CRETE MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
Adopted: August 26, 1985 
Effective: August 26, 1985 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Trustees 
____________ 
Republished: January 2002 
Republished: March 2005 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF CRETE, ILLINOIS 
AT THE TIME OF THE 1985 CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Michael Einhorn 
President 
____________ 
Phil Bartos 
Morgan Carter 
Bruce Hackel 
Edward Newton 
Darcy Stevens 
Charles Wisnieswski 
Trustees 
____________ 
Robert S. Grim 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Mariann Gemper 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Robert S. Grim/Clinton, Tongren & Grim 
Professional Counsel 
____________ 
George A. Ranney/Joseph A. Schudt & Associates 
Village Engineer 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF CRETE, ILLINOIS 
AT THE TIME OF THE 2002 REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Michael Einhorn 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bob Gaines 
Larry Johnston 
Michael Knaak 
Thomas Knuth 
Mark Wiater 
Stephen Johnson 
Trustees 
____________ 
David Wallace 
Village Administrator 
James Stevenson 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Kathleen Wantuch 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Stanley Pagorek 
Prosecutor 
____________ 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF CRETE, ILLINOIS 
AT THE TIME OF THE 2005 REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Michael Einhorn 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bob Gaines 
Larry Johnston 
Cindy Simon 
John Stoll 
Mark Wiater 
Stephen Johnson 
Trustees 
____________ 
Thomas Durkin 
Village Administrator 
James Stevenson 
Village Attorney 
____________ 
Kathleen Wantuch 
Village Clerk 
____________ 
Stanley Pagorek 
Prosecutor 
____________ 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a republication of the 1985 Code of Ordinances as republished in 2002. Ordinances were added in this republication through Ordinance No. 2004-48, adopted December 13, 2004. State law reference footnotes have been updated and a new index has been prepared. This republication was prepared under the supervision of A. Lawton Langford, Corporate President, and Linda Davis, Editor, with the able assistance of the MCC staff. The preface as it appears in the 2002 Republication is reprinted here as follows: 
    This Code constitutes a complete republication of the ordinances of the Village of Crete of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the republished Code were the Village's 1985 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Council through Ordinance No. 2001-40, adopted October 22, 2001. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the 1985 Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1965 Code included in the 1985 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the first section of Chapter 28 is 28-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 1-2 and 1-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 1-2.1, 1-2.2 and 1-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 10 and 11, it will be designated as chapter 10.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER ..... CHT:1 
CODE ..... CD1:1 
APPENDIX A ..... CDA:1 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE ..... SRT:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES ..... CCT:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES ..... CCT:1 
CHARTER INDEX ..... CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX ..... CDi:1 
Index 
    The index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Roger D. Merriam, Supervising Editor of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. This 2002 republication of the Code was under the supervision of A. Lawton Langford, President, and Wilma Reed, Supplement Editor, of the corporation. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Robert S. Grim, Village Attorney for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the publication of the 1985 Code, and it is hoped that the efforts of all involved in the publication and republication of this Code have resulted in an up-to-date Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Village's affairs. 
January, 2002 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 85-10 
An Ordinance adopting and enacting a newly-revised and recodified Code for the Village of Crete, ordaining the same as the "Crete Municipal Code" in place of the Revised Municipal Code of the Village of Crete of 1965, providing for the repeal of certain ordinances not included therein, setting forth the manner of amending and supplementing said new Code and providing the date upon which such new Code and this Ordinance shall become effective. 
Whereas, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Crete have determined, after due and careful consideration of the fact that the Revised Municipal Code of the Village of Crete of 1965, as presently in force and effect in said Village, has not been comprehensively revised or recodified since its initial enactment, despite numerous and varied amendment thereto and of various changes in laws of the State of Illinois from which the said municipality obtains its powers and authority to govern; and 
Whereas, after due and careful consideration of the needs of the people of the Village of Crete and of the area of the municipality of Crete to have a Code of Ordinances expressed in concise, modern and proper phraseology, without conflicts, ambiguities and repetitious provisions, the President and Board of Trustees of said Village have commissioned their Village attorneys and the Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida, to completely revise, edit and recodify the Revised Municipal Code of the Village of Crete of 1965, as amended, in the form of a new Code to be designated simply the "Crete Municipal Code;" and 
Whereas, the Village's attorneys and said Municipal Code Corporation have completed their work in substantially the form of a Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 through 28, each inclusive as appended hereto and made a part hereof; and 
Whereas, the Village's attorneys have recommended that said new Code and all of the terms and provisions as set forth therein, including those corrections as set forth hereinafter, be adopted and enacted as the "Crete Municipal Code," with the following corrections, namely: 
(a)  At page 3 (Chapter 1, Section 1-3), a paragraph numbered "(14)" shall be added so as to correct the inadvertent omission of Ordinances Numbers 817 and 818. The new paragraph as numbered "(14)" shall read in its entirety as follows, namely: 
(14)  Ordinances Numbers 817 and 818; 
(b)  At page 3 (Chapter 1, Section 1-3), a paragraph numbered "(15)" shall be added so as to correct the inadvertent omission of phraseology protesting the intent and purpose of Resolution No. 120 as adopted by the President and Board of Trustees on October 24, 1983, pertaining to the membership and classification of members of the Police Department of the Village. The new paragraph as numbered "(15)" shall read in its entirety as follows, namely: 
(15)  Resolution No. 120, providing the general organization, structure and membership of the Village Police Department; 
(c)  At page 64 (Chapter 2, Section 2-107(b), the term "departmental" is corrected so as to provide in place thereof the term "department"; 
(d)  At page 783 (Chapter 13, Section 13-1(a)), the phraseology therein referring to the Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 36, is corrected so as to properly refer to Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 38; 
(e)  At page 1381 (Chapter 24, Section 24-24(b)), the date of February 1st within the phraseology therein provided is corrected to June 1st; 
(f)  At page 1381 (Chapter 24, Section 24-24(c)), the date of June 30th within the phraseology therein provided is corrected to October 31st; 
(g)  At page 1557 (Chapter 27, Section 27-22(a)(1)), the charge of 50 cents is corrected to $2.50 per 1,000 gallons of water; 
(h)  At page 1629 (Chapter 28, Section 28-49(a)), the said paragraph (a) is corrected so as to provide in place thereof, the following full paragraph as corrected, namely: 
(a)  A Plan Commission is hereby established. The Plan Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, six (6) of whom shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The President shall serve as an ex officio member of the Plan Commission, having all rights and privileges of Board membership as customarily bestowed by rule and law. The appointed members shall serve for the following terms: One (1) for one (1) year; one (1) for two (2) years; one (1) for three (3) years; one (1) for four (4) years; and two (2) for five (5) years. 
(i)  At page 1647 (Chapter 28, Section 28-208(c)), the date of May 28, 2982 is corrected to May 28, 1982. 
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Crete, Will County, Illinois, as follows: 
    Section One  That the preamble of this Ordinance is hereby incorporated into the text hereof to the same force and effect as though the same were set forth verbatim herein. 
    Section Two  The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 through 28, each inclusive, together with all corrections as set forth in the final "Whereas" paragraph as set forth hereinabove, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Crete Municipal Code," which said Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the Village as adopted by said Village on or before March 25, 1985. Any and all ordinances or provisions thereof as adopted on or before March 25, 1985, which are not included in such Code or recognized or continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed. 
    Section Three  That the repeal provided for in Section Two hereinabove shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed in the instant ordinance. 
    Section Four  Whenever in such Code, or in any ordinance of the Village, any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense or a violation of this Code, or whenever in such Code, or ordinance, the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or any ordinance, is hereby declared to be an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00); moreover, each day during which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to occur or continue shall be deemed a separate offense and accordingly punished. No provision of such Code which designates the duty of any Village officer or employee shall be construed to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided in such Code for failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the Board of Trustees of the Village to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the Section creating the duty or liability. 
    Section Five  Any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate an intention on the part of the Village to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section Six  That in the case of the amendment of any Section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section Four of the instant ordinance and in Section 1-10 of such Code shall apply to the Section as amended, or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty as provided in another Section in the same Chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the Section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section Seven  Any ordinance adopted after March 25, 1985, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
    Section Eight  That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. 
Passed by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Crete, Will County, Illinois, on this 26th day of August, A.D., 1985. 
AYES: 4 
NAYS: 3 
ABSENT: 0 
/s/ Mariann E. Gemper 
      Village Clerk   Approved by the President of the Village of Crete, Illinois, this 26th day of August, A.D., 1985. 
/s/ Michael Einhorn 
      Village President   Attest: 
/s/ Mariann E. Gemper 
      Village Clerk   (Seal) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 2008-01 1-2-08 Include 3 2008-14 2-25-08 Include 3 2008-15 3-24-08 Include 3 2008-36 9-8-08 Include 3 2008-44 12-22-08 Include 3 2009-08 2-23-09 Include 3 2009-09 2-23-09 Include 3 2009-16 3-9-09 Include 3 2009-17 3-3-09 Include 3 2009-51 7-27-09 Include 3 2009-52 7-27-09 Include 3 2009-53 7-27-09 Include 3 2009-54 8-10-09 Include 3 2009-68 11-23-09 Include 3 2009-76 12-14-09 Include 3 2010-02 2-8-10 Include 3 2010-04 2-22-10 Include 3 2010-05 3-8-10 Include 3 2010-07 3-8-10 Include 3 2010-10 3-22-10 Include 3 2010-11 3-22-10 Include 3 2010-12 3-22-10 Include 3 2010-13 3-22-10 Include 3 2010-14 3-22-10 Include 3 2010-21 4-26-10 Include 3 2010-23 6-14-10 Include 3 2010-24 7-12-10 Include 3 2011-06 2-28-11 Include 3 2011-09 5-9-11 Include 3 2011-10 5-9-11 Include 3 2011-17 6-13-11 Include 3 2011-18  6-13-11 Include 4 2011-24  8- 8-11 Include 4 2012-03  2-13-12 Include 4 2012-08  4-23-12 Include 4 2012-09  5-14-12 Include 4 2012-21  7- 9-12 Include 4 2012-22  8-27-12 Include 4 2012-27 11-26-12 Include 4 2013-01  1-14-13 Include 4 2013-06  5-13-13 Include 4 2013-11  6-10-13 Include 4 2013-12  6-24-13 Include 4 2013-13  6-24-13 Include 4 2013-23 12- 9-13 Include 4 2014-12  6-23-14 Include 4 2014-16  7-14-14 Include 4 2015-12  7-13-15 Include 5 2015-19  8-10-15 Include 5 2015-20  8-10-15 Include 5 2015-22  8-24-15 Include 5 2015-25  9-28-15 Include 5 2016-05  5- 9-16 Include 5 2016-14  7-25-16 Include 5 2016-16  8-22-16 Include 5 2016-17  9-12-16 Omit 5 2016-20 10-24-16 Include 5 2016-22 11-28-16 Include 5 2016-23 11-28-16 Include 5 2017-01  1-23-17 Include 5 2017-02  1-23-17 Omit 5 2017-07  3-18-17 Include 5 2017-09  8-27-17 Include 5 2017-15  6-12-17 Include 5 2017-33 10-23-17 Include 5 2018-08  6-11-18 Include 5 2018-09  6-11-18 Include 5 2018-13  7- 9-18 Include 5 2018-15  8-13-18 Include 5 2018-18  9-24-18 Include 5 2018-21 11-12-18 Omit 5 2018-22 11-12-18 Include 5 2018-24 11-12-18 Include 5 2018-30 12-10-18 Include 5 2018-33 12-10-18 Include 5 2019-03  1-28-19 Include 5  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the Crete Municipal Code and may be so cited. 
(Code 1965, Art. 12.1) 
State Law reference- Revision of ordinances, adoption of revision, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of trustees. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter of the context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of trustees may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Board, board of trustees, village board. Whenever the words "board," "board of trustees" or "village board" are used, they shall be construed to mean the board of trustees of the Village of Crete, which shall consist of the president and trustees. 
    Circuit court. The term "circuit court" shall mean the Circuit Court of the Twelfth Judicial Circuit of Illinois (Will County). 
    Code. The term "code" or "this Code" shall mean the Crete Municipal Code as designated in section 1-1 above. 
    Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by this Code is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a legal holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
    Corporate limits, village limits. The term "corporate limits" or "village limits" shall mean the legal boundaries of the Village of Crete. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Will, State of Illinois. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    May. The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Must. The word "must" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers generally. Whenever any officer is referred to by title, such as "village clerk," "chief of police," "president," etc., such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Village of Crete." 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
    Signature or subscription. The terms "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Illinois. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the village and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use. 
    Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant," or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Village shall mean the Village of Crete, Will County, Illinois. 
    Wholesale, wholesaler, etc. In all cases where the term "wholesale," "wholesaler," or "wholesale dealer" is used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall be understood and held to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities directly to the consumer. 
    Written or in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1965, Arts. 12.2, 12.3, 12.5, 12.6) 
Sec. 1-3. - Ordinances, etc., not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the village or excluding territory as a part of the village; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(6)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the village; 
(8)  Any ordinance levying special assessments; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of village officers or employees; 
(10)  Any ordinance relating to cable television; 
(11)  Any ordinance whose purpose has been accomplished; 
(12)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect; 
(13)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect; 
(14)  Ordinance Numbers 817 and 818; 
(15)  Resolution No. 120, providing the general organization, structure and membership of the village police department; 
and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1965, Art. 12.13; Ord. No. 85-10, 8-26-85) 
Sec. 1-4. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or suffering any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the village in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the village relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc.; references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1965, Art. 12.17) 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations; exception. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance of the village, any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a violation of this Code, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance is hereby declared to be an offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $750.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to occur or continue. Except when fines are paid by compromise payment and prepaid prior to being placed on the court docket, the court or court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  No provision of this Code designating the duties of any village officer or employee shall be construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the board of trustees to impose such a fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
(c)  Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance section listed hereinafter as subject to compromise payment may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Code 1965, Arts. 12.4, 12.5; Ord. No. 2003-34; §§ 1-3, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 2, 12-11-06) 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1; power of village to declare ordinance violation to be a misdemeanor, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code-Generally. 
(a)  By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of trustees. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Same-Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
    Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature (e.g., ordinances saved from repeal in section 1-3) shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code. 
Secs. 1-13-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-31. - Adoption. 
    The Village of Crete hereby adopts Division 2.2 of 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq. in its current form and as it may be amended from time to time for adjudication of Municipal Code violations to the extent permitted by the Illinois Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-32. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Code means any municipal ordinance except for: (i) building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 et seq. in its current form and as may be amended from time to time; and (ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
    Hearing officer means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of the village, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to: 
(1)  Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists; 
(2)  Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code violation; 
(3)  Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and 
(4)  Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a code violation exists. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-33. - Code hearing department. 
(a)  There is hereby established a code hearing department in the Village Municipal Government. The function is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth in this article. 
(b)  The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a municipal ordinance except for: (i) building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to Division 31.1 of 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 et seq. in its current form and as amended from time to time; and (ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-34. - Hearing procedures not exclusive. 
    This article does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce the provisions of its Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-35. - Instituting hearing code proceedings. 
(a)  When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a municipal code violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates: 
(1)  The name and address of the defendant; 
(2)  The type and nature of the violation; 
(3)  The date and time the violation was observed; and 
(4)  The names of the witnesses of the violation. 
(b)  The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30, nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported. 
(c)  One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the village in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be personally served on the defendant at the time of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-36. - Subpoenas; defaults. 
    At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for the hearing the defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-37. - Continuances; representation at code hearings. 
(a)  No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this article except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. 
(b)  Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this article shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the village may be presented by an attorney designated by the village or by any other municipal employee, except that the case for the village shall not be presented by any employee of the hearing code department. The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative of the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-38. - Hearing; evidence. 
    At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-39. - Qualifications of hearing officers. 
(a)  Prior to conducting proceedings under this article, hearing officers shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following: 
(1)  Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will conduct; 
(2)  Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will administer; 
(3)  Observation of administrative hearings; and 
(4)  Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and issuing final orders. 
(b)  In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-40. - Findings, decision and order. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order shall include: 
(1)  The hearing officer's findings of fact; 
(2)  A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and 
(3)  An order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved. 
(b)  A monetary sanction for a violation under this article shall not exceed the amount provided for in 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2, in its current form and as amended from time to time. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the defendant within five days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and summons are served under section 1-35 of this article. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the Code, unless the corporate authorities adopting this article provide otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-41. - Review under administrative review law. 
    The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the Twelfth Judicial Circuit, Will County. The provisions of the Administrative Review Law and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decisions, and order of a hearing officer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 1-42. - Judgment on findings, decision and order. 
(a)  A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the Twelfth Judicial Circuit, Will County, for purpose of obtaining a judgment of findings, decision and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with this article and the applicable municipal ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method in accordance with state statute; provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed $2,500.00. If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of this article and the applicable municipal ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this article and for judicial review as provided in this article: 
(1)  The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; 
(2)  The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a code violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Secs. 1-43-1-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Volunteer fire department, § 9-26 et seq.; police department, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Municipalities, 65 ILCS. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Village seal. 
    The design for the village seal, as shown in Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance No. 594, is hereby adopted as the official seal of the village. The seal shall be incorporated in the corporate seal, the official flag, the village stationery, and other related documents. The seal may be used in color or in black and white or by imprint as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 594, §§ I-IV, 3-27-67) 
Sec. 2-2. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the village shall begin on the first day of May of each year. 
(Code 1965, § 10.11.2) 
State Law reference- "Fiscal year" defined, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2. 
Sec. 2-3. - Village datum. 
    The village datum is hereby established as a horizontal plane 100 feet below the level of the top of an iron rod imbedded in the cement sidewalk at the southwest corner of the intersection of Exchange Street and Main Street (Dixie Highway), in Crete, the center of the top of the said iron rod being at the point of intersection of the west line of Main Street (Dixie Highway) with the south line of Exchange Street. 
(Code 1965, § 1.24.3) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 2-4. - Surety, etc., bonds. 
(a)  Whenever a bond is required as a prerequisite to holding any village office, or to securing any license or permit or enjoying any special privilege, such bond shall have as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the state as an insurance surety company in the absence of provision to the contrary. The president and board of trustees may waive this subsection and accept other bonds, provided that where such bond is required in connection with the use of real estate in the village the bond of the owner thereof shall be sufficient if his interest in the real estate is equal in amount to the amount of the bond required. Whenever any bond shall become insecure for any reason the board of trustees may order a new bond to be filed or an additional surety to be procured. A failure to file such new bond or procure such additional surety shall operate to discontinue the office, permit, license or privilege to the enjoyment of which filing the bond was a prerequisite. 
(b)  Whenever in its opinion additional sureties or an additional surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the village against any loss or liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other reason, the board of trustees may order new sureties to be secured on such bond. If such new sureties are not procured within ten days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or his assignee, the board shall declare the bond to be void, and thereupon such principal or assignee, shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or position as condition of which the bond was required. 
(Code 1965, §§ 1.24.7, 10.11.6) 
Sec. 2-5. - Industrial revenue bonds. 
(a)  It is declared to be the public policy of the village to favorably consider the issuance of industrial revenue bonds to qualified industries whose project proposals meet the requirements of these guidelines, applicable ordinances of the village, relevant federal and state statutes and regulations and the state constitution. In reaching a decision with respect to whether a particular project qualifies for assistance hereunder and whether or not to authorize tax exempt financing for a project, the board of trustees, whose determination shall be conclusive, will duly consider and evaluate each project proposal in light of guidelines and criteria established in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise defined herein, the following terms when used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Costs shall mean and include the sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to a project, including, but not limited to, and without limitation, the following: Real property; studies and surveys; plans and specifications; architectural and engineering services; underwriting fees; legal, accounting, marketing, and other special services relating to a project or incurred in connection with the issuance and sale of bonds, necessary application and other fees to federal, state and local governmental agencies for any requisite approvals for construction, for assisted financing or otherwise; and all other necessary and incidental expenses, including trustee and rating agency fees and an initial bond and interest reserve together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to a date six months subsequent to the estimated date of completion; and premiums with respect to insurance with respect to bonds; and such other expenses as the village shall deem appropriate. 
(2)  Project or project proposal shall mean any: 
a.  Capital project, including one or more buildings and other structures, improvements, machinery and equipment whether or not on the same site or sites now existing or hereafter acquired, suitable for use by any manufacturing, industrial, research or commercial enterprise, including, but not limited to, use as a factory, mill, processing plant, assembly plant, packaging plant, fabricating plant, office building, industrial distribution center, warehouse, repair, overhaul or service facility, freight terminal, research facility, test facility, commercial facility, and including also the sites thereof and other rights in land therefor whether improved or unimproved, site preparation and landscaping, and all appurtenances and facilities incidental thereto such as utilities, access roads, railroad sidings, truck docking and similar facilities, parking facilities, dockage, wharfage, and other improvements necessary or convenient thereto; or 
b.  Any land, buildings, machinery or equipment comprising an addition to, or renovation, rehabilitation or improvement of any existing capital project. 
(c)  Prior to submitting a formal application to the village, potential applicants should contact the village president or the trustee in charge of licensing and ordinances for a preliminary project review and an explanation of application procedures. Upon a potential applicant's determination that a formal application is desired to be submitted, a completed application form shall be tendered to the village, which shall be addressed to the village clerk and contain a complete and thorough analysis of the particular industrial or commercial purpose including, inter alia, the following information: 
(1)  A statement defining the project, showing its achievement of stated public policy objectives and specifically indicating the number of jobs created, yearly anticipated payroll, increases in sales and property taxes to the village and any other specific data more fully explaining the achievement of public policy objectives; 
(2)  A detailed cost breakdown of all elements of anticipated costs (not just a general statement of total anticipated costs); 
(3)  Balance sheets and income statements pertaining to the applicant entity for the past three years (if the applicant entity is a corporation, said financial statement shall be prepared by a certified public accountant); 
(4)  The name of the person that will purchase the bonds (if known purchasers are available); 
(5)  A SEC-10-K report in the event that the applicant entity is a corporation required to file such a report; 
(6)  The name and addresses of two commercial bankers, who may be contacted and used for reference purposes; 
(7)  A list of all officers, directors and principals, including their biographies and personal financial statements if the particular project proposes that bonds will be guaranteed by them; 
(8)  Complete architectural design and construction documents sufficient to enable the village to evaluate a proposed building, rebuilding or remodeling or improvement thereby proposed; 
(9)  An underwriter's or institutional investor's letter as to proposed interest rates and possibility of placement; 
(10)  All documents identifying the legal status of title of the land and/or buildings involved; 
(11)  A written commitment from proposed purchasers of the bonds to the effect that any of the bonds be purchased and stating the terms of such purchase (the applicant must have arrangements made or proposed for private placement of the bonds); 
(12)  A letter guaranteeing to pay all the costs of the village, its agents and employees, whether or not the issue is approved, and if approved, an administrative fee determined by the village and payable at the time the bonds are issued; 
(13)  A schedule and timetable of planned construction, rebuilding or remodeling; and 
(14)  Any other information, documents, assurances, security, or agreements as required by the board of trustees. 
(d)  The board of trustees will issue such revenue bonds only where the bonds are to be sold at public or private sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be determined by the board of trustees. 
(e)  In addition to normal zoning, building and village code requirements, the board of trustees reserves the right of final approval or disapproval of plans and specifications for purposes of issuing bonds hereunder. For example, the village will not utilize its bond powers to build buildings that aesthetically are not pleasing, even though such construction might satisfy other requirements. Also, each project, its plans and specifications, must be consistent with the village's comprehensive plan. 
(f)  Prior to approaching the board of trustees any proposal will have to be reviewed by the village attorney or corporation counsel, as the case may be, and the village's bond consultant. The board will not proceed and will not adopt any preliminary resolutions until their respective reports, even if preliminary in form, are received. The applicant must indicate the name, address, telephone number and individual to contact at the office of bond counsel desired to be retained by the applicant if other than the village's normal bond counsel; however, the village reserves the right to reject the applicant's choice of bond counsel. 
(g)  Except as provided in subsection (e), the village's normal bond counsel and bond consultant must be utilized. If so desired, the applicant may, subject to approval by the village, select bond counsel other than the village's normal bond counsel. The village reserves the right, subject to the applicant's approval, to employ legal, accounting, appraisal, financial, engineering, architectural and other consultants to review the proposed project and its financing, and the costs thereof as defined above, together with the administrative expenses, to be paid by the applicant, whether or not a particular project is completed and funded hereunder. The village reserves the right to require additional cash deposits sufficient to cover such consulting costs. Any unexpected balance of such deposit shall be returned to the applicant if the project is aborted for any reason; and, if the project is approved, the village will allow such expenses to be paid or reimbursed as part of the project cost financed. 
(h)  The applicant shall be required to comply with the stipulation that not less than the prevailing rate of wages as determined by the pertinent provisions of "An Act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed in any public works by the state, county, city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one under contract for public works," [820 ILCS 130/1, et seq.] as amended, shall be paid to all laborers, mechanics and other workers performing work on any community improvement project authorized by any bond ordinances. 
(i)  Applicants shall provide and maintain at all times adequate workmen's compensation, liability, fire and other related necessary types of insurance coverage relating to the project in amounts and in form satisfactory to the village. 
(j)  The applicant and, if underwriters are involved in the issuance and sale of such tax exempt obligations, the underwriters shall hold harmless the village, its officers, employees, consultants, and agents for any alleged or actual violation of any securities laws, state or federal, in connection with the issuance of bonds or loans for the project. The village may require a bond or appropriate insurance to assure compliance with this subsection. 
(k)  The village reserves the right to deny any application for any reason and to revoke approval of an application at any time before actual issuance of bonds or making of the loan without liability of the village, its board members, officers, or agents to the applicant, the underwriter, attorneys or other counsel associated with the project. 
(l)  All applicants will name the real parties in interest in the project including the principal stockholders if a corporation or if a partnership, the general partners and a copy of the partnership agreement must be submitted as well. 
(m)  Any application shall be accompanied with a nonrefundable fee of $2,500.00 and such supporting financial documents and information as hereinbefore provided. 
(n)  Before the village issues industrial revenue bonds, pursuant to any application or petition, the president and board of trustees will require the following statements from various agents and employees and commissions of the village: 
(1)  A statement from the village attorney or corporation counsel, as the case may be, to the effect that he has reviewed or will review all documents pertinent to the application and bond issue. 
(2)  A statement from the village's financial consultant, or bond counsel, as the case may be, to the effect that based upon the consultant's study of the information supplied and from other available sources, nothing has come to his attention to indicate: 
a.  The applicant is not in a position to undertake its commitment; or 
b.  It is inadvisable for the village to lend its name to the proposed project even though it does not thereby undertake any financial obligations. 
(3)  The chairman of the village plan commission to the effect that the industry and proposal is in compliance with the village's comprehensive plan that the industry would be an asset to the village. 
(4)  A statement from the village's auditor to the effect that suitable arrangements have been made for the payment of all fees, costs, and expenses incurred in behalf of the village. 
(o)  The president and board of trustees reserve the right to have the applicant appear before them to explain the proposed development and to answer any questions that may be deemed to be in the public interest. Upon completion of all steps, conditions and requirements of this section, the president and board of trustees shall consider approval of the industrial bond issue. 
Secs. 2-6-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Bond, oath and salary of president. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, the president shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the board of trustees conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of at least $3,000.00 or such other higher sum as may be directed by the board of trustees or required by state law. He shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute and receive compensation at an annual rate of $14,400.00, payable in equal semi-annual installments. The president shall be reimbursed for such expenses as reasonably incurred in connection with activities authorized or necessarily incurred in connection with his designated duties and responsibilities. 
(Code 1965, § 1.1.4; Ord. No. 85-1, 1-28-85; Ord. No. 89-1, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 96-4, § 1, 9-9-96; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 10-24-16) 
State Law reference- Filing of bond, 65 ILCS 5/3-14-3. 
Sec. 2-21.1. - Oath and salary of trustees. 
    The members of the board of trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute and shall be paid an annual rate of $7,200.00. Each trustee shall be reimbursed for all expenses reasonably incurred in connection with activities authorized or necessarily incurred in connection with their designated duties and responsibilities as prescribed by statute or ordinance. Each member of the board of trustees may be excused upon notice from attending up to four meetings, whether general or special in nature, during each 12-month period of service. 
(Code 1965, § 1.1.5; Ord. No. 85-1, 1-28-85; Ord. No. 88-22, § 1, 9-12-88; Ord. No. 89-1, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 96-4, § 2, 9-9-96; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 2, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 10-24-16) 
State Law reference- Oath or affirmation, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25; execution of bond, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30. 
Sec. 2-22. - Meeting place. 
    The meeting place of the board of trustees shall be held in the Village Hall, unless otherwise ordered by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 1.2.3) 
State Law reference- Power of village trustees to set meeting place, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25. 
Sec. 2-23. - Date and time of regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be held on the dates and times as ordered by the board of trustees. If there is no quorum present, the meeting shall be held on the next scheduled date. At the beginning of each calendar or fiscal year, a schedule of all of the regular meetings for that year time period, listing the dates, times and places of such meetings, shall be prepared and public notice shall be given in accordance with state law. No notice of such regular meetings shall be required except as provided by state law. Changes may be made thereafter in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1965, § 1.2.3; Ord. No. 676, § 1, 4-21-71; Ord. No. 86-6, § 1, 6-23-86; Ord. No. 87-40, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 2018-30, § 2, 12-10-18) 
State Law reference- Notice of meetings, 5 ILCS 120/2.02; schedule of meetings, 5 ILCS 120/2.03. 
Sec. 2-24. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the board of trustees may be called by the president of the village or by any three trustees upon at least 24 hours' written notice to all members and the president; provided that if all the trustees are present at a special meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be necessary and such notice shall be deemed waived. 
(Code 1965, § 1.2.4) 
Sec. 2-25. - Interim emergency succession. 
    In accordance with 5 ILCS 275/1 et seq., the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act, hereinafter "the Act", if the village president is "unavailable" as defined by the Act, the following emergency interim successors are hereby established in the following order: 
First: Trustee in charge of public safety; 
Second: Trustee in charge of license, finance and ordinance; 
Third: Trustee in charge of public health. 
The formalities of taking office, period in which authority may be exercised and removal shall be governed by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 5, 11-26-12) 
Secs. 2-26-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power of board of trustees to determine its rules of proceeding, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15. 

Sec. 2-36. - Scope; compliance required. 
    The provisions of this division shall govern all meetings of the board of trustees, and shall be followed unless suspended pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
Sec. 2-37. - Order of business. 
    The president shall take the chair at the hour at which the meeting shall have been called and call the members to order. If a quorum be present, the board of trustees shall take up business in the following order: 
(1)  Pledge of allegiance; 
(2)  Roll call; 
(3)  Reading of minutes from last meeting; 
(4)  Presentation and consideration of bills for approval; 
(5)  Approval of payroll; 
(6)  Committee reports; 
(7)  Communications; 
(8)  Old business; 
(9)  New business; 
(10)  Comments from the public. 
Sec. 2-38. - Duty of president generally; appeals from rulings. 
    The president shall preside, preserve order and decorum, may speak to points of order in preference to any other member, and shall decide questions of order subject to an appeal to the trustees by any two trustees on which appeal no trustee shall speak more than twice, unless by leave of the board of trustees. 
Sec. 2-39. - Chairman pro tem. 
    In the absence of the president, the village trustees may elect a trustee to act as temporary chairman. He shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right to vote in his capacity as trustee on any ordinance, resolution or motion. The president may call upon any village trustee to perform the duties of the chair, but such substitution shall not extend beyond an adjournment and such person shall nonetheless be entitled to vote as a trustee. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35. 
Sec. 2-40. - Standing committees established. 
    The following standing committees shall be appointed: 
(1)  Buildings and grounds; 
(2)  Finance, licenses and ordinances; 
(3)  Public health; 
(4)  Public safety; 
(5)  Streets and alleys; 
(6)  Water. 
Sec. 2-41. - Appointment of standing committee members. 
    All standing committees shall be appointed by the president and confirmed by the board of trustees. 
Sec. 2-42. - Standing committee meetings. 
    Meetings of a standing committee may be held on call of the chairman or any two members at such time and place as may be designated in said call. 
Sec. 2-43. - Special committees. 
    The president shall create all special committees. The members of such committees shall be appointed by the president with the concurrence of the board of trustees. 
Sec. 2-44. - Committee reports. 
    All standing and special committees, to whom any matter may be referred, shall report thereon, in writing, at the next regular meeting, giving the facts and their opinion thereon, and said report shall be signed by a majority of the committee; if desired, those not in favor may at the same time present a minority report. Such reports need not be in writing unless so required by the president. 
Sec. 2-45. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the corporate authorities as defined by Illinois Statute shall constitute a quorum to do business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-17, § 2, 6-13-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20. 
Sec. 2-46. - Voting required; effect of failure to vote. 
    When a question is taken, each member of the board of trustees shall vote unless excused by the board of trustees, or unless he is directly interested in the question, in which case such member shall not vote; provided, however, that the failure of the president or a trustee to vote shall be considered to be an affirmative vote. 
Sec. 2-47. - Passage of ordinances, resolutions, etc., generally. 
    The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any resolution or motion to create any liability against the village or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the board of trustees, including the president, unless otherwise expressly provided by state law. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the designated ordinances, resolutions, or motions and recorded in the journal of board of trustees. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40. 
Sec. 2-48. - Approval and veto of ordinances, etc. 
    All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the village, or which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or to sell any village property, and all ordinances, passed by the board of trustees shall be deposited with the village clerk. If the president approves, he shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves he shall return to the board of trustees, with his written objections, at the next regular meeting of the corporate authorities occurring not less than five days after their passage. The president may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the president may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the president fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his written objections, within the designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of his signature. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45. 
Sec. 2-49. - Passage of ordinances, etc., over veto. 
    Every resolution and motion, specified in section 2-48 of this Code, and every ordinance, which is returned to the board of trustees by the president shall be reconsidered by the board of trustees. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the trustees then holding office shall agree to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion, notwithstanding the president's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the president's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-50. 
Sec. 2-50. - Approval of contracts and sureties. 
    No contract in writing to which the village is a party shall be considered binding until the same has been approved in open meeting of the board of trustees, and where a bond is required, the amount of bond for the faithful performance thereof, fixed by the board of trustees, the sureties approved and the president and village clerk directed to execute such contract by a vote of a majority of the members elected to the board of trustees. 
State Law reference- Power of corporate authorities to control municipal finances, 65 ILCS 5/8-1-1. 
Sec. 2-51. - New business. 
    All new business introduced at any meeting shall be referred to the appropriate committee, or be held over until the next meeting, or acted upon at once. 
Sec. 2-52. - Addressing board. 
    Every member of the board of trustees shall proceed with his remarks only after being named and recognized by the chair. 
Sec. 2-53. - Speaking twice on same subject. 
    No member of the board of trustees shall speak more than twice on the same subject, unless by consent of a majority of the members of the board of trustees present. 
Sec. 2-54. - Motions having priority. 
    When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received but to adjourn; lay on the table; the previous question; postpone to a day certain; to commit; to amend; to substitute; or postpone indefinitely, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are above arranged. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and be decided without debate. 
Sec. 2-55. - Effect of certain motions. 
    A motion for the "previous question", to lay on the table, or to commit until it is decided, shall preclude all amendments or substitutes and debate of the main question; and a motion to postpone a question indefinitely, or to adjourn it to a day certain, until decided, shall preclude all amendments and substitutes to the main question. 
Sec. 2-56. - Actions after report or motion made or stated. 
    After a report is made or a motion stated by the president, it shall be in possession of the board of trustees, but it may be amended or laid on the table, or withdrawn at any time before the question is put. 
Sec. 2-57. - Reduction of motions to writing. 
    All motions shall be in writing upon demand of the president or any trustee. 
Sec. 2-58. - Stating question or motion. 
    Every question or motion when seconded shall be stated by the president before it is open for debate. 
Sec. 2-59. - Division of question. 
    When a question before the board of trustees contains several distinct propositions, any member of the board of trustees may call for a division of the question. A vote on each proposition shall then be taken. 
Sec. 2-60. - Reconsideration of motions, etc. 
    The president or a trustee who votes with the prevailing side on any motion or any trustee who was absent at the time the vote was taken may move a reconsideration, but no such motion shall be in order after the expiration of the next regular meeting of the board of trustees. No vote of the board of trustees shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless there are present at the special meeting as many trustees as were present when the vote was taken. 
State Law reference- Reconsideration at special meeting, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55. 
Sec. 2-61. - Recording name of one moving motion or resolution. 
    The name of the member of the board of trustees moving any ordinance, resolution or motion shall be entered in the minutes. 
Sec. 2-62. - Filing of reports and resolutions. 
    All reports made by committees, and all resolutions adopted by the board of trustees shall be filed and preserved by the village clerk. 
Sec. 2-63. - Calling unruly member to order. 
    If any member of the board of trustees transgresses the rules of the board of trustees, the president or any trustee may call him to order, and when called to order, the member shall take his seat unless permitted to explain. 
Sec. 2-64. - Expulsion of member. 
    Any member of the board of trustees acting or appearing in a disgraceful manner, or using violent and insulting language to or about any member of the board of trustees, or who does not obey the orders of the chair, shall, on motion, be censured by a majority vote of the members present or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all members elected; provided, however, that a trustee may not be expelled a second time for the same offense. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15. 
Sec. 2-65. - Public addressing board. 
    No person who is not a member of the board of trustees, except village officers, shall address the board of trustees without the unanimous consent of the members present, and then only once on the same subject without further consent. This section shall not apply to that period of time during the time set aside for comments from the public. 
Sec. 2-66. - Petitions. 
    All petitions addressed to the board of trustees shall be in writing and filed by the village clerk, except as otherwise provided by statute. 
State Law reference- Petitions to change name of municipality, 65 ILCS 5/2-4-1 et seq.; petition to disconnect lands, 65 ILCS 5/7-3-4 et seq.; petitions to dissolve municipalities, 65 ILCS 5/7-6-1 et seq.; petition to lay street railroads, 65 ILCS 5/11-90-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-67. - Reading of proposed ordinances, resolutions, correspondence, etc. 
    The reading of any proposed ordinance, resolution and/or correspondence shall not be required at any regular or special meeting of the board of trustees unless where required by motion adopted by two-thirds vote of the membership of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 1(1.3.10), 12-14-81) 
Sec. 2-68. - Robert's Rules. 
    Whenever a question of parliamentary law, not fully covered by this division, shall arise, the same shall be decided in accordance with the rules of parliamentary law set forth in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
Sec. 2-69. - Suspension or amendments. 
    Except where the provisions of this division are required by state law, any of said provisions may be suspended or amended, or additional rules adopted by the affirmative vote of four members of the board of trustees. 
Secs. 2-70-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Volunteer fire department, § 9-26 et seq.; interference with village officers or employees, § 13-17; police department, Ch. 20. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-86. - Designation of duties. 
    Whenever there is a question as to the duties or powers of any appointed officer of the village, it shall be settled by the president. The president shall have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty. 
(Code 1965, § 1.1.3) 
State Law reference- Officers to perform duties provided for by ordinance, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40. 
Sec. 2-87. - Term of office and vacancies. 
    Every appointive officer of the village shall hold office during the fiscal year or until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Any vacancy shall be filled in the manner as designated hereinafter; in the absence of specific code provisions, the appointment shall be made by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 1.18.3; Ord. No. 2007-17, § 2, 4-23-07) 
Sec. 2-88. - Residency requirements for policemen and firemen. 
(a)  All the village department heads who are subject to the jurisdiction of the board of fire and police commissioners, and all commissioned fire and police personnel must reside within a radius of 15 miles of the center of the intersection of Exchange Street and Main Street in the village, except as otherwise provided in this section. Such personnel may reside permanently within the State of Indiana provided that such residency is within the aforementioned radius from the aforementioned intersection. 
(b)  Any person included within the categories described in subsection (a) who does not reside within a radius of 15 miles from the intersection of Exchange Street and Main Street of the village as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 89-12 shall be permitted to continue such residence until such person changes his residence at which time he shall be required to establish residence within the 15-mile radius above-described. 
(c)  All persons subject to the provisions of this section shall report their respective places of residence to their respective department heads should they be subject to subsection (b). Any change of residence must be immediately reported to the board of fire and police commissioners. 
(d)  Any person appointed on a probationary basis to any of the above-described employment categories who shall not reside within the aforementioned 15-mile radius of the village, must change his place of residence prior to the expiration of one year after completion of probationary term. 
(e)  The failure of any personnel to act consistently with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for discharge from village employment. 
(f)  As used in this section the term "residence" shall mean a person's principal domiciliary dwelling and not a temporary or transitory dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 768, §§ 1-6, 10-10-77; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1, 12-23-85; Ord. No. 89-12, § 1, 5-8-89) 
Sec. 2-89. - Turn over of monies. 
    Every officer of the village shall at least once each month turn over all money received by him in his official capacity, to the village clerk with a statement showing the source from which the same was received. 
(Code 1965, § 1.18.4) 
Sec. 2-90. - Surrender of official records upon termination of employment. 
    Within five days after notification and request any person who has been an officer of the village shall deliver to his successor, or if no successor has been appointed, to the village clerk, in office all property, books and effects in his possession, belonging to the village, or pertaining to the office he has held. Upon his refusal to do so, he shall be liable for all damages caused thereby and shall also be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 1.18.8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35. 
Sec. 2-91. - Annual review of wages and working conditions. 
    Wage and salary rates and work schedules shall be reviewed annually, not less than 60 days prior to the beginning of a new fiscal year, and oftener as conditions may require. Review shall be by a standing committee of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 1.24.12; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 3-27-72) 
Secs. 2-92-2-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, adopted Dec. 23, 1985, repealed Div. 2, §§ 2-106-2-109, which pertained to holidays and leaves of absence, and enacted in lieu thereof new provisions relative to the same subject matter designated as Div. 2, §§ 2-100-2-110, herein. Prior to such repeal, former Div. 2 was derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 1.24.9-1.24.11, 1.24.11.4; Ord. No. 651, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 1970; Ord. No. 685, § 1, adopted Mar. 27, 1972; Ord. No. 704, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 1973; Ord. No. 778, § 1, adopted Apr. 10, 1978; and Ord. No. 85-10, adopted Aug. 26, 1985. 

Sec. 2-100. - Short title, intent, usage. 
(a)  Short title. This division shall be known and may be cited as "an ordinance providing employee benefits". 
(b)  Intent. The purpose of this division is to administer the village's leave program on an equitable basis for all employees, after giving due and proper consideration to (1) the needs of the village; and (2) the welfare of the individual employee. The employee benefits package provided herein shall comply, in all respects where possible, with the Fair Labor Standards Act (hereinafter referred to as the "act") as said act presently applies to municipalities. In situations governing hourly employees, the work period as specified in the act will be defined as the 14-day period that corresponds with the present 26 village pay periods. Said period shall begin at 12:01 a.m. on the first day and run for 14 consecutive days thereafter. 
(c)  Definitions and usage. As used in this division, the following words and phrases, namely, unscheduled absence, leave year, accumulated leave, current leave, accrued leave, administrative leave, non-pay status, contagious disease, leave without pay (LWOP), absence without leave (AWOL), pregnancy, court leave, official duty, military leave, prime vacation time and temporary assignments, shall be defined as hereinafter provided in the text in which the particular word or phrase is used and such definition is provided. The provisions of this division are set forth plainly and without extensive introduction in the nature and style of an employee handbook. In this connection, the village's employees are encouraged to use the same as an employee handbook. 
(d)  [Modification of benefits.] The corporate authorities, however, as duly elected representatives of the residents, and in keeping with state statutory provisions, have the right to alter, modify, amend or eliminate any and all employee benefits depending of the needs of the municipal corporation and the corporate authorities' evaluation of the welfare of the employees of the municipal corporation. 
(e)  Labor contract agreements superseding. No benefits as provided for in this division apply to any employee covered by a labor contract agreement, in force or expired less than two years unless provided for in writing. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85; Ord. No. 2003-17, § 2, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2003-18, § 2, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 2-101. - Eligibility for and responsibilities concerning leave. 
(a)  Responsibilities. 
(1)  Appropriate village officials shall: 
a.  Administer the leave program; 
b.  Inform employees of their leave balance; 
c.  Approve or disapprove requests for leave; and 
d.  Control unscheduled absences. 
(2)  Village employees shall: 
a.  Request leave; and 
b.  Obtain approval before taking leave, except in cases of emergency. 
(b)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Employees covered by the leave program are: 
a.  Full-time employees; and 
b.  Permanent part-time employees. 
(2)  Employees not covered by the leave program are: 
a.  Nonpermanent part-time employees; 
b.  Part-time temporary employees; 
c.  Auxiliary police; and 
d.  Employees who work on a fee or contract basis (e.g., an independent contractor). 
(c)  Unscheduled absence. 
(1)  Unscheduled absences are defined as any absence or absences from work which are not requested and approved in advance. 
(2)  Management responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of appropriate village officials to control unscheduled absences by: 
a.  Informing employees of leave regulations; and 
b.  Discussing attendance records with individual employees when such discussion is warranted. 
(3)  Employee responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the employee to maintain his or her assigned schedule and to make every effort to avoid unscheduled absences. In addition, each employee must provide acceptable evidence for absences when required. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85) 
Sec. 2-102. - Annual leave. 
(a)  General provisions: 
(1)  Purpose. Annual leave is provided to employees for rest, recreation and for personal and emergency purposes. No employee is credited at the beginning of a leave year with more than 40 hours of previously accumulated annual leave. 
(2)  Definitions: 
Accrued leave is defined leave which is earned but is unused by an employee during any period during the current leave year. 
Accumulated leave is defined as the total unused leave which remains to the credit of the employee at the beginning of any leave year. 
Current leave is defined as leave which an employee earns by bi-weekly pay periods during the current leave year. 
Leave year is defined as a year which shall begin the first day of the first complete pay period in the calendar year and ends on the day before the first day of the first complete pay period in the following calendar year. 
(b)  Eligibility. Only the following earn annual leave, namely: 
(1)  Full time employees; and 
(2)  Permanent part-time employees. 
(c)  Accrual and crediting for full-time employees. 
(1)  Full-time employees shall earn annual leave based upon the number of creditable years of service in accordance with the schedule provided on the following accrual chart unless modified by the corporate authorities: 
Leave
Category Creditable 
Service Maximum 
Leave per Year Category 2 Less than 1 year .025 per hour of normally scheduled straight time hours Category 4 1 year or more, but less than 6 years .050 per hour of normally scheduled straight time hours Category 6 6 years or more, but less than 10 years .063 per hour of normally scheduled straight time hours Category 8 10 years or more .077 per hour of normally scheduled straight time hours  
(2)  Credit at beginning of leave year. Full-time employees are credited at the beginning of the leave year with the total number of annual leave hours that they will earn for that leave year. 
(3)  Changes in employee's accrual rate. Full time employees that will experience a change in an accrual rate during that year will be credited with leave hours calculated using each rate applicable for the time to be scheduled during the year. 
(4)  Change from part-time to full-time. An employee who changes from part-time to a full-time status after the start of a leave year will be credited with the annual leave earned for the remainder of the leave year at the category status granted. 
(5)  Non-pay status is defined as any day or part of a day or shift for which the employee is not receiving compensation either in the form of work hours, annual leave, or sick leave or while receiving workers compensation TTD benefits. Leave credit for periods in which an employee is in non-pay status is reduced during the leave year as follows: 
a.  When an employee's absence in non-pay status totals the equivalent of one pay period of regular service during the leave year (ten days or 80 hours if 40-hour work week and corresponding ratio of hours for less than 40-hour work schedule) credit for leave is reduced by the amount of leave earned by the employee in a pay period; and/or 
b.  When an employee has one or more periods of non-pay status during the year, all hours from such periods in non-pay status (during periods in which the employee earned annual leave) are totaled to reduce leave credit. 
(d)  The corporate authorities reserve the right to craft annual leave benefit availability to other employees on an individual basis. 
(e)  Authorization required. Except for emergencies, annual leave for all employees must be requested and approved in advance by appropriate village officials. 
(1)  Emergencies. An exception to the advance approval requirement as provided in section 2-102(e) hereinabove, is made for emergencies; however, in such situations, the employee must notify appropriate authorities as soon as possible as to the emergency and the expected duration of the absence. As soon as possible after return to duty, employees must explain the reason for the emergency to an appropriate village official. Such appropriate village official shall then approve or disapprove the leave as requested. When the request is disapproved, the absence may be recorded as leave without pay (hereinafter referred to as "LWOP") or absent without leave (hereinafter referred to as "AWOL") at the discretion of the appropriate village official. 
(2)  Request for, or notification of, absence. Application for annual leave is made in writing on an appropriate form designated by each appropriate village official. 
(3)  Approval/disapproval. The appropriate village official is responsible for approving or disapproving application for annual leave. If said appropriate village official does not approve an application for leave, the application is returned to the employee with the reasons for disapproval given in writing. 
(4)  Retention period. Request forms are retained by the appropriate village officials for two years from the date the leave is taken or disapproved. 
(5)  Insufficient leave balance. If the leave is approved and the employee has insufficient leave balance, the village automatically changes annual leave to LWOP when processing the employee's pay. 
(f)  Leave charge information for full-time employees. Full-time employees shall be charged in accordance with the following schedule for the purposes of leave: 
Employee Category Minimum 
Unit Charge All full-time 
employees Quarter hour  
(1)  Additional leave. Additional leave is granted in multiples of quarter hours. 
(2)  Holidays. Leave cannot be charged for national legal holidays, days designated as holidays, or absences authorized by village ordinance or resolution. 
(g)  Leave charge information for permanent part-time employees. Permanent part time employees shall be charged in accordance with the following schedule for purposes of leave: 
Employee Category Minimum 
Unit Charge Permanent part-time employee Quarter hour  
(1)  Permanent part-time. A permanent part-time employee who is granted annual leave and performs service on the same day is not allowed to work more hours than would total eight hours when combined with leave hours. A part-time employee who has been credited with 40 hours or more of paid service (work, leave, or a combination of work and leave), in a service week is not granted paid annual or sick leave during the remainder of that service week. Absences in such cases are treated as non-duty time, not chargeable to paid leave of any kind. Supervisors should avoid granting leave resulting in the requirement for overtime pay. Part time employees who request leave on days that they are scheduled to work, except legal holidays, may be granted leave provided they can be spared. Leave charged cannot exceed eight hours on any one day. The appropriate village official may also consider a request for annual leave on any day a part-time employee is not scheduled to work. The 40 hours' paid service in a service week may not be exceeded. 
(h)  Vacation planning: 
(1)  Granting of vacation leave. For all regular employees, both full-time and permanent part-time, vacation leave is granted when requested to the extent practicable. 
(2)  Prime vacation time is the period beginning with the Sunday of the first full week in June through the Saturday following Labor Day. 
(3)  Maximum length of continuous leave. The maximum length of continuous annual leave during prime time shall not exceed 14 days. There shall be no restriction during the remainder of the year. Appropriate village officials shall have the authority to deny extended vacations when staffing indicates potential problems in supplying necessary village services. 
(4)  Maximum number of employees on vacation. Appropriate village officials shall determine the maximum number of employees that can be on vacation at one time. This policy shall be made known to the employees of the various village departments. 
(5)  Vacation selection. Vacation selection for the prime time period shall be made on the basis of seniority by department. Submission of vacation requests shall be made and assigned by a specified date prior to the prime time period. All other vacation selection shall be made on the basis of submission date. 
(i)  Separation adjustments: 
(1)  Collection for unearned leave; refund. Separating employees who are indebted for unearned annual leave (or sick leave) have to refund the amount paid to them for such unearned leave. If employees do not make refunds, deductions are made from any salary due them. 
(2)  Collection for unearned leave; exception Collection is not required in the case of death or in the case of separation due to a disability which prevents an employee from returning to duty. 
(3)  Payment for accumulated leave. A separating employee may receive a lump sum payment for accumulated annual leave subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Before qualifying period. An employee who separates before completing the qualifying period forfeits terminal leave payment for accumulated leave. 
b.  On or after qualifying period. An employee who completes the 90-day qualifying period, even if separated at the close of business on the 90th day, is entitled to a terminal leave payment for leave accumulated. 
c.  Before last Friday of pay period. An employee whose separation is effective before the last Friday of a pay period does not receive leave credit or terminal leave payment for the leave that would have accrued during that pay period. 
d.  Lump sum payment. Lump sum payment for annual leave at the time of retirement does not affect the amount or commencement date of annuity payments. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85; Ord. No. 97-08, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 2003-18, § 3, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 2018-08, § 2, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 2-103. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of sick leave is to insure employees against loss of pay if they are incapacitated for the performance of duties because of illness, injury, pregnancy and confinement, and medical (including dental or optical) examination or treatment. Sick leave may also be used in the case of death of an immediate family member of the employee. The term "immediate family member" includes husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, brother-or sister-in-law, or parent-in-law of the employee. Sick leave for this purpose in all cases is limited to three days' work. 
(b)  Accrual and crediting. For the purposes of providing sick leave, each employee shall be subject to the accrual and crediting procedure as follows unless modified by the corporate authorities: 
Full time employees working normally scheduled straight time hours of 35 to 40 per week shall earn sick leave at a rate of .0347 per straight time hour worked. 
(1)  Crediting in general. Sick leave is credited at the end of each bi-weekly pay period in which it is earned. Sick leave (earned, unused and not compensated as set forth below) accumulates without limit. 
(2)  Full time employee annual payments for unused annual sick leave earned in that calendar year shall be paid after the close of each calendar year per the following conditions (unless an employee declines payment in writing). 
a.  If zero hours of sick leave are used, three days of regularly scheduled straight time hours will be paid to the employee from the unused sick leave balance. If any sick leave hours up to the three such days of pay are used, that number of hours used will be subtracted and the remainder will be paid to the employee. Remaining hours after annual payments of unused sick leave will be added to an employee's sick leave accrual balance. 
b.  Unused sick leave annual payments will be made to employee during January of the next calendar year. 
(3)  Non-pay status is defined as any day or part of a day or shift for which the employee is not receiving compensation either in the form of work hours, annual leave, or sick leave or is receiving workers compensation TTD benefits. Sick leave is not accrued during any period an employee is in a non-pay status. 
(c)  General policy for authorizing sick leave. Sick leave cannot be granted until it is earned, except as provided hereinafter in section 2-103(e). 
(1)  Restriction. An employee in sick leave status may not engage in any gainful employment unless prior approval has been granted by the appropriate village official. 
(2)  Conditions for authorization. Sick leave will be authorized to an employee: 
a.  In case of illness or injury, if said employee is incapacitated for the performance of his or her official duties; or 
b.  In case of pregnancy and confinement, if said employee meets the various qualifications and restrictions set forth in section 2-105 governing absences for maternity/paternity reasons; or 
c.  In case of medical, dental or optical examination or treatment, if such absence is necessary during the employee's regularly scheduled tour (every effort should be made to schedule medical and dental exams closest to either the beginning or end of a workshift); and 
d.  In cases of contagious disease, if such employee: 
1.  Care for a family member afflicted with a contagious disease; or 
2.  Has been exposed to a contagious disease and would likely jeopardize the health of others employed by the village. 
Such employee must submit evidence supplied by the village's health officer or an appropriate letter or certificate signed by a physician certifying the need for the period of isolation or restriction. 
e.  In case of care of immediate family household member. "Immediate family household member" is defined as spouse, father, mother, parent-in-law, or dependent children living in your household. Sick leave for this purpose in all cases is limited to 48 hours annually. 
(3)  As used in subsection (2)d. above, contagious disease is defined as a disease ruled as requiring isolation, quarantine or restriction of movement of the patient for a particular period of time by the village's health authority. 
(4)  Application for sick leave. Except for unexpected illness/injury situations, sick leave must be requested and approved in advance by the appropriate village official. 
(5)  Unexpected illness/injury. An exception to the advance approval requirement as provided in subsection (4) above, is made for unexpected illness/injury; however, in such situations employees must notify their department head or other appropriate village official as soon as possible as to their illness/injury and expected duration of absence. As soon as possible after return to duty, the employee must submit a request for sick leave. Employees may be required to submit acceptable evidence of incapacity to work as outlined in provisions of section 2-103(c)(8), documentation requirements. The appropriate village official must then approve or disapprove the leave request. When the request is disapproved, the absence may be recorded as annual leave, if appropriate, as LWOP, or AWOL, at the discretion of the supervisor as provided in section 2-103(c)(7) of this division. 
(6)  Request for, or notification of, absence. Application for sick leave is made in writing, in duplicate. 
(7)  Approval/disapproval. The appropriate village official is responsible for approving or disapproving applications for sick leave by signing a copy of the sick leave request. When a request is disapproved, the granting of an alternative type of leave, if any, must be noted along with the reason for the disapproval. A determination that the particular absence constitutes absence without leave must be similarly noted. 
(8)  Documentation requirements. Certain documentation must be provided in connection with each absence and leave request in the following particulars: 
a.  For periods of absence of three days or less, supervisors may accept the employee's statement explaining the absence (medical documentation or other acceptable evidence of incapacity for work is required only when the employee is on restricted sick leave, or when the appropriate village official deems documentation desirable for the protection of the interests of the village); 
b.  For periods of absence of three days or more, employees are required to submit medical documentation or other acceptable evidence of incapacity for work to the appropriate village official; 
c.  For periods of absence excused as sick leave for extended period, employees are required to submit, at appropriate intervals, but not more frequently than one time per pay period, satisfactory evidence of continued incapacity for work unless an appropriate village official has knowledge of the continuing incapacity for work. 
(9)  Return to duty after extended leave. Employees on extended leave shall, upon returning to work, be scheduled to the shift which coincides with that shift they would have been working had they not been off on leave. 
(10)  Medical documentation or other acceptable evidence. When employees are required to submit medical documentation pursuant to these regulations, such documentation shall be furnished by the employee's attending physician or other attending practitioner. Such documentation shall provide an explanation of the nature of the employee's illness, or injury, in sufficient detail to indicate to the appropriate village official that said employee was (or will be) unable to perform his normal duties for the period of absence. Medical statements to the effect that a particular employee was "under my care," or "received treatment," will not be acceptable evidence of incapacitation to perform duties. All such statements must be sufficiently detailed to satisfy the requirements of this section. In the alternative, appropriate village officials may accept proof other than medical documentation if they believe it supports a particular application for sick leave. 
(11)  Failure to furnish required documentation. If acceptable proof of incapacitation is not furnished, the absence may be charged to annual leave, LWOP or AWOL. 
(12)  Restricted sick leave; reasons for restriction. Appropriate village officials who have evidence indicating that an employee is abusing sick leave privileges may place such employee on the restricted sick leave list. In addition, employees may be placed on the restricted sick leave list after their sick leave use has been reviewed on an individual basis and the following actions have been taken: 
a.  The particular employee's employment file has been reviewed for absences by the appropriate village official; and 
b.  The particular village official has shared a discussion of the employee's absence record with the particular employee. 
(13)  Notice and listing. Village officials must provide written notice to employees that their names have been added to the restricted sick leave listing. The notice must explain that, until further notice, the particular employee or employees must support all applications for sick leave by medical documentation or other acceptable evidence. 
(14)  Recision of restriction. The appropriate village official shall review the quarterly leave. If there has been a substantial decrease in absences charged to sickness, the employee's name must be removed from the restricted sick leave list and the employee must be notified in writing of such removal. 
(15)  Performance ability questioned. When the reason for an employee's sick leave is of such nature as to raise justifiable doubt concerning the employee's ability to satisfactorily and/or safely perform his duties, a "fitness for duty" medical examination may be requested through such appropriate village official. A complete report of the facts, medical or otherwise, should support the request. 
(d)  Charging sick leave: 
(1)  Sick leave shall be charged against all full-time employees according to the following general rules: 
a.  Sick leave is not charged for legal holidays or for non-work days established by village ordinance or resolution; and 
b.  Sick leave may be charged on any scheduled work day of an employee's basic work week, including Saturdays and Sundays. 
(2)  The charging of sick leave shall be made in accordance with the following minimum unit charge: 
Employee Category Minimum 
Unit Charge All full-time 
employees Quarter hour  
(3)  Sick leave shall be charged against part-time employees in accordance with the following general rules and procedures: 
a.  Absences due to illness shall be charged as sick leave on any day that an hourly rate employee is scheduled to work, except an authorized paid holiday; and 
b.  Except as provided in section 2-103(g)(1), paid sick leave may not exceed the number of hours that an employee would have been scheduled to work, up to: 
1.  A maximum of eight hours in any one day; 
2.  Forty hours in any one week; or 
3.  Eighty hours in any one pay period (in the event that a dispute arises as to the number of hours the permanent part-time employee would have been scheduled to work, the schedule will be considered to have been equal to the average hours worked by other part-time employees in the same work location on the day in question); 
4.  Limitations as provided hereinabove shall apply only to paid sick leave and not to a combination of sick leave and work hours (part-time employees who have been credited with 40 hours or more of paid service-e.g., work, leave or a combination of work and leave-in a service week, shall not be granted sick leave during the remainder of that service week. Absences in such cases shall be treated as non-duty time not chargeable to paid sick leave of any kind). 
(4)  The charging of sick leave for all part-time employees shall be in accordance with the minimum unit charge schedule set forth as follows: 
Employee Category Minimum 
Unit Charge All part-time 
employees Quarter hour  
(e)  Advance sick leave: 
(1)  Sick leave not to exceed 30 days (240 hours) may be advanced in cases of serious disability or ailment if there is reason to believe the employee will return to duty. Sick leave may be advanced whether or not employees have annual leave to their credit. 
(2)  Medical documentation required. Every application for advance sick leave must be supported by medical documentation as to illness and reason. 
(3)  Additional sick leave. Additional sick leave may be advanced even though liquidation of a previous advance has not been completed, provided the advance, at no time, exceeds 30 days. Any advance sick leave authorized is in addition to the sick leave which has been earned by the employee at the time the advance is authorized. 
(4)  Liquidating advance sick leave. The liquidation of advance sick leave is not to be confused with the substitution of annual leave for sick leave to avoid forfeiture of the annual leave. Advance sick leave may be liquidated in the following manner: 
a.  By charging the sick leave against the sick leave earned by the employee as it is earned upon return to duty; or 
b.  By charging the sick leave against any equivalent amount of annual leave, at the employee's request if the annual leave charge is made prior to the time such leave is forfeited because of leave limitation regulations. 
(f)  Leave charge adjustments: 
(1)  Insufficient sick leave. If sick leave is approved, but the employee does not have sufficient sick leave to cover the absence, the difference is charged to annual leave or to LWOP at the employee's option. 
(2)  Insufficient sick and annual leave. If sick leave is approved for employees who have no annual or sick leave to their credit, the absence may be charged as LWOP, unless sick leave is advanced as outlined in section 2-103(e). LWOP so charged cannot thereafter be converted to sick or annual leave. 
(3)  Disapproved sick leave. If sick leave is disapproved, but the absence is nevertheless warranted, the appropriate village official may approve, at the employee's option, a charge to annual leave or a charge to LWOP. 
(4)  Absence without leave. An absence which is disapproved is charged as LWOP and may be administratively considered as AWOL. 
(5)  Annual leave charged to sick leave. If an employee becomes ill while on annual leave and the employee has a sick leave balance, the absence may be charged to sick leave. 
(g)  Retirements or separations: 
(1)  Use of sick leave at time of separation or retirement. Payment for earned but unused sick leave at the time of separation or retirement, will be made at the rate of 50 percent of the unused balance up to a maximum payment of 320 hours. 
(2)  Separation by death. If an ill employee dies without returning to duty and without making application for sick leave, such appropriate village official may grant sick leave for the period of illness or disability immediately prior to death. If the employee was in pay status on the day of death or immediately prior to death, the employee's beneficiary shall be entitled to receive compensation without charge to leave for the date of death. The latter applies whether or not such employee has leave to his credit. 
(h)  Collection for unearned sick leave. Collection for used but unearned sick leave at the time of separation is made in the same manner as for unearned annual leave (see section 2-102(i)(1) and (2) for information pertaining to the collection of unearned annual leave). 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85; Ord. No. 2003-18, § 4, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 3, 1-23-17; Ord. No. 2018-08, § 2, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 2-104. - Leave without pay (LWOP). 
(a)  Leave without pay (LWOP): Leave without pay is defined as an authorized absence from duty in a non-pay status. LWOP may be granted upon the employee's request and covers only those hours which the employee would normally work or for which the employee would normally be paid. In this respect, LWOP differs from an absence without leave (AWOL) in that AWOL is a non-pay status due to a determination that no appropriate leave can be granted in a particular situation either because: 
(1)  The employee did not obtain advance authorization; or 
(2)  The employee's request for leave was denied. 
(b)  Restriction policy. LWOP in excess of two years is not approved unless specifically provided for. 
(c)  Administrative discretion. Each request for LWOP shall be carefully and closely examined and a decision shall be made as to the request based upon the needs of such employee, the needs of the village, and the costs to the village. A decision to grant LWOP is a matter of administrative discretion and shall not be granted solely on such employee's demand. 
(d)  Condition of LWOP. In granting approval for extended LWOP, the application for such LWOP must demonstrate a reasonably expectation that the employee will return to work at the end of the approved period. 
(e)  Leave credit reduction. Employees on LWOP for a period or periods totalling 80 hours (the normal number of work hours in one pay period) during a leave year shall have their leave credit reduced by the amount of leave earned in one pay period. 
(f)  Restricted use of LWOP. LWOP shall not be granted to any employee for the purposes of enabling such employee to "try out" for alternate employment or to accept other employment. 
(g)  Acceptable reasons and instruments. The following subsections provide acceptable reasons for granting LWOP and instructions as to the grant of LWOP and various restrictions relating to LWOP: 
(1)  Personal reasons: LWOP may not exceed 30 days during each leave year. 
(2)  Employee has no leave to cover vacation during choice vacation period: LWOP may be granted to cover the absence. 
(3)  Full-time attendance at a college or university: 
a.  Restricted to full-time employee. 
b.  An official transcript of courses taken must be submitted to the appropriate village official. 
(4)  Personal illness or injury: 
a.  LWOP may be granted after accumulated accrued sick and annual leave have been exhausted, except the employee may request LWOP prior to exhausting annual leave. 
b.  A medical document from the attending physician or practitioner must be obtained prior to approval, the same as for sick leave. 
c.  Applications for LWOP to cover a period in excess of 30 days in any one year in cases of illness or injury, are reviewed and acted upon by the appropriate village official. 
d.  An employee normally will not be separated from the service because of LWOP taken due to illness for a period of less than one year. An employee may be separated if required to be absent for more than one year, unless there is cause to expect recovery and return within a reasonable time after the end of one year in LWOP status. 
e.  The separation of an employee after one year of continued absence without pay does not prevent an eligible employee from filing an application for retirement. 
(5)  Injury in line of duty: 
a.  An employee may choose to use annual or sick leave until it is exhausted prior to being placed on LWOP. 
b.  On favorable adjudication of a claim by the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs. LWOP may be substituted for a period of sick and/or annual leave, so that the employee may accept disability compensation for the period of absence. The appropriate village official must advise employees of their right to file an application for injury suffered in line of duty. 
c.  An employee who elects LWOP during a pay period in order to receive compensation under the Federal Employees Compensation Act earns leave during that part of the pay period in which the employee is in pay status, despite general prohibition against earning leave for a part of a pay period. 
(6)  Maternity absence (see section 2-105): An employee absent for maternity reasons may request LWOP for periods of absences which are not medically certified as being due to incapacitation for the performance of duty. 
(7)  Military duty for scheduled drills or for periods of training: An employee enlisted under the Reserve Forces Act of 1955, who has completed the initial period of active duty training of not less than three months or more than six months may be granted LWOP for scheduled drills or periods of training. 
(8)  Military duty for any purpose, training or otherwise: Eligible members of the National Guard or reserve components of the Armed Forces ordered to active duty for training or for any other purposes, for a specified period of time not to exceed one year, but in excess of the total time allowable under military leave and annual leave shall be granted. 
(h)  Required forms, leave request. A request for LWOP must be made by written application. All requests for LWOP must provide written justification and a statement as to the reason why the desired absence is required. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85) 
Sec. 2-105. - Absence for maternity/paternity reasons. 
(a)  Absence for maternity reasons. Maternity absence is not a separate type of leave. All policies, regulations and procedures as applied generally to leave also apply to absence for maternity reasons. 
(1)  Pregnancy is defined as a condition which eventually requires the employee to be absent from the job because of incapacitation. For leave purposes, a period of absence covering pregnancy and confinement is to be treated like any other condition which incapacitates the employee from the performance of duty. As a means of accommodating this temporary incapacitation, appropriate leave is available to the employee. 
(2)  Granting leave. Maternity absences may be a combination of sick leave, annual leave, and LWOP in the following particulars: 
a.  Sick leave to the extent available, may be used to cover the time required for physical examinations and periods of incapacitation; and 
b.  Annual leave or LWOP may be used to cover absence due to reasons such as the need for a period of adjustment following birth and recuperation, or for time to make arrangements for the care of the child or children only if requested by the employee and approved by the appropriate village official (an employee need not exhaust sick and annual leave prior to requesting LWOP). 
(3)  Request for leave. An employee shall inform such appropriate village official as soon as possible of her intention to request leave for maternity reasons and indicate the type of leave desired, approximate dates, and anticipated duration to allow the supervisor to prepare for any staffing adjustments which may be necessary. The length of absence from duty for maternity reasons is a matter requiring joint determination by the said employee, her physician and the appropriate village official. 
(4)  Request for light duty/temporary reassignment. Department heads shall make every reasonable effort to accommodate requests for light duty or temporary reassignment to other available work for which the employee is qualified and which is requested due to maternity reasons. Such requests shall be accompanied by appropriate medical recommendations. 
(b)  Absence for paternity reasons. A male employee may request only annual leave or LWOP for purposes of assisting or caring for his minor child or children or the mother of said child or children while she is incapacitated for maternity reasons. Approval of leave for these reasons is consistent with the policy of granting leave in any other situation where leave is requested due to the incapacitation of said employee's spouse. Each such leave request shall be considered on its own merits. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85) 
Sec. 2-106. - Court leave. 
(a)  Absences for court or court-related service. Leave shall be granted in relation to court or 
court-related service in accordance with the following schedule: 
Nature of
Service Court 
Leave Official 
Duty Annual 
Leave 
or LWOP (1) Jury service, state or 
local court X (2) Witness service: a. In official capacity X b. Not in official capacity on behalf of private party X  
(b)  Determining nature of court service. The appropriate village official shall ascertain the exact nature of court service in order to determine whether the particular employee is entitled to court leave or official duty status. If a summons to witness service is not specific or clear, the appropriate village official shall contact appropriate authorities to determine the party on whose behalf the witness service is to be rendered. When the exact nature of court service is determined, records shall be accordingly noted. 
(1)  Court leave is defined as the authorized absence (without loss of, or reduction in, pay, leave to which otherwise entitled, credit for time or service, or performance rating) of an employee from work status for jury duty or for attending judicial proceedings in a nonofficial capacity as a witness on behalf of a state or local government. 
(2)  Employee's eligibility for court leave. Court leave shall be granted only to full-time and permanent part-time employees. All other employees shall be ineligible for court leave and must use either annual leave or LWOP to cover the period of absence from village duty for court service, however, such employee or employees may retain any fee or fees received incident to such court service. 
(3)  Granting court leave; pay status requirement. Court leave shall be granted only to eligible employees who, except for jury duty or service as a witness in a non-official capacity on behalf of a state or local governmental agency, would be in work status or on an annual leave. An employee on LWOP when called for such court service, although otherwise eligible for court leave, shall not be granted court leave; however, such individual may retain any fees or compensation received incident to court service. 
(4)  Employee on annual leave. If an eligible employee while on annual leave is summoned for jury duty or service as a witness in a non-official capacity on behalf of a state or local governmental agency while on annual leave, the employee's annual leave shall be canceled and the employee shall be placed on court leave for the duration of such court service. Employees who are not entitled to court leave must use annual leave or LWOP for the period of absence from duty for such court service. 
(5)  Overtime. No overtime is allowed for court service performed while an employee is on court leave. 
(6)  Fees in general. Employees who receive jury or witness fees for court service while on court leave must remit such fees to the appropriate village official. The amount of fees shall be retained by the village and may not exceed the amount of salary otherwise payable to the employee for the hours of court leave. Any such excess may be retained by the employee. The employee is entitled to retain an amount equal to the per diem allowance authorized. 
(c)  Official duty: 
(1)  Official duty status: An employee is in an official duty status (as distinguished from a leave status and without regard to any entitlement to court leave) if assigned by the village or summoned by proper authority to testify or produce official records on behalf of the village. 
(2)  Compensation. Employees who perform witness service in an official duty status shall be paid their regular salaries as employees, including any applicable night differential. In addition, such employees shall collect the authorized fees and any allowances for travel and subsistence expenses and retain an amount equal to actual allowable expenses. 
(3)  Witness services in a nonofficial capacity on behalf of a private party. An employee who testifies in a nonofficial capacity (as a private individual) on behalf of a private party is not performing official duty. The employee's absence shall be charged to annual leave or LWOP and the employee may retain any fees or compensation received for such witness service. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85) 
Sec. 2-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-30, § 2, adopted September 24, 2007, deleted § 2-107, which pertained to military leave and derived from Ord. No. 85-19, adopted December 23, 1985. 
Sec. 2-108. - Holiday leave. 
(a)  Holiday leave prerequisites. All village employees shall be required to work the scheduled work days both before and after any designated holiday and, in the event that the particular holiday is a scheduled workday, on the holiday as a prerequisite to receiving the holiday leave benefit. Any village employee who is absent on the day before or after a designated holiday, and whose absence is unexcused, shall not receive holiday leave benefit. 
(b)  Holiday observance. The following ten days shall be observed as holidays by the village and all village employees who have satisfied the aforementioned prerequisites shall be paid the rate of pay established as such holiday pay for each such holiday: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Dr. Martin Luther King Day; 
(3)  Good Friday; 
(4)  Memorial Day; 
(5)  Independence Day; 
(6)  Labor Day; 
(7)  Veteran's Day; 
(8)  Thanksgiving Day; 
(9)  Christmas Day; 
(10)  Presidents' Day. 
(c)  Holiday on nonscheduled workdays. 
(1)  Saturday. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as the holiday. 
(2)  Sunday. When a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as the holiday. 
(3)  Non-scheduled workday. When a holiday falls on an employee's nonscheduled workday, the first scheduled workday preceding the holiday is hereby designated as the employee's holiday. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85; Ord. No. 90-4, § 1, 2-26-90; Ord. No. 2001-33, § 2, 9-10-01; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 2, 2-11-02) 
Sec. 2-109. - Administrative leave. 
(a)  Administrative leave. Administrative leave is defined as absence from duty authorized by such appropriate village official, without charge to annual or sick leave and without loss of pay. Such leave must be approved by the village president. 
(b)  First aid examination and treatment for on-the-job injuries or illness: 
(1)  Employees on regular tour. If an employee on regular tour of duty is injured and the injury can be treated so that the employee can return to duty during that tour, the employee shall be excused without charge to annual or sick leave. The employee shall not be required to clock out when leaving the place of duty for first aid examination or treatment. 
(2)  Employee in overtime status. When an employee is directed by an appropriate village official to an on-site or off-site medical unit due to injury, all time spent waiting for and/or receiving medical attention, on the service day on which the injury occurred which would have been worked but for the medical attention, shall be credited as work time even though overtime hours may be involved. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85) 
Sec. 2-110. - Temporary assignments. 
(a)  Temporary assignment. Temporary assignment is defined as the placement of an employee in another established position for a limited period of time to perform duties and responsibilities other than those specifically set forth in his position description when a formal reassignment and/or promotion personnel action is not required. 
(b)  Light duty assignment. Employees may be assigned to light duty as follows: Employees recuperating from a serious injury or illness who are unable to perform their regularly assigned duties, may (if administratively feasible) be temporarily assigned to such duties as they can perform for a short period of time pending their recovery. Generally, these employees should be required to present acceptable medical evidence and such appropriate village official must be convinced that they can perform such light duty assignment without risk of further injury. Such appropriate village official is under no obligation to provide light duty assignments; moreover, such official shall take into account the employee's present abilities in developing and arranging light duty assignments. 
(c)  Termination of temporary assignment. A temporary assignment may be terminated at any time by such appropriate village official, either at his own discretion or at the request of the particular employee or employees. 
(Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 12-23-85) 
Secs. 2-111-2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-121. - Position created; appointment, etc. 
    There is hereby created the position of village administrator. The village administrator shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees to serve an undetermined period at the pleasure of the president or by a mutually agreeable contract of employment. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 1(1.25.1), 2-13-84; Ord. No. 94-9, § 1, 6-27-94) 
Sec. 2-122. - Persons eligible. 
    The village administrator shall be of high moral character and have administrative experience. He shall be knowledgeable in management. No village trustee, village president or village clerk shall hold the office of village administrator during their term of office or within one year after their terms of office expire. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 1(1.25.2), 2-13-84; Ord. No. 85-4, § 1, 3-25-85; Ord. No. 85-6, § 1, 7-10-85; Ord. No. 94-9, § 1, 6-27-94) 
Sec. 2-123. - Outside employment. 
    The village administrator shall not be employed by any other person or governmental body during the period of his village employment, unless specifically authorized by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § (1.25.3), 2-13-84; Ord. No. 94-9, § 1, 6-27-94) 
Sec. 2-124. - Vacancy in office. 
    In case the office of village administrator shall become vacant for any reason, the president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may appoint an individual to act as temporary village administrator. The temporary village administrator shall have all the duties and responsibilities of the village administrator. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 1(1.25.4), 2-13-84; Ord. No. 94-9, § 1, 6-27-94) 
Sec. 2-125. - General duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the village administrator to assist the president and board of trustees in adopting and modifying the village's zoning ordinance and securing and managing grant assistance programs. He shall administer the business licensing application procedure of the village. He shall attend all meetings of the board of trustees, zoning board of appeals and the plan commission and shall attend other public hearings involving the village and various branches and agencies thereof, which administer duties and responsibilities consistent with those hereinbefore specified, unless excused by the president. He shall investigate into the affairs of the village and into complaints in relation to matters concerning village services and administration and perform such other duties as may be required by the corporate authorities consistent with all village ordinances. The village administrator shall direct the administration and implementation of the zoning ordinance, subdivision control ordinance, comprehensive plan and other group management policies and ordinance. He shall serve as zoning administrator and as such coordinate all zoning and development, review activities and prepare reports on subdivision and zoning proposals as necessary in conjunction with the plan commission and zoning board of appeals. In addition, the village administrator shall ensure that all significant board actions are transmitted to the appropriate departments for implementation or action. He shall also be responsible for actively engaging in the pursuit of economic development opportunities that will enhance the village and act in a public relations capacity in matters relating to the village, particularly involving the business community. Finally, he shall supervise and direct all department heads to provide for a coordinated approach to the management of the village. 
(Ord. No. 84-1, § 1(1.25.5), 2-13-84; Ord. No. 85-4, § 1, 3-25-84; Ord. No. 85-6, § 1, 7-10-85; Ord. No. 94-9, § 1, 6-27-94) 
Secs. 2-126-2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VILLAGE ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-136. - Legal advice. 
    The village attorney shall be the legal advisor of the village and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting it, whenever requested to do so by any village official. Upon request by the president or the board of trustees, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. 
(Code 1965, § 1.6.4) 
Sec. 2-137. - Enforcement of judgments. 
    It shall be the duty of the village attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgements or decrees entered in favor of the village, and of all similar interlocutory orders. 
(Code 1965, § 1.6.3) 
Sec. 2-138. - Handling lawsuits. 
    The village attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against or by, any officer of the village on behalf of the village or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the village. 
(Code 1965, § 1.6.2) 
Sec. 2-139. - Special assessments. 
    It shall be the duty of the village attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. 
(Code 1965, § 1.6.5) 
Sec. 2-140. - Approval of surety bonds. 
    All bonds required by law or ordinance to be submitted to and approved by the board of trustees shall first be submitted to the village attorney, and it shall be his duty to examine said bonds, and if in his judgment the same are properly drawn and are legal and binding obligations, he shall endorse the same with his approval, and if not, he shall endorse his disapproval thereon, together with his reasons therefor. 
(Code 1965, § 1.6.6) 
Secs. 2-141-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VILLAGE CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12; taxation, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Village clerk, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90. 

Sec. 2-151. - Election, bond and salary. 
    The village clerk shall be elected for such term as may be prescribed by statute and shall take the statutory oath of office. He shall give bond with sureties to be approved by the board of trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. The village clerk shall be paid at an annual rate of $9,600.00. 
(Code 1965, § 1.4.1; Ord. No. 85-1, § 1, 1-28-85; Ord. No. 89-1, § 1, 1-23-89; Ord. No. 96-4, § 3, 9-9-96; Ord. No. 2004-34, § 3, 9-27-04; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 3, 10-24-16) 
Sec. 2-152. - General duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the village clerk to perform all duties and functions which may be required by him by statute or by ordinance, to attend the meetings of the board of trustees and to keep the records thereof, and to keep a record of all the officers of the village with the names of the person holding each office. 
(Code 1965, § 1.4.4) 
State Law reference- General duties of clerk, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90. 
Sec. 2-153. - Records to be kept. 
    The village clerk shall keep the record of ordinances which is required to be kept by statute, and such other records as may be required by ordinance. He shall keep in a separate book a record of all licenses and permits issued by him, and of the amounts of money received by him, and he shall keep the record of accounts between his office and that of the treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 1.4.3) 
Secs. 2-154-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VILLAGE COLLECTOR[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12; taxation, Ch. 24. 

Sec. 2-166. - Office created. 
    There is hereby created the office of village collector, an executive office of the village. 
(Code 1965, § 1.5.1) 
State Law reference- Appointment of officers, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5. 
Sec. 2-167. - General duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the collector to collect and receive all money due on special assessments and special taxes that are not paid directly to the treasurer or to some other village official, and to keep such records pertaining to such collections as may be required by statute or ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 1.5.3) 
Sec. 2-168. - Reports. 
    The collector shall make such reports regarding delinquent special assessments as are required by statute, and shall make a monthly report to the board of trustees showing what money has been received, and the source thereof. The collector shall also make an annual report during the last month of the fiscal year showing all the activities of his office. 
(Code 1965, § 1.5.4) 
Secs. 2-169-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VILLAGE TREASURER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12; taxation, Ch. 24. 

Sec. 2-181. - Office created; term. 
    There is hereby created the office of village treasurer who shall be appointed for a term of one year. 
(Code 1965, § 1.8.1) 
State Law reference- Appointment of treasurer, 65 ILCS, 5/3.1-30-5. 
Sec. 2-182. - General duties. 
    The village treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute or ordinance. He shall receive all money paid into the village, either directly from the person paying the money or from the hands of such other officer or employee as may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the president and the village clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 1.8.3) 
Sec. 2-183. - Deposit of funds. 
    The village treasurer shall deposit the village funds in such depositories as may be selected from time to time by the board of trustees; he shall keep the money belonging to the village separate and distinct from his own money, and shall not make private or personal use of any money belonging to the village. 
(Code 1965, § 1.8.4) 
State Law reference- General duties of treasurer, 65 ILCS, 5/3.1-35-40. 
Sec. 2-184. - Records. 
    The village treasurer shall keep the records showing all money received by him, showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is paid; he shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of the village. 
(Code 1965, § 1.8.5) 
Sec. 2-185. - Accounts. 
    The village treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance, and he shall keep them in the manner required by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 1.8.6) 
Sec. 2-186. - Register of warrants. 
    The village treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds or orders filed with him or paid by him, and all vouchers, as is required by statute. 
(Code 1965, § 1.8.7) 
Secs. 2-187-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - VILLAGE ENGINEER OR SPECIAL ENGINEER 

Sec. 2-201. - Authorized. 
    The president with the consent of the board of trustees may from time to time engage a village engineer to represent or advise the village on engineering matters; he may also engage a special engineer to advise or represent the village on special matters or to assist the village engineer. 
(Code 1965, § 1.9.1) 
Sec. 2-202. - Duties. 
    The village engineer shall advise the president and board of trustees generally and specially on engineering matters as the same shall pertain to the program and problems of the village. 
(Code 1965, § 1.9.2) 
Secs. 2-203-2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - AUDITOR AND SPECIAL ACCOUNTS 

Sec. 2-216. - Authorized. 
    The president, with the consent of the board of trustees, may from time to time retain an auditor to advise the village on financial and fiscal matters; he may also engage special accountants to advise the village on special matters or to assist the auditor for the village. 
(Code 1965, § 1.7.1) 
Sec. 2-217. - Duties. 
    The auditor for the village shall prepare all financial statements requested by the village and required by law, and shall prepare the certified annual reports required by law. 
(Code 1965, § 1.7.2) 
State Law reference- The Illinois Municipal Auditing Law, 65 ILCS 5/8-8-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-218-2-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 2-223. - Position created. 
    There is hereby created the position of code enforcement officer. Code enforcement officers shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees to serve as a full-time employees or part-time employees. 
(Ord. No. 2003-36, § 2, 10-13-03) 
Sec. 2-224. - General duties. 
    A code enforcement officer shall have authority to enforce the provisions of the property maintenance code and those provisions of the Crete Municipal Code as designated. A code enforcement officer shall exercise authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare to interpret and implement property maintenance code and other designated provisions, to inspect properties and to institute court proceedings. The code enforcement officer is also hereby designated as a "code official" as described in the International Codes adopted in the Crete Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-36, § 2, 10-13-03) 
Secs. 2-225-2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Architectural advisory board, § 6-28; licensing committee, § 12-1; economic development commission, § 19-36 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, § 28-48; plan commission, § 28-49. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-231-2-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Board of local improvements, 65 ILCS 5/9-2-7. 

Sec. 2-246. - Established; functions. 
    There is hereby established a board of local improvements; the duties and rights of the board of local improvements shall be as provided by statute and ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 11.1.1) 
Sec. 2-247. - Members. 
    The board of local improvements shall consist of the village president and the village trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 11.1.2) 
Sec. 2-248. - Secretary. 
    The village clerk shall be ex officio secretary of the board of local improvements. He shall attend all meetings of the board of local improvements. He shall keep the records of the board of local improvements. 
(Code 1965, § 11.1.3) 
Secs. 2-249-2-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Police department, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Board of fire and police commissioners, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-261. - Generally. 
    The board of fire and police commissioners is hereby created. Such board shall be governed by the provisions of division 2.1 of article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.), which division is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-262. - Application fee. 
    An application fee not to exceed $40.00 shall be collected at the time any application is requested by an applicant which is subject to board of fire and police commission testing for new hires. The board of fire and police commissioners shall determine the exact fee prior to its publishing its notice of testing. 
(Ord. No. 98-31, § 1, 1998) 
Secs. 2-263-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FEES AND FINES SCHEDULE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 86-13A, § 2, adopted Jan. 5, 1987, provided for the inclusion of a fees and fines schedule as art. V of ch. 2. Such provisions have been further designated as § 2-301, in order to conform to the numbering system of the Code. 
Cross reference- Construction permit and inspection fees, schedule, § 2-311. 

Sec. 2-301. - Comprehensive listing. 
    The following schedule provides a comprehensive listing of all permit and license fees and fines as imposed in connection with various specific offenses, which schedule of fees and fines shall be the official schedule of such fees and fines until further amendment thereof. The following consists of three separate columns: The column to the extreme left-hand side of the page provides the section or provision number of the section or provision to which the specific fee or fine relates; the center column provides some explanation, identification or classification of the particular license, permit or offense to which the particular fee or fine relates; and, the column to the extreme right-hand side of the page sets forth the actual amount of each such fee or fine, all of which is set forth as follows: 
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND FINES 
Code 
Section 
No. License, Permit and Other Fees and/or Fine or Fines Amount 3-1 Alarm systems 3-1(a) Systems directly wired into and monitored by dispatch center, per line, monthly $5.00 3-1(b) Fine for failure to pay monthly fee $100.00 to $500.00 Compromise fine 50% of the minimum required fine (see section 3-1) 3-16 False alarms $25.00 to $100.00 4-25 Liquor license  Class A $800.00  Class A Restricted $800.00  Class B $800.00  Class C $800.00  Class D $100.00  Class E $800.00  Class F $800.00  Class G $100.00  Class H $100.00  Class T $25.00 5-6 Impoundment of animals actual cost plus $2.00/day 5-7 Release payment from impoundment $25.00 5-12 Stable License $50.00 5-13 Small animal store $50.00 5-33 Dog running at large $100.00 or $50.00 if paid prior to court hearing 5-36 Pet excrement violation $100.00 or $50.00 if paid prior to court hearing 5-51 License for animal $10.00/animal 5-53 Tag replacement $5.00 5-71 Cat running at large $100.00 or $50.00 if paid prior to court hearing 5-72 Failure to provide proof of rabies vaccination $50.00 6-27 (128.0) Contractor's license  General $100.00  Sub $100.00 8-30 Drainage and flood control fine, each offense Not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00 8-54 Site development permit $20.00 minimum and/or same as site/development plans review fee under section 28-33 9-34 Ambulance service: Resident: Mileage (loaded) $15.00/mile BLS Transport $700.00 ALS Transport $900.00 ALS2 Transport $1,100.00 Scene treatment $250.00 Nonresident: Mileage (loaded) $15.00/mile BLS Transport $900.00 ALS Transport $1,100.00 ALS2 Transport $1,300.00 Scene treatment $300.00 9-74 Flammable storage tank $1.00/100 gallons 10-33 Collection and Disposal: Residential rate (which includes garbage, recycling and yard waste curbside removal) $17.95/month 12-10 Business license, multiple license/building $20.00/dealer 
$75.00/owner, operator of building 12-13 Nonspecified business $75.00 Nonspecified business with municipal contractor license 50% of the nonspecified business rate 12-28 (1) Menageries $25.00/day (2) Inanimate objects $10.00/day (3) Other amusements $10.00/day 12-29 Athletic exhibitions $100.00/day 12-46 Pool hall, per each set of 10 tables or portion thereof $75.00 12-61 Bowling alley, per each set of 10 lanes or portion thereof $75.00 12-81 Circus/carnival $200.00/day 
10.00/concession or side show 12-96 Golf range, per each set of 10 tees or portion thereof $75.00 12-111 Theaters $500.00/year 
$50.00/day 12-131 Public dances $25.00/day 12-146 Skating rink $500.00/year 12-161 Golf range, per each set of 10 tees $75.00 Go carts, per each set of 10 carts $120.00 Miniature golf, per each set of 9 holes $50.00 Batting cage, per each set of 10 $140.00 Tennis practice, per each set of 10 courts $200.00 Indoor golf range, per each set of 10 cages $140.00 Coin-operated (or token-operated) automatic amusement devices of any type whether mechanical or video:  1 to 5 devices $100.00  5 to 10 devices $200.00  10 to 20 devices $400.00  For every lot of 10 devices or fraction thereof in excess of 20 devices up to 30 devices $150.00  For every lot of 10 devices or fraction thereof in excess of 30 devices up to 50 devices $100.00  For every lot of 10 devices or fraction thereof in excess of 50 devices $50.00 12-181 Auctioneer $100.00/year 
$40.00/month 
$10.00/day 12-202 Auto body shop $75.00 12-223 Auto service station $100.00 plus 
$50.00/fuel nozzle 12-251 Barbershop $75.00 12-272 Beauty shop $75.00 12-291 Coin-operated (or token-operated) devices, for every set of 5 devices or part thereof $100.00 12-292 Video gaming terminal licensed in accordance with the Video Gaming Act (per terminal) $25.00 12-311 Drug paraphernalia dealer $650.00 12-332 Dry cleaners $75.00 12-371 Florist $75.00 12-371 Food dealer $75.00 12-372 Food delivery $50.00/vehicle 12-373 Ice dealer $20.00/machine 
$5.00/vehicle 12-374 Restaurant $75.00 12-375 Milk dealer $50.00 plus 
$10.00 per vehicle 12-376 Food locker $100.00 12-392 Garage Sales $5.00 12-412 Handbills $20.00/day 12-431 Hardware store $75.00 12-451 Hotel, bed and breakfast $75.00 plus 
$10.00 per hotel room or bed and breakfast sleeping room 12-471 Junk dealer $100.00 
plus $10.00/vehicle 12-491 Laundry, washing or drying devices in a laundry establishment for every set of 10 devices or part thereof $75.00 12-512 Lumber yard $75.00 12-532 Machine shop $75.00 12-552 Mobile home sales $75.00 12-567 Motels $75.00 plus 
$10.00 per motel room 12-591 Nursing home, per building $75.00 12-606 Paint store $75.00 12-622 Parking lot $50.00 plus 
$1.00 each space over 50 12-671 Pawnbroker $375.00 12-691 Public garage $250.00 12-712 Scavenger $75.00 12-731 Secondhand store $75.00 12-753 Self-serve gas station $100.00 
plus $50.00/fuel nozzle 12-776 Appliance store $75.00 12-791 Tobacco dealer $75.00 12-811 Undertaker or mortician $100.00 12-827 Motor vehicle dealer $75.00 12-846 Variety store $75.00 12-855 Landscaper's license/lawn service $75.00 12-856 Landscape's permit $20.00 13-7 Vandalism fine Not more than $750.00 13-22 Unlawful possession of paint marking instrument or etching equipment:  Subsection (a) (by minor) $25.00 to $100.00  Subsection (b) (public or private property) Not less than $750.00  Subsection (c) (public way with intent) Not less than $750.00 14-2 Mobile home park $100.00 
plus $10.00/space 15-16 Sound amplifiers - Stationary $50.00/day 18-24 Peddler, solicitor, itinerant merchant $20.00/day 21-18 Outdoor advertisers $1.00/sq.ft. 22-40 Preliminary plat of subdivision $50.00 
plus $5.00 lot Engineering Review of subdivision Cost incurred Engineering inspection Per agreement Recordation Cost incurred 24-24 Vehicle license tax:  Horsedrawn None  Car $50.00  Motorcycle None  Trucks (B) $50.00  Trucks (over B) $50.00  Snowmobile None  Recreational vehicles $50.00  Antique vehicle if licensed as such None  Bus $50.00  Residents age 65 or over (limit to one vehicle) $25.00 NOTE: Vehicle license tax amounts are twice the amount listed above if purchased later than 30 days when due 24-25 Vehicle sticker transfer fee $3.00 26-22 Taxicabs $50.00 27-3 Water service connection fee: Meter connection fee:  1" meter size $500.00 + $50.00 (insp. fee) 
+ meter cost  1 1/2" meter size $1,225.00 + $50.00 (insp. fee) 
+ meter cost  2" meter size $2,000.00 + $50.00 (insp. fee) 
+ meter cost  3" meter size $4,500.00 + $50.00 (insp. fee) 
+ meter cost  4" meter size $8,000.00 + $50.00 (insp. fee) 
+ meter cost  6" meter size $18,000.00 + $50.00 (insp. fee) 
+ meter cost Sewer tap fee:  Residential $550.00 per dwelling unit  Commercial/Industrial $25.00 per PE 
(population equivalent) used 
(minimum fee $550.00) Note: Recapture fees may also apply in addition to both water and sewer connection fees. The PE is estimated by developer and approved by the Thorn Creek Sanitary District. Thorn Creek Sanitary District is responsible for collection of its own sewer connection charge in addition to the above village charges. 27-8 Altering water lines, fine $100.00 to $500.00 27-9 Infiltration testing of sewer system $10.00/quarter 27-22(a) Water and sewer rates:  Water and sewer $5.80/1,000 gal.  Water only $3.40/1,000 gal.  Sewer only $36.75/quarter  
Combined water/ 
sewer per 1,000 gal. Water only 
per 1,000 gal. Sewage only 
per quarter 7/15/2012 $4.64 $2.58 $37.85 7/15/2013 4.77 2.66 38.99 7/15/2014 4.92 2.74 40.16 7/15/2015 5.06 2.82 41.36 7/15/2016 5.22 2.90 42.60 9/15/2016 5.80 3.40 42.60 7/15/2017 5.80 3.40 43.88 7/15/2018 5.80 3.40 45.19 7/15/2019 5.80 3.40 46.55 7/15/2020 5.80 3.40 47.95 NOTE: Each water account shall be billed a flat fee of $3.00 per month in addition to the above; further, each water account shall be billed an additional flat fee of $4.00 per month in accordance with the provisions of section 27-22(b) for water iron removal treatment services.  
Code 
Section 
No. License, Permit and Other Fees and/or Fine or Fines Amount 27-22(c) Construction Water:  Single-family $25.00  Multifamily $25.00 plus 
$10.00/1,000 sq. ft./unit  Commercial $25.00 plus 
$10.00/1,000 sq. ft. 27-28 Reconnection to water if during normal working hours (Monday-Friday, 7:00 a.m.-3:00 p.m., excluding holidays) $75.00 All other times $100.00 28-33 Zoning fees:  Zoning certificate Part of building permit or business license  Certificate of occupancy Part of building permit or business license  Variation $125.00  Special use permit $125.00 
plus $50.00  Map amendment $125.00 
plus $50.00  PUD $125.00 
plus $5.00/lot or 
$20.00/acre  Appeals $125.00  Mobile home parks $125.00 
plus $5.00/lot or 
$20.00/acre Temporary use or structure $25.00/application 
and $20.00/day Permanent sign permit $1.00 per sq. ft. of sign surface with 
a minimum fee of $20.00 Temporary sign permit $1.00 per each day permitted with 
a minimum fee of $20.00 Site and/or development plans Actual costs incurred  
(Ord. No. 86-13A, § 2, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 87-41, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. 88-2, § 1, 2-8-88; Ord. No. 88-8, § 1, 4-11-88; Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 89-5, § 2, 2-27-89; Ord. No. 89-10, § 1, 4-10-89; Ord. No. 89-19, § 2, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 90-11, § 3, 3-26-90; Ord. No. 92-2, § 1, 1-27-92; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 2-8-93; Ord. No. 93-6, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 93-21, § 1, 7-12-93; Ord. No. 93-23, § 1, 8-9-93; Ord. No. 93-24, § 1, 8-9-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 2, 8-22-94; Ord. No. 94-19, § 8, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 95-20, § 4, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 95-23, § 4, 5-22-95; Ord. No. 95-37, § 1, 8-14-95; Ord. No. 95-58, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 96-04, § 3, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 12-9-96; Ord. No. 96-58, § 1, 12-9-96; Ord. No. 97-36, § 1, 6-23-97; Ord. No. 97-50, § 1, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 4-26-99; Ord. No. 98-28, § 2, 8-10-98; Ord. No. 99-26, § 1, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-50, § 4, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2001-52, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 3, 11-25-02; 2003-08, § 1, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 6-23-03; 2004-06, § 2, 2-9-04; 2004-13, § 2, 4-12-04; Ord. No. 2005-29, § 1, 7-25-05; Ord. No. 2005-30, § 2, 7-25-05; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 4, 3-13-06; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 3, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 6-25-07; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 3-8-10; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 2, 3-22-10; Ord. No. 2010-21, § 3, 4-26-10; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 4, 5-9-11; Ord. No. 2011-18, § 1, 6-13-11; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 3, 6-24-13; Ord. No. 2014-16, § 2, 7-14-14; Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 8-10-15; Ord. No. 2016-05, § 1, 5-9-16; Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 8-22-16; Ord. No. 2016-23, § 2, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 2, 6-11-18) 
Secs. 2-302-2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, § 10, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, deleted the former art. VI of ch. 2, which had been included as § 2-311, inasmuch as new provisions pertaining to similar subject matter were enacted by the same ordinance and designated as § 6-1501. The former art. VI pertained to construction and inspection permit fees and was derived from Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1988; Ord. No. 90-32, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 1990; Ord. No. 93-24, § 2, adopted Aug. 9, 1993; Ord. No. 93-25, § 1, Sept. 9, 1993; and Ord. No. 95-18, § 5, adopted April 24, 1995. 

Secs. 2-311-2-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RECAPTURE FEES 

Sec. 2-321. - Capital improvement fee. 
    For the purpose of funding necessary capital improvements that are not the responsibility of a single builder or land developer nor which are a general benefit to the public as a whole, there shall be required a fee for each use or any increment in the size of any established use that uses water in the amount of $1.67/gallon of an estimated daily water usage. 
(Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Editor's note- Sec. 2-321 contains a capital improvement fee which the village advised had been erroneously deleted in Supplement No. 8. Such provisions, formerly § 6-27(g), have been redesignated by the editor as § 2-321 with the concurrence of the village. 
Sec. 2-322. - Listing of specific projects fees. 
    [This section contains a listing of municipal recapture fees to be paid, when applicable, prior to the issuance of building permit fees:] 
(1)  Huntley Terrace Watermain Extension (lots fronting Huntley Terrace between Beckwith Lane and Inverness Lane), per lineal foot of frontage on the water line ..... $15.00 
(2)  Richton Road Watermain Extension (lots fronting Richton Road adjacent to 148 West Richton Road), per lineal foot of frontage ..... 35.41 
(3)  Dorsetshire Drive Watermain Extension (lots fronting Dorsetshire Drive), per lineal foot of frontage ..... 31.67 
(Limited to five years from September 26, 1994) 
(Ord. No. 93-3, 2-8-93; Ord. No. 94-22, § 1, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 95-9, § 1, 2-13-95) 
Secs. 2-323-2-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - POLITICAL ACTIVITIES AND GIFTS 

Sec. 2-801. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms shall be given these definitions: 
    Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice-presidential electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
    Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3). 
    Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3). 
    Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this article, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, compensated time includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location. 
    Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment. 
    Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4). 
    Employee means a person employed by the Village of Crete whether on a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor. 
    Employer means the Village of Crete. 
    Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee. 
    Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer. 
    Officer means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or article, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity. 
    Political activity means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
    Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk. 
    Prohibited political activity means: 
(1)  Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event. 
(2)  Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event. 
(3)  Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution. 
(4)  Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(5)  Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(6)  Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(7)  Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls. 
(8)  Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(9)  Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office. 
(10)  Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires. 
(11)  Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(12)  Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(13)  Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(14)  Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention. 
(15)  Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election. 
    Prohibited source means any person or entity who: 
(1)  Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(2)  Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(3)  Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(4)  Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-802. - Prohibited political activities. 
(a)  No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the Village of Crete in connection with any prohibited political activity. 
(b)  At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment, or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off). 
(c)  No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an office or employee to engage in as part of this or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this article. 
(e)  No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party or of a political organization or club. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-803. - Gift ban. 
    Except as permitted by this article, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipient"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or article. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-804. - Exceptions. 
    Section 2-803 is not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public. 
(2)  Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value. 
(3)  Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate. 
(4)  Educational materials and missions. 
(5)  Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business. 
(6)  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee. 
(7)  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar fits to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members. 
(8)  Food or refreshments not exceeding $75.00 per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means. 
(9)  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances. 
(10)  Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this article, "intra-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "inter-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity. 
(11)  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death. 
(12)  Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.00. 
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-805. - Disposition of gifts. 
    An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this article if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-806. - Ethics advisor. 
(a)  The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees shall designate an ethics advisor for the Village of Crete. The duties of the ethics advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the Village of Crete and said the position shall not be considered an office by the Village of Crete. 
(b)  The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the Village of Crete concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this article and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-807. - Ethics commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ethics commission of the Village of Crete. The ethics commission shall be composed of the village president, village clerk and one member of the board of trustees that has served the greatest number of years as a member of the board of trustees. In the event any member of the ethics commission is unable to serve due to a conflict or other reason, said vacancy shall be filled by a trustee who has served the second greatest number of years on the board of trustees. Further vacancies shall be filled thereafter by the remaining trustees according to the number of years served. In the event a vacancy is not able to be filled by the above procedure, a vacancy will be filled by the chief judge of the Twelfth Judicial Circuit from a list of two or more names of Crete residents submitted by the village president. No more than two members of the commission shall belong to the same political party at the time such appointments are made. Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed. 
(b)  At the first meeting of the commission, the commissioners shall choose a chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or any two commissioners. A quorum shall consist two commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the affirmative vote of two members. The commission shall be active only as required upon receipt of a complaint and until it has made a final determination. 
(c)  The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with section 2-810 of this article and refer violations of section 2-802 or 2-803 of this article to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this article and not upon its own prerogative. 
(3)  To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons who may have violated the provisions of this article. 
(4)  To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the Village of Crete to cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with request by the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge. 
(5)  The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this article. 
(d)  Complaints alleging a violation of this article shall be filed with the ethics commission. 
(1)  Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint, the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed. 
(2)  Upon not less than 48 hours' public notice, the commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this article, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven business days after receiving the complaint. 
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-803 of this article and there is a determination of probable cause, then the commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is not determination of probable cause, then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public. 
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-802 of this article, then the commission shall notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation. 
(3)  On the scheduled date and upon a least 48 hours' public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the open meeting act. 
(4)  Within 30 days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the commission shall either (i) dismiss the complaint or (ii) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the village president or other officer having authority to discipline the officer or employee, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public information. 
(5)  If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven business days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the recommendation or fine. Within 14 days after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least 48 hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven days thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the village president or other officer having authority to discipline the officer or employee or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. 
(6)  If a complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall render its decision as required under subsection (e) within seven days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven days preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible. 
(7)  The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-803 of this article in an amount of not less than $1,001.00 and not more than $5,000.00. The commission may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this article in an amount of not less than $1,001.00 and not more than $5,000.00. The commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including discharge. 
(8)  A complaint alleging the violation of this article must be filed within one year after the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-810. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-802 of this article may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. 
(b)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-803 of this article is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001.00 and not more than $5,000.00. 
(c)  Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this article to the local enforcement authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. 
(d)  A violation of section 2-802 of this article shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the Village of Crete by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. A violation of section 2-803 of this article may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the Village of Crete, or, if an ethics commission has been created, by the commission through the designated administrative procedure. 
(e)  In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-802 or section 2-803 of this article is subject to discipline or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Alarm line fee. 
(a)  All alarm systems, whether fire, burglar, panic or other type, which is directly wired into and monitored by the dispatch center maintained, directly or pursuant to contract, for the village police and fire departments shall be charged a monthly line fee as set by the corporate authorities of the village, see section 2-301. Collection of said line fee shall be supervised by the village administrator and shall be collected as part of the monthly monitoring fee by the alarm monitoring company and forwarded to the village monthly. 
(b)  Failure to pay said alarm line fee shall constitute a petty offense and is punishable by a fine as set forth in section 2-301. Each month the line fee remains unpaid shall constitute a separate offense. Any person accused of a violation of this section may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 98-28, § 2, 8-10-98) 
Secs. 3-2-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2006-09, adopted March 27, 2006, retitled art. II, burglar alarms, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 3-16. - False alarms. 
    Any person, business or corporation who has installed or operates on any premises or vehicle a burglary, fire, panic or medical emergency alert or alarm system that automatically sounds an audible alarm or notifies the Crete Police or Fire Department to respond to said alarm, when it is determined there is no valid purpose for said alarm or alert to be activated (hereinafter "false alarm") shall be made subject to a penalty as set forth in article V of chapter 2 shown immediately to the right of the reference to section 3-16, which penalty shall be imposed for each event or occasion upon which the false alarm is sounded in excess of two such false alarms in any given three-month period. 
(Ord. No. 808, (Art. 10.14), 9-10-79; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2006-09, § 3, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 3-17. - Alarm key holders. 
    Any person, business or corporation operating any premises alarm subject to the section 3-16 regulation, shall provide and maintain accurate information to the chief of police or the premises' individual alarm service company regarding names, addresses and phone numbers of persons who have both the ability and knowledge of the operation of said alarms ("alarm key holder") who can silence audible alarms and/or deactivate repetitive alarm activations. The failure to provide and maintain accurate alarm key holder information to the chief of police or the premises' individual alarm service company shall constitute a petty offense punishable pursuant to the provisions of subsection 3-1(b) above, including compromise payment provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, § 5, 3-27-06) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 11; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12; food dealers, food handlers, etc., § 12-371 et seq.; consumption of intoxicating liquors in parking lots, § 12-626; public intoxication, § 13-8; liquor and drunkenness in public parks, § 17-22; taxation, ch. 24. 
State Law reference- The Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.; local liquor control powers, 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this chapter which are defined in The Liquor Control Act of 1934 shall have the meanings assigned to them in such Act. 
(Code 1965, §§ 9.1.1-9.1.6) 
State Law reference- Applicable definitions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2. - Offenses involving underaged persons. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years shall consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession within the village; provided, the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under the age of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, the consumption by a person under the age of 21 years under the direct supervision and approval of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or the possession and delivery of alcoholic liquors in the course of a person's employment by a licensee under this chapter is not prohibited. 
(b)  No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except as allowed under subsection (a). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child of which he is the parent or guardian to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within the village to knowingly allow any person under the age of 21 years to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquors in violation of subsection (a). 
(e)  No person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this chapter, or any officer, associated member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, or his agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age of 21 years to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to, or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of 21 years who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to that portion of any licensed premises which derives its principal business from restaurants or the sale of service or commodities other than alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1965, Arts. 9.18.1-9.18.4; Ord. No. 83-4, § 1, 6-13-83) 
State Law reference- Offenses involving underaged persons, 235 ILCS 5/6-16, 5/6-20. 
Sec. 4-3. - Offenses involving consumption outside of the licensee's building. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any patron of any liquor-dispensing establishment, holding a license allowing consumption on the premises, to allow consumption of liquor purchased from said establishment outside of the building in which the liquor was purchased, unless either the license specifically allows for consumption on the premises outside the building and such building has been specifically designed and approved for such outdoor consumption, or, the liquor commissioner has specifically authorized the licensee's use in this regard. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of any liquor license, or his agent or employee, to knowingly allow any patron to purchase alcoholic liquor with the intent of violating subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 4-4. - Removal of alcoholic liquor from premises. 
    No person shall remove or attempt to remove, nor shall a licensee, or his agent or employee, permit a person to remove, any alcoholic liquor in an open container or when permitted by applicable license in any packaging other than its original container or packaging from the licensed premises. The licensee shall post a sign at all exits prohibiting open liquor from being removed from the licensed premises. The licensee is prohibited from making "to go" or carry-out sales from the licensed premises unless the licensee is properly licensed for sales in closed containers. 
(Ord. No. 2010-24, § 2, 7-12-10) 
Sec. 4-5. - Persons on-premises after hours. 
    No persons, except peace officers in the performance of law enforcement duties or licensees including employees actually on duty, shall be upon the premises of any licensed building or area, excepting licensed as Class B or Class G, between the hour of closing and the hour of opening as established by section 4-48 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-24, § 2, 7-12-10) 
Sec. 4-6. - Liquor on public ways and other public places. 
(a)  No person shall possess, except in an unbroken original package, or consume alcoholic liquor upon a public way, other than in an area designated as a licensed premises by the liquor commissioner as set forth in this chapter 4. 
(b)  No person shall possess, except in an unbroken original package, or consume alcoholic liquor within a park, public library or public mass transit facility unless such areas, or portions thereof, are designated as licensed premises by the liquor commissioner as set forth in this chapter 4. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation under this section that the liquor commissioner, park district, public library district or public mass transit system specifically authorized the possession or consumption of alcohol liquor upon the property or area involved at such time and place of the alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-24, § 2, 7-12-10) 
Sec. 4-7. - Alcoholic beverages on any parking lot, parking garage, business property or vacant lots. 
(a)  No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage in an open or unsealed container while the person is located on: 
(1)  A parking lot or parking garage accessible to the public; 
(2)  The exterior portion of any property being used as a business that is accessible to the public or for any other use not permitted in a residential zoning district excepting cemeteries and public utilities; or 
(3)  Any vacant lot accessible to the public with or without the owner's permission. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation under this section that the location has been specifically licensed by the village president as the liquor control commissioner to permit the sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The terms "parking lot" and "parking garage" as used in this section shall have the same meaning as the terms "parking area, public" and "parking lot" as defined in the Crete Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010-24, § 2, 7-12-10) 
Secs. 4-8-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to require, classify, etc., licenses, 235 ILCS 5/4-1. 

Sec. 4-16 - Required license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale at retail or give away any alcoholic liquor in the village in conjunction with a business or any nonresidential context, without having a retail liquor dealer's license. No person issued such a license shall sell, offer for sale or give away an alcoholic liquor in violation of the terms of their license. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.2; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11) 
Sec. 4-17. - Application. 
    Application for such license shall be made to the commissioner, upon forms prepared and furnished by the village. Each application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall sign the application. If the applicant is a corporation or club, all officers shall sign the application and indicate their official position and title. The information recited in the application form shall be verified upon the oath or affirmation of each person signing the application. Such application shall be filed with the commissioner and be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $100.00. Each application shall contain at least the following information and statements: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the names ages, and addresses of all partners; in the case of a corporation or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, manager, and, if a majority in interest of the stock of the corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name, age and address of that person. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The nature of the business which the applicant intends to carry out on the premises along with the percentage of the applicant's gross revenues for alcoholic liquor as compared with the percentage of revenue from other sources within the proposed licensed premises. 
(4)  The nature of entertainment proposed to be offered on the proposed premises. 
(5)  The class of license for which application is made. 
(6)  The length of time that the applicant has been a resident of the state, county and village; or, if a partnership, the length of time that each partner has been a resident of the state, county and village; or if a corporation, the length of time which its proposed resident manager has been a resident of the state, county and village. 
(7)  The length of time that the applicant has been in a business of that character; or, in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued, the state of incorporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the date upon which said foreign corporation was first registered to do business within the State of Illinois. 
(8)  The address of the proposed premises, a detailed description of the proposed premises, an exterior photograph of the premises, and an interior layout plan of the proposed premises including the approximate number of seats and/or the maximum number of occupants allowed by code. 
(9)  A list of governmental entities to which the applicant has submitted an application for a liquor license, the date of such application, the disposition of such application and the dates, reason and length of suspension or revocation of such license, if any. 
(10)  A list of convictions for any violation [other than traffic violations,] of any city ordinance or state or federal statute indicating the name of the offense and date(s) of conviction. In the case of a corporation, such information must be supplied of all officers, directors, shareholders owning more than five per cent of the stock, and the manager. In the case of a partnership, such information must be supplied by all partners. 
(11)  Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.3; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 2016-22, § 3, 11-28-16) 
Sec. 4-18. - Hearing on license application. 
(a)  Calling; notice. Upon the filing of an application for a liquor license, the commissioner shall fix a time and place for a hearing thereon. Such hearing shall be scheduled not more than 45 days following the date upon which a completed application has been submitted. Notice of such hearing shall be given in a newspaper providing general circulation within the village. Such notice shall be given not less than five business days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain the time, place and date of the hearing, the name or names of the applicant(s) and the proposed location of the premises on which licensee's privileges will be maintained. 
(b)  Report to council. After conducting a hearing in relation to the application for a license (the hearing shall be used to afford all interested persons an opportunity to be heard in relation to matters and issues relating to the licensing application process), the commissioner shall report his findings and decision to the board of trustees of the village. Such decision shall be based on the criteria set forth in this article. 
(c)  Criteria. The commissioner shall not issue a new liquor license unless he has found that the issuance of such license is in the best interest of the people of the village. In deciding whether the issuance is in the best interest of the people of the village, the commissioner shall consider the following criteria, namely: 
(1)  The class liquor license applied for; 
(2)  The past performance of the applicant; or if a partnership, that of each of the partners; or if a corporation, that of the officer's directors, and majority stockholder, and manager, as a licensee; 
(3)  The character and reputation of the applicant; or if a partnership, that of each of the partners; or if a corporation, that of the officers, directors, majority stockholder and manager; 
(4)  The general design and layout of the proposed premises with particular attention given to the licensee's ability to control access by minors; 
(5)  The amount of the applicant's anticipated gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic liquor as compared with gross revenue from other sources within the proposed license premises; 
(6)  The nature of entertainment, if any which the applicant intends to provide; 
(7)  The compliance of the premises with all ordinances of the city and specifically health, building, property, maintenance, housing, and fire safety ordinances; 
(8)  Any monies owed to the city by the applicant which have remained unpaid for a period of more than 45 days, whether for bills, taxes, licenses or otherwise; 
(9)  The number, class and type of licensed premises within a one-mile radius of the proposed licensed premises, and within the city as a whole; 
(10)  The zoning general character of the surrounding neighborhood and the projected impact of the premises upon the surrounding neighborhood and the city as a whole; 
(11)  The law enforcement problems, if any, which would be created by the opening of the premises; 
(12)  The type of operation of the business and its relation to the sale of alcohol; 
(13)  The applicability of section 4-20 to the applicant's location. 
(d)  Post-hearing action. The commissioner shall render a decision on each application within 15 business days following the conclusion of the hearing as provided hereinbefore. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the commissioner's decision along with the reasons therefor. If the application is denied, the applicant may request a hearing before the commissioner within seven days of the receipt of such notification. Said request shall be made in writing. A hearing in response to said request shall be held within a reasonable period of time thereafter at a mutually agreeable time and place. 
(e)  Conditions. If a license is issued by the commissioner, said licensee shall be subject to the terms of this chapter and also to any additional terms or conditions as discussed and agreed upon during the hearing process, the furnishing of dram shop insurance as required by state statutes and appropriate provisions of this article and the provisions of this chapter to the extent that the same are applicable to the operation of licensed premises. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.6; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 785, § 1, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 821, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 84-5, § 1, 3-28-84; Ord. No. 85-11, § 1, 8-26-85; Ord. No. 86-2, § 1, 6-9-86; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11) 
Sec. 4-19. - Prerequisites for license issuance. 
(a)  At the time set forth herein for the renewal of a retail liquor license, and in the case of a successful new applicant, within ten days of notification of the commissioner's action in relation to the license application, the current licensee or new applicant shall present the following information and materials to the commissioner, namely: 
(1)  Evidence of dram shop liability insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois and providing insurance for the applicant, the owner and/or lessor of the premises in the minimum amount as required by Illinois law; and 
(2)  Payment to the village clerk in cash, or its equivalency of the license fee in the amount required for the particular class of license to be issued. 
(b)  Following the fulfillment on the part of applicant of the requirements specified in subsection (a) hereinabove, the commissioner shall issue the appropriate liquor license. 
(c)  If the requirements of subsection (a) are not fulfilled within the period of time specified therein, subject application shall be deemed withdrawn and applicant shall be required to tender a new application pursuant to the various procedures set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 4-20. - License classes generally. 
    Licenses required by this article shall be of the following classes: 
(1)  Class A. Class "A" licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well as other retail sales of such liquor in their original package not for consumption on the premises. Any Class A license may be supplemented by a rider which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises of alcoholic liquor for consumption on said premises, and limited to within the building and any attached patio areas which are fenced or otherwise prohibit entry or exit directly to the outside parking areas or adjacent properties (unless by way of an emergency exit.) Said rider is not transferable to any other person or entity and may not be transferred from a particular premises and specifically do not permit any sales of liquor in any manner for consumption off the premises other than as packaged sales in their original package. 
(2)  Class B. Class "B" licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the premises for consumption on the premises as well as other retail sales in their original package not for consumption on the premises of alcoholic liquor in the form of beer or wine only. For the purposes of this section, "beer" means a beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like. For the purposes of this section, "wine" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as defined in 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. (as amended). 
(3)  Class C. Class "C" licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. 
(4)  Class E. Class "E" licenses shall authorize the retail sale and consumption of all types of alcoholic liquor on any part of the premises and grounds of a country club or golf course either public or private. This shall also allow consumption of all types of alcoholic liquor on any day of the week as early as 6:00 a.m. including Sunday and shall observe the hours of closing as referenced in section 4-48. 
(5)  Class F. Class "F" licenses shall authorize the sale and distribution of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a hotel as defined by this chapter or other ordinances of the village and the state. This shall not include areas of the hotel buildings or grounds that may be either leased or rented to another party for the purpose of establishing a retail alcoholic liquor establishment or other similar business. 
(6)  Class G. Class "G" licenses shall authorize the use of particular alcoholic liquor as ancillary to the preparation of food or drink or other business operation, including, but not limited to, the use of alcohol as a complementary beverage to customers but not holding out said business as a bar, tavern or alcoholic drinking establishment. 
(7)  Class H. Class "H" licenses shall authorize the use of particular alcoholic liquor as ancillary to the preparation of food and drink in connection with the business of catering. 
(8)  Class K-AL. Class "K-AL" licenses shall authorize the retail sale and consumption on the premises of all types of alcoholic liquor in an establishment whose principal business is one of gaming. 
(9)  Class K-B. Class "K-B" licenses shall authorize the retail sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor in the form of beer and wine, as described above in paragraph (2), in an establishment whose principal business is one of gaming. 
(10)  [Class M.] A Class "M" license shall entitle the licensee to operate a microbrewery or winery and to manufacture and store beer, cider or wine product on the licensed premises and to make sales at retail of the on-site manufactured products for consumption on or off the premises, and to store and sell at retail other alcoholic liquor, including distilled spirits or liquor purchased wholesale, for consumption on the premises. Permitted free sampling of product manufactured on the premises is allowed in accordance with the zoning regulations of the licensed premises. Additionally, a wholesale sale of product manufactured on site is permitted in accordance with the state license obtained. Nothing in the issuance of a Class "M" license pursuant to this section shall be considered to relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying with applicable state and federal regulations relating to the manufacture and/or sale of beer products or other alcoholic beverages and applicable environmental regulations and all applicable business and other regulations of the village. 
(11)  Class R. Class "R" licenses shall authorize retail sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises only and shall only be granted for use in an establishment that contains a restaurant as defined in this chapter. A Class "R" license shall be co-extensive with the rights and prerogatives of a Class "A" license including the rider; provided, however, that under no circumstances shall a Class "R" license holder sell packaged or bulk liquor goods. This license shall be void and of no effect if it is not used in an establishment containing a restaurant as defined in this chapter. 
(12)  Class T. Class "T" licenses, shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor by civic, charitable, governmental or other not-for-pecuniary-profit organizations on specified premises or within an area specifically designated in the license for not longer than a period of 72 hours. A Class "T" license shall be available to only such organizations whose offices are located within the village, and in no event shall an organization be issued more than three such permits in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 96-04, § 2, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 97-10, § 2, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 2005-07, § 2, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 2015-25, § 2, 9-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-22, § 4, 11-28-16) 
Sec. 4-21. - Persons eligible. 
    No license of any kind required by this article shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person who is not a resident of the village if the license is being requested by an individual; 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides; 
(3)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States; 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, if the president determines, after investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust; 
(5)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame; 
(6)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality; 
(7)  A person whose license issued under this the Liquor Control Act of 1934 has been revoked for cause; 
(8)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application; 
(9)  A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license; 
(10)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political subdivision; 
(11)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois; 
(12)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee; 
(13)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to January 31, 1934 or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation; 
(14)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued; 
(15)  Any law enforcing public official of the village, including members of any village liquor control commission, the president of the board of trustees, any member of the board of trustees; 
(16)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee; 
(17)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by section 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961, approved July 28 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, [720 ILCS 5/28-1, 5/28-3] or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions; 
(18)  A person to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period; 
(19)  A co-partnership to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period, if any of the partners have been issued a federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period; 
(20)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20 percent of the stock of such corporation has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period; 
(21)  Any premises for which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period; 
(22)  A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in 235 ILCS 5/6-21 (as amended); 
(23)  A person who knowingly has misstated a material fact under oath during the application process. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.4; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-2. 
Sec. 4-22. - Retail sales near churches, schools, etc. 
(a)  No license required by this article shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station, provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to July 1, 1934; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on-premises within 100 feet of any church or school where such church or school has been established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.14; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-11. 
Sec. 4-23. - Stores selling school supplies, lunches, etc. 
    No license required by this article shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.4; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-12. 
Sec. 4-24. - Requirements for restaurant and club licenses. 
    No person shall receive a license required by this article to sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises as a restaurant nor as a club unless it has the qualifications respectively described in sections 1-3.23 and 1-3.24 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 [235 ILCS 5/1-3.23, 5/1-3.24]. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.4, § 9.6.6; Ord. No. 785, § 3, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 85-11, § 1, 8-26-85; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-25. 
Sec. 4-25. - Fees. 
(a)  The fee which shall be paid to the village prior to the issuance or renewal of a license required by this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Class "A" ..... $800.00 
(2)  Class "B" ..... 800.00 
(3)  Class "C" ..... 800.00 
(4)  Class "E" ..... 800.00 
(5)  Class "F" ..... 800.00 
(6)  Class "G" ..... 100.00 
(7)  Class "H" ..... 100.00 
(8)  Class "K-AL" ..... 800.00 
(9)  Class "K-B" ..... 800.00 
(10)  Class "M" ..... 800.00 
(11)  Class "R" ..... 800.00 
(12)  Class "T" ..... 25.00 
(b)  The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar month which have expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license. 
(c)  All such fees shall be paid to the village collector at the time the application is approved. Such fees shall be immediately transferred to the village treasurer for deposit in the village's general corporate fund or in such other fund or funds as the president and board of trustees of the village may from time to time designate. 
(Code 1965, Arts. 9.6, 9.7; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 785, § 1, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 821, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 84-5, § 1, 3-28-84; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 96-04, § 3, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 2, 5-13-13; Ord. No. 2015-25, § 3, 9-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-22, § 5, 11-28-16) 
Sec. 4-26. - Maximum number. 
    Licenses shall be issued in the following numbers by classes: 
(1)  Class "A": This class shall allow for six such licenses, and such number may be changed from time to time as determined by village board action. 
(2)  Class "B": No limits. 
(3)  Class "C": No limits. 
(4)  Class "E": No limits. 
(5)  Class "F": No limits. 
(6)  Class "G": No limits. 
(7)  Class "H": No limits. 
(8)  Class "K-AL": This class shall allow for two such licenses, and such number may be changed from time to time as determined by village board action. Provided, further, no such license may be issued for any premises which is located on Main Street between North Street and Cass Street. 
(9)  Class "K-B": This class shall allow for ten such licenses, and such number may be changed from time to time as determined by village board action. Provided, further, no such license may be issued for any premises which is located on Main Street between North Street and Cass Street. 
(9)  Class "M": This class shall allow for one such license, and such number may be changed from time to time as determined by village board action. 
(10)  Class "R": No limits. 
(11)  Class "T": No limits. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.6; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 11-28-77; Ord. No. 785, § 1, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 821, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 84-5, § 1, 3-28-84; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 96-04, § 4, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11; Ord. No. 2015-25, § 4, 9-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-22, § 6, 11-28-16; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 2, 6-12-17; Ord. No. 2018-18, § 2, 9-24-18) 
Sec. 4-27. - Term. 
(a)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance, or in the case of renewals, from the first day of June through the business night of May 31, including the morning hours of May 31, per the closing times as stated in the license. A new or renewed license will be required in order for the licensed establishment to commence operations on June 1 of the new [license] year. 
(b)  Any licensee who ceases to do business for whatever reason, or who closes his place of business for whatever reason for a period in excess of 45 days should notify the commissioner in writing of the same. The licensee may be required by the liquor commissioner, after receipt of notice of a hearing, to show cause why the license for such establishment should not be terminated. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.5; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11) 
Sec. 4-28. - Renewal. 
(a)  Any licensee may renew his liquor license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and, provided further, that this section shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the village from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the village. 
(b)  In the event that a liquor license is issued, the holder of such license shall bear continuing responsibility to update the original license application form so as to furnish the liquor commissioner with current information in relation to corporate shareholders, partnership members, and/or changes in management establishing local residence for the purposes of license issuance. Failure to do so shall be grounds for immediate license suspension. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.5; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-1. 
Sec. 4-29. - Transfer. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to this article shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless revoked sooner and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated, subject, however, to exceptions hereinafter provided in this section. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article a license holder or the legal representative of a deceased or incompetent person who held such a license, may, at his option, transfer the license upon the sale of the business premises upon which the alcoholic beverages are sold, or have been sold, provided that the purchaser qualified in all respects necessary for the granting of an application for such license contained in this chapter and that the referred to qualifications have first been acknowledged and approved in writing by the village president. If a purchaser does not qualify within six months as herein provided, the license will be automatically revoked and not reissued except upon application for an original issuance of a license. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.9; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-1. 
Sec. 4-30. - Change of location. 
(a)  A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon permission from the village president. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under law and ordinance. 
(b)  Inasmuch as businesses involving the issuance of a liquor license are subject to review and approval upon issuance of such license initially, any substantial change in business operations, including, but not by way of limitation, structural remodeling, renovation, addition or expansion, or the addition or development of entertainment or amusement facilities, shall subject such license to review for continued compliance in relation to the terms of the original issuance. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.10; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 4-31. - Records, etc. 
    The president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued by him pursuant to this article; and shall furnish the village clerk, the village treasurer, and the chief of police each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any license, the president shall give written notice of such action to each of such officers within 48 hours of such action. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.8; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 4-32. - Revocation. 
    The president may revoke any retail liquor dealer's license for cause in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.19; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
State Law reference- Revocation for cause authorized, 235 ILCS 5/4-4; revocation procedures, 235 ILCS 5/7-5. 
Sec. 4-33 - Penalties. 
    Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense and subject to the penalties as set forth in 235 ILCS 5/7-5 (as amended). 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 2, 2-28-11) 
Secs. 4-34-4-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS FOR RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- General regulatory authority of municipalities over retail sale of alcoholic liquor, 235 ILCS 5/4-1. 

Sec. 4-46. - Sanitation-Generally. 
    All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption, and the same shall be approved by the county board of health. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.12) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 11; food dealers, food handlers, etc., § 12-371 et seq. 
Sec. 4-47. - Same-Employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease. It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.13) 
Cross reference- Food dealers, food handlers, etc. § 12-371 et seq. 
Sec. 4-48. - Closing hours, etc. 
(a)  All classes other than Class T: 
6:00 am Sunday through Thursday until 1:00 am the following day; 
6:00 am Friday and Saturday until 2:00 am the following day; 
Hours of operation on New Year's Eve shall begin 6:00 am and conclude 5:00 am on the following day. 
Class T: 
Specifically annotated by license. 
(b)  Restaurants, clubs or hotels whose premises are licensed under this chapter, shall be permitted to remain open during periods of time differing from the hours established by subsection (a) hereinabove, provided, however, that: 
(1)  No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall sell any alcoholic liquor except during the hours permitted in subsection (a) hereinabove. 
(2)  No alcoholic liquor may be served within 20 minutes prior to the conclusion of hours of operation as permitted in subsection (a) and further all alcoholic liquor so regulated must be cleared from public areas and tables at the time of conclusion of said hours of operation. 
(3)  With regard to restaurants, no alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the premises later than 15 minutes after the hour of closing as permitted in subsection (a) hereinabove. All businesses holding Class C licenses shall be allowed to permit persons upon their premises for the purposes of conducting business other than that of the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1965, Art. 9.15, § 9.6.6; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 9-17-65; Ord. No. 785, § 3, 9-11-78; Ord. No. 857, § 1, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 85-12, § 1, 8-26-85; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 96-04, § 5, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 97-10, § 3, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 2007-32, §§ 2, 3, 10-8-07) 
Sec. 4-49. - Posting of license. 
    Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall immediately post the license so issued in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and shall keep such license so posted during all of the time said license is in force. 
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 1-25-88) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; nuisances generally, ch. 16; animals in parks, § 17-24. 
State Law reference- Animal Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.; general authority to regulate animals, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Animal warden. 
(a)  The office of animal warden is hereby created. 
(b)  The duties of the animal warden shall be as follows: 
(1)  To routinely and/or periodically patrol the public streets, alleys and public places of the village; 
(2)  To apprehend and confine dogs or other animals who may be dangerous to the public safety or health of the village; 
(3)  To provide suitable and humane facilities, care and treatment for the confinement of such animals, within the village limits or otherwise; 
(4)  To destroy vicious, diseased or poisonous animals when it appears to him that the public health or safety of the village is directly and immediately in jeopardy; 
(5)  To dispose of the remains of such animals or creatures in accordance with public health regulations; 
(6)  To assist the police department with said duties; 
(7)  To do all other acts or things necessary or requisite to effectuate and implement the meanings and interest of the subject matter of this chapter; 
(8)  To do such other acts or things as may be contracted between him and the village or such acts or things that the president and board of trustees may from time to time direct him to do. 
(c)  The animal warden shall be deputized as a special policeman for the limited purpose of exercising his duties. He shall be empowered, accordingly, to issue complaints or citations against offenders or violators of any of the provisions of this chapter. The animal warden need not be a resident of the village. 
(d)  An animal warden shall be compensated by salary by the president and board of trustees in such amount as they may determine and such salary may be in weekly, monthly, annual or such other installments as the president and board of trustees believe to be to the best interests of the village. 
(e)  The animal warden salary, equipment costs and vehicle costs shall be defrayed by a $0.55/month charge on the village services bill mailed quarterly to all residential and commercial accounts. 
(Ord. No. 723, § 1(6.2.15), 8-5-74; Ord. No. 2001-50, § 2, 12-10-01) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees generally, § 2-86 et seq. 
Sec. 5-2. - Powers of policemen. 
    Members of the police department shall have the same powers as the animal warden in the absence of the animal warden. 
(Ord. No. 723, § 1(6.2.15), 8-5-74) 
Sec. 5-3. - Use of steel jaw leghold traps. 
    No person shall use or permit the use of any leghold animal trap or similar device with spring activated jaws of the type used for the trapping of fur-bearing animals, which has a capability of inflicting cruelty upon small animals and threatening the health, safety, and welfare of small children. 
(Ord. No. 83-7, § 1(6.1.11), 7-25-83) 
Cross reference- Hunting prohibited, § 13-3. 
Sec. 5-4. - Permissible animals. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance, the only animals which shall be allowed to be housed or kept in the village by any owner or resident shall be those commonly characterized as domestic pets such as dogs, cats rabbits, caged birds (not fowl), guinea pigs, hamsters and similar pets which are not confined or held for business or breeding purposes, except as the same may be incidental thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 6.1.10) 
Sec. 5-5. - Cruelty. 
    No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the village in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overload, or abandons any animal shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 6.1.1) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit cruelty to animals, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-6; Humane Care for Animals Act, 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-6. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The animal warden and/or members of the police department shall impound all stray animals at the Forest South Animal Hospital, or at such other animal hospital as the chief of police shall from time to time determine, subject to the approval of the president and board of trustees. 
(b)  The animal hospital staff shall care for such impounded animals for a period of three days following their impoundment and shall provide proper sustenance and human care for them during such period. The cost for such care shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 5-6, or such increased or diminished figures as the chief of police shall from time to time determine subject to the approval of the president and board of trustees. 
(c)  If the owner of an impounded animal wishes to claim such impounded animal the owner shall first obtain a release form from the police department, which department shall, upon issuance of the release, serve a complaint for the violation of this chapter. An owner, upon presentation of the release to the animal hospital and the payment of the accrued per diem cost for animal care to the hospital, shall be entitled to reclaim the animal. 
(d)  If an owner does not claim an animal during the three-day impoundment period, a suitable home will be sought for the animal by the hospital staff and if the same cannot be found, the animal will be turned over to the Humane Society, and if such organization does not have sufficient accommodations for the animal, the same shall be humanely destroyed and per diem and disposition costs paid by the village. 
(e)  In the instance of a stray animal being impounded as the result of a reported "bite" case, the animal will be impounded at the animal hospital for a period of not less than ten days and at a cost as set forth in article V of the instant ordinance immediately to the right of the reference to section 5-6(e), said cost to be borne by the village unless an owner claims such animal pursuant to the procedures contained in subsection (c). 
(Ord. No. 740, § 6.2.16, 9-22-75; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 5-7. - Reports of rabies. 
    It shall be the duty of every veterinarian or other person who discovers any animal to be suffering with rabies to report such fact immediately to the chief of police. Such report shall give the name, if known, and the place of residence of the person owning or harboring such animal, the place where the animal can be found, and any license number of the animal, if known. Such animal shall be immediately taken up and impounded in the manner provided in this chapter, and securely kept until the chief of police can make or cause to be made an examination of said dog or other animal. If upon examination, it is determined that such animal is suffering with rabies, the animal shall be immediately killed. 
(Code 1965, §§ 6.2.12, 6.2.14; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 8-5-74; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03) 
State Law reference- Reports of rabies, 510 ILCS 5/12, 5/13; penalty for ordinance violations, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1. 
Sec. 5-8. - Wild or dangerous animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal to run at large within the village. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law are prohibited. The members of the police department or any other person in the village are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Code 1965, §§ 6.1.2, 6.1.5) 
Sec. 5-9. - Noises. 
    It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. 
(Code 1965, § 6.1.3) 
Sec. 5-10. - Livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats, or poultry under his care, custody or control to run at large in the village. Any such animal running at large in any public place in the village shall be impounded in the manner provided in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to picket or tie any such animal in any street or residential area of the village for the purpose of grazing or feeding. 
(Code 1965, § 6.1.4) 
Sec. 5-11. - Diseased animals. 
    No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected, nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of the chief of police or the health officer. The health officer shall secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act. 
(Code 1965, § 6.1.6) 
Sec. 5-12. - Licensing and regulation of stables. 
(a)  As used in this section the phrase "the business of operating a stable" shall mean providing buildings for the shelter and feeding of horses and renting horses for hire for riding or related purposes. 
(b)  No person shall conduct the business of operating a stable without first having secured a license for same. An annual license fee shall be a charge as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 5-12, which fee shall be paid to the village in relation to such license. 
(c)  The buildings and grounds of stables shall be maintained in an orderly and sanitary manner and no manure or refuse of any kind or description shall be burned upon the premises but shall be otherwise disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 1(2.2.25B), 6-22-70; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to locate and regulate the use and construction of stables, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 
Sec. 5-13. - Licensing and regulation of small animal stores. 
(a)  As used in this section the term "small animal store" shall be construed to include any establishment for the raising, training, boarding or selling of dogs, cats, birds, mice, rats or other small animals for hire or profit, or any establishment where more than three dogs or cats are harbored or kept. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a small animal store anywhere in the village without having first secured a license therefor. The annual fee to be paid to the village for such license shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 5-13. 
(c)  Every place used as a small animal store shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain thereon for more than 24 hours. All animals shall be humanely treated, and any animal having any disease shall be properly isolated and treated. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.25; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- State licensing and regulation of pet stores, 225 ILCS 605/1 et seq. 
Secs. 5-14-5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, deleted § 5-31, which pertained to the penalty for violation of this article and was derived from Ord. No. 723, § 1, 8-5-74; and Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87. 
Sec. 5-32. - Vaccination. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor any dog in the village unless the dog has been vaccinated against rabies as required by state law. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.2) 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccinations, 510 ILCS 5/8. 
Sec. 5-33. - Leashes and running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit, or to fail to take reasonably necessary steps to prevent any dog under their care, custody or control, to run at large anywhere within the limits of the village. Further, no dog shall be allowed to go upon any public street, alley or sidewalk, or other public place unless it is controlled by a leash made of chain, leather or other substantial material, which leash must be of sufficient length to prevent unreasonable interference or contact with other persons or animals on said public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. The leash must be affixed securely to the animal's collar or harness as provided in this article and the opposite end must have a suitable loop or hand grip to assure control of the animal. 
(b)  At such times as when the dog is located upon the private property where it is housed, and said private property is not suitably fenced: 
(1)  The dog must be tethered or securely connected to a fixed pole, tree, fence post or other suitable anchorage by a leash or connector made of chain, leather or other suitable material, which said leash or connector shall not exceed such length to prevent said dog from causing unreasonable interference or contact to persons on surrounding properties or public sidewalks or rights-of-way. The leash must be affixed securely to the animal's collar or harness of appropriate size for the animal as provided in this article; or 
(2)  The owner or person having care or custody of the dog must be outside within the presence of the dog and positioned such to control the dog and prevent the dog from leaving the property. Compliance with this subsection (2) shall not be a defense to the dog running at large in violation of subsection (a) above, if the dog physically leaves the property while so attended. 
(c)  Dogs which are running at large shall be taken up and impounded. 
(Code 1965, §§ 6.2.6, 6.2.7; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 8-5-74; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 2, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 5-34. - Prohibited in public places. 
(a)  No dog shall be permitted, even though on leash, to enter any public hall, restaurant, coffeehouse, ice cream parlor, soft drink parlor, office, store, market, or confectionery shop anywhere within the village, during the time that such place is open for public business. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to dogs leading blind persons. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.11) 
Sec. 5-35. - Dog bites. 
    Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of the dog shall immediately notify the health officer who shall order the dog to be held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded for a period of 15 days. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the 15-day period. If at the end of the 15-day period a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is free from rabies, he shall order the dog released. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.13) 
Sec. 5-36. - Removal of pet excrement. 
    No person shall appear with a pet upon the public ways or within public places or upon the property of another, absent that person's consent, without some means for the removal of excrement; nor shall any person fail to remove any excrement deposited by such pet. This section shall not apply to a blind person while walking his or her guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 88-25, § 1, 10-24-88) 
Secs. 5-37-5-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 

Sec. 5-51. - Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep more than three dogs or three cats per each dwelling within the village. The owner or keeper of such animal(s) shall make application for such license to the village clerk, giving the animal's name, breed, color, sex and/or other identifying characteristics as required pursuant to the village's application form. The fee for such license shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the section number assigned to such section. The fee for each such license shall be paid to the village clerk. The license shall expire on the last day of April in each year following the issuance of such license. No license shall be issued for a sum less than the full annual fee except as provided herein, and no license shall be issued for more than the number of animals permitted herein. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.1; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 5-52. - Rabies vaccination as prerequisite. 
    No dog license shall be issued unless the dog to be licensed is vaccinated as required by law. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.2) 
Sec. 5-53. - Issuance and tag. 
(a)  After the payment of the license fee required by this division, and upon presentation of a certificate signed by a veterinarian that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies as required by law, the village clerk shall furnish to the person paying the same a license certificate and tag for the dog. 
(b)  The shape of dog tags issued by the village clerk shall be changed each year, and it shall have stamped thereon the year for which the fee is paid, the identifying description, and the number of the tag to correspond with the number on the license certificate. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner to remove a license tag from a dog. 
(d)  Upon satisfactory proof to the village clerk that a license tag has been lost or worn or damaged beyond further use, the village clerk shall issue to the licensee a new tag, but of new and different number, and upon payment of a fee of $1.00 and the village clerk shall revise his records accordingly. 
(Code 1965, §§ 6.2.2, 6.2.5) 
Sec. 5-54. - Collar or harness. 
    Every dog kept within the village shall be provided by its owner or keeper with a collar or harness made of leather, metal or other substantial material to which the required license tag shall be securely fastened. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.3) 
Sec. 5-55. - Transfer. 
    Whenever the ownership of a dog shall change, the new owner shall notify the village clerk, and pay to the village clerk, the sum of $2.00 whereupon the village clerk shall alter the records accordingly for the dog. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.4) 
Sec. 5-56. - Records. 
    The village clerk shall keep a complete record of all licensed dogs, describing the same by name, breed, color and sex, and shall also enter in such records the name and address of the owner or keeper as given, and the number of the village license tag. 
(Code 1965, § 6.2.4) 
Secs. 5-57-5-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS 

Sec. 5-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, repealed § 5-70, which pertained to the penalty for violation of this article and was derived from Ord. No. 95-20, § 3, 4-24-95. 
Sec. 5-71. - Running at large prohibited. 
    No person shall cause or permit any cat owned or kept by them to run at large within the limits of the village. Any cat found upon the private property of another other than the owner or keeper, or upon a public street, sidewalk, alley, parkway or any enclosed place shall be deemed running at large unless under restraint. For the purposes of this section, a cat is under "restraint" if it is controlled by a leash; within a vehicle being driven or parked on the street; or within the property limits of its owner or keeper. Cats running at large shall be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 95-20, § 3, 4-24-95) 
Sec. 5-72. - Proof of rabies vaccination required. 
    All owners or keepers of cats shall be required to provide proof of current rabies vaccination upon the request of the animal warden or a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 95-20, § 3, 4-24-95) 
Secs. 5-73-5-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES IV-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 5-101-5-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 5-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 4, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Village datum, § 2-3; fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; flood hazard areas, § 8-16 et seq.; erosion and sedimentation, § 8-51 et seq.; scaffolds, § 13-10; mobile home parks, ch. 14; planning and development, ch. 19; signs and billboards, ch. 21; house numbering, § 22-41 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 23; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 27; zoning, ch. 28. 
State Law reference- General authority to regulate construction, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-26. - Adoption of 2003 International Building Code. 
    The 2003 International Building Code, including Appendix Chapters C, E, I and J, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., Publication Date: December 2002, is hereby adopted as the building code [of the] Village of Crete, in the State of Illinois, for the control of building and structures, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as specified in section 6-27 of this chapter. This code is intended [for] and shall establish the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, and shall provide the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and shall provide for the issuance of permits, collection of fees and establish the required inspections, and shall provide for the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures, and shall provide for enforcement and penalties concerning the regulations of said building code. Three copies of such publication will be maintained on file with the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 2, 12-8-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, enacted provisions to be designated as § 6-26.1. Said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-26 at the direction of the village. 
Sec. 6-27. - Revisions to 2003 International Building Code. 
    The following sections of the 2003 International Building Code are hereby revised so as to be read with the following insertions, additions and deletions and/or changes as follows: 
    Section 101.1. Title. Insert: Village of Crete, IL. 
    Section 101.4.4. Plumbing. "International Plumbing Code" is deleted and replaced with "Illinois Plumbing Code, (02/04)." 
    Section 103.3. Deputies' is amended by adding the following paragraph to the existing language: 
Building inspectors shall be appointed by the Village President with the advise and consent of the Board of Trustees to serve as full-time employees or part-time employees. The Village President may direct full-time employees or part-time employees to perform the duties and exercise the powers of the building official. 
    Section 105.2. Work exempt from permit is amended as follows: 
Building 
1.  Existing language is deleted and replaced with following language: One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds provided the floor area does not exceed 32 sq. ft. and no electric service is installed. 
2.  Deleted 
3.  Deleted 
4.  Deleted 
    Section 105.5. Expiration. The first sentence is deleted and the following is inserted in its place: Permits shall be valid upon issuance for a period not to exceed twelve months. 
    Section 106.1. Submitted Documents. Addition: The building official shall have the authority to require an Illinois architect seal or Illinois licensed engineer seal on any construction drawing submitted in support of an application for a building permit. All submittals shall be made in minimum 1/4" scale on paper sized a minimum of 18"×24" and maximum of 30"×42". 
    Section 108.2. Schedule of Permit Fees, the following language is added: The schedule of the various permit fees are listed in section 6-1501 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
    Section 109.1. General. The following language will be added: 
"Where panels are constructed off site and assembled on site, open panel panelized construction will be required. After inspection, panels may be enclosed." 
    Section 113.4. Violation penalties, the following language is added: Each day that a violation continues is deemed a separate offense. 
    Section 113.5. Penalties, the following language is added to Section 113, Violations, and reads as follows: 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail excepting violations of stop work orders and occupancy without a permit. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in (b) below prior to Court, the Court Clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this Code may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the Village Clerk at the Village Hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the Complaint and Notice to Appear form. 
(c)  Violations of any Stop Work Order issued by the Building Official are set at a minimum fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail; violations of occupancy of a structure without an occupancy permit are set at a minimum fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. 
    Section 116. Plumbing inspector is added and reads as follows: 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created the position of plumbing inspector, an executive position of the village. The plumbing inspector shall be selected by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees for a term of one (1) year. Said plumbing inspector shall be qualified pursuant to the law of the State of Illinois. 
(b)  Duties and Responsibilities. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to enforce all village ordinances relating to the installation, care and standards of plumbing. He shall make all necessary inspections and tests, which may be needed in the performance of his duties. Whenever the plumbing inspector shall find plumbing work in violation of village ordinances, he shall have the power to order the work stopped until the ordinances are complied with. It shall be unlawful to continue any such work after such a stop order has been issued, except upon the written permission of the plumbing inspector or village president; provided, that where such stop order has been made orally it shall be followed by a written stop order within two (2) hours, which said stop order may be delivered in the same manner as the building official's stop order (or orders). 
(2)  The plumbing inspector shall have the power to enter any building or premises on or in which plumbing fixtures or pipes are being installed, altered or repaired, at all reasonable hours, to make inspections to determine compliance with the village ordinances relating to plumbing. 
    Section 117. Contractor's License, the following language is added: 
Work for which a permit is required under this code if performed by a third party shall be performed by and under the jurisdiction of a contractor licensed by the state. 
    Section 202. Definitions is amended by adding the following: 
"Building contractor" shall mean a general building contractor who undertakes to construct or erect, or repair or alter an entire building or structure or portion thereof involving the work of more than one (1) trade. 
"Building subcontractor" shall mean a subtrade contractor who undertakes to construct or erect, or repair or alter an entire building or structure or portion thereof involving the work of but one (1) trade. 
"Owner-builder" shall mean anyone who through use of his own skills or through use of skills of others, including subcontractors, shall undertake to construct or erect, or repair or alter an entire building or structure or portion thereof involving the work of one (1) or more trades. 
    Section 301.1.1. Dwelling Unit Separation. All separation walls must be freestanding and masonry construction. 
    Section 1612.3. Establishment of flood hazard areas. Insert: Village of Crete FEMA map dated November 6, 2000. 
    Section 3409.2. Applicability insert: February 1, 2002. 
    Section 3401.3. Compliance with other codes. The International Plumbing Code reference is deleted and replaced with "Illinois Plumbing Code, 1998 edition, with 2002 amendments." 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 2, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2004-39, § 2, 11-22-04; Ord. No. 2007-17, § 3, 4-23-07) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, enacted provisions to be designated as § 6-27.1. Said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-27 at the direction of the village. 
Sec. 6-28. - General requirements. 
(a)  Work within the right-of-way. The provisions of chapter 22 entitled Streets and Sidewalks shall be adhered to and any necessary permits and bonds shall be secured prior to the start of any work within the right-of-way. If such work is known to be necessary as part of any construction activity covered under a requested building permit, then in such cases the permit required for work within the right-of-way shall be required prior to the issuance of the building permit. Such permits and bonds shall be required of the contractor or subcontractor who will actually be performing the work. 
(b)  Times when construction is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to conduct construction operations that will disturb the peace of adjoining residential properties which are within 400 feet of the construction site between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Such operations shall be in conformance with the performance standards governing noise so noted in section 28-311(i). 
(c)  Crete Public Library District. All applications for building permits for new construction will be accompanied by a receipt showing the appropriate cash contribution has been paid to the Crete Public Library District as required by ordinance. 
(d)  Connection to storm drainage system. In all multifamily, commercial and industrial structures, roof drains, downspouts and sump pump discharge shall be directly connected to the storm drainage system required by section 23-107 of the subdivisions chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 3-8-93; Ord. No. 95-10, § 4, 2-27-95; Ord. No. 2003-52, § 2, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2005-38, § 1, 10-10-05; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-9-06) 
Sec. 6-29. - Masonry fireplaces. 
    All wood burning fireplaces shall be masonry construction including fire brick constructed fire box with masonry flue. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 2, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 6-30-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-51. - Adoption of 2003 International Residential Code. 
    The International Residential Code, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, G, H, J, and K, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., Publication Date: January, 2003, is hereby adopted as the residential code for one- and two-family dwellings of [the] Village of Crete, for the control of building of one- and two-family dwelling structures and accessory structures, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as specified in section 6-52 of this chapter. This residential code is intended and shall establish the minimum regulations governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height and further to provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees; and shall provide the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such 2003 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (First Printing, Publication Date: January, 2003) published by the International Code Council are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 6-52 of this chapter. Three copies of said residential code will be maintained on file with the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2003-53, § 2, 12-8-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, enacted provisions to be designated as § 6-51.1. Said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-51 at the direction of the village. 
Sec. 6-52. - Revisions to 2003 International Residential Code. 
    The following sections of the International Residential Code are hereby revised so as to be read with the following insertions, additions, deletions and/or changes as follows: 
    Section R101.1 Insert: Village of Crete. 
    Section R105.2. Work exempt from permit is amended as follows: 
Building 
1.  Existing language is deleted and replaced with following language: One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds provided the floor area does not exceed 32 sq. ft. and no electric service is installed. 
2.  Deleted 
3.  Deleted 
4.  Deleted 
    Section R105.5. Expiration. The first sentence is deleted and the following is inserted in its place: Permits shall be valid upon issuance for a period not to exceed twelve months. 
    Section R106.1. Submitted Documents Addition: The building official shall have the authority to require an Illinois architect seal or Illinois licensed engineer seal on any construction drawing submitted in support of an application for a building permit. All submittals shall be made in minimum 1/4" scale on paper sized a minimum of 18" × 24" and maximum of 24" × 36". 
    Section R108.2. Schedule of Permit Fees, the following language is added: The schedule of the various permit fees are listed in section 6-1000 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
    Section 109.1. General. The following language will be added: 
Where panels are constructed off site and assembled on site, open panel panelized construction will be required. After inspection, panels may be enclosed. 
    Section R113.4. Violation penalties, the following language is added: Each day that a violation continues is deemed a separate offense. 
    Section R113.5. Penalties, the following language is added to Section 113, Violations, and reads as follows: 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) nor more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail excepting violations of stop work orders and occupancy without a permit. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in (b) below prior to Court, the Court Clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this Code may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the Village Clerk at the Village Hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the Complaint and Notice to Appear form. 
(c)  Violations of any Stop Work Order issued by the Building Official are set at a minimum fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail; violations of occupancy of a structure without an occupancy permit are set at a minimum fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. 
    Section R115. Plumbing inspector is added and reads as follows: 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created the position of plumbing inspector, an executive position of the village. The plumbing inspector shall be selected by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees for a term of one (1) year. Said plumbing inspector shall be qualified pursuant to the law of the State of Illinois. 
(b)  Duties and Responsibilities. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to enforce all village ordinances relating to the installation, care and standards of plumbing. He shall make all necessary inspections and tests, which may be needed in the performance of his duties. Whenever the plumbing inspector shall find plumbing work in violation of village ordinances, he shall have the power to order the work stopped until the ordinances are complied with. It shall be unlawful to continue any such work after such a stop order has been issued, except upon the written permission of the plumbing inspector or village president; provided, that where such stop order has been made orally it shall be followed by a written stop order within two (2) hours, which said stop order may be delivered in the same manner as the building official's stop order (or orders). 
(2)  The plumbing inspector shall have the power to enter any building or premises on or in which plumbing fixtures or pipes are being installed, altered or repaired, at all reasonable hours, to make inspections to determine compliance with the village ordinances relating to plumbing. 
    Section R116. Contractor's License, the following language is added: 
    Work for which a permit is required under this code if performed by a third party shall be performed by and under the jurisdiction of a contractor licensed by the village pursuant to this section. The annual fee for said license shall be Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00). A further condition of license is proof of insurance coverage of not less than $500,000 per occurrence. Section R202. Definitions is amended by adding the following: 
    "Building contractor" shall mean a general building contractor who undertakes to construct or erect, or repair or alter an entire building or structure or portion thereof involving the work of more than one (1) trade. 
    "Building subcontractor" shall mean a subtrade contractor who undertakes to construct or erect, or repair or alter an entire building or structure or portion thereof involving the work of but one (1) trade. 
    "Owner-builder" shall mean anyone who through use of his own skills or through use of skills of others, including subcontractors, shall undertake to construct or erect, or repair or alter an entire building or structure or portion thereof involving the work of one (1) or more trades. 
    Table R301.2(1). Insert: 
Roof Snow Load 25 pounds per square foot Wind 90 mph Seismic Design Category B Weathering Severe Frost line depth 42 inches Termite moderate to heavy Decay slight to moderate Winter Design Temp 0 degrees F Flood Hazards FEMA map dated November 6, 2000  
Section R304.5 Residence space requirements. 
(a)  No residential building erected or constructed within "R-E single-family residence district zoning" shall contain less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of livable floor area. Those built in "R-1A single-family residence district zoning" shall contain no less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet of livable floor area. Those built in "R-1 single-family residence district zoning" shall contain no less than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of livable floor area. Those built in R2 districts shall contain no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of livable floor area per dwelling unit. For minimum livable floor areas for dwellings built in R-3 or R-4 zoning districts, please refer to Crete Zoning Code. In "R-EU' districts, the minimum livable floor area for single-story residential buildings is two thousand (2,000) square feet; for multistory residential buildings the minimal livable floor area is two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(b)  No residential buildings erected or constructed within the village shall contain cubical livable contents less than the square feet of livable floor area multiplied by the height of the ceiling line above the floor line, excluding areas occupied by basements, porches, garages, attics, utility and/or heater rooms. 
(c)  The limitations provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall constitute limitations on bulk. The ceiling heights of every room constituting livable ground floor area shall be not less than eight (8) feet from the floor line. All upper floor livable floor area ceiling heights shall be not less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet, providing that where sloping ceiling lines are employed in sleeping rooms, the ceiling height thereof shall be not less than seven and on-half (71/2) feet above floor line, which height shall be maintained over one-half of the ceiling area. 
(d)  No residence shall be erected or constructed in an "R1" residential district that does not include a living room containing at least two hundred (200) square feet of livable floor area. All residences erected or constructed in any other residential districts shall contain a living room containing at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of livable area. All other minimum room sizes shall be governed by R304 unless amended hereinabove or hereinbelow. 
(e)  Any bedroom included in any residential building constructed or erected shall contain a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet of livable floor area. 
    Section R309.2 is amended in that "fire rated 5/8 " gypsum board or equal is to be used in place of "1/2" gypsum board and the following is added: "Walls not common with the residence must be covered by a minimum of 1/2" gypsum board. Doors between the garage and residence must be self-closing and carry a one hour fire rating." 
    Section R321. Dwelling Unit Separation. Insert: All separation walls must be freestanding and masonry construction. 
    Section R326. Accessibility. Insert: Accessible dwelling units shall also comply with the Illinois Accessibility Code, as amended. See Title 71, Illinois Administrative Code. 
    Section R402. Materials. 
    Sections R402.1. Wood foundations, R402.1.1. Fasteners and R402.1.2 Wood treatment are deleted in their entirety. 
    Section 403.1 General (Footing) is changed to read as follows: 
All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous concrete footing with a 2"×4" keyway which shall be of sufficient design to accommodate all loads according to Section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as determined from the character of the soil. Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill. 
    Section R403.1.1 Minimum size (footings) is changed to read as follows: 
Minimum size for concrete footings shall be 10" thickness by 20" width. The size of footing piers and columns shall be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table R401.4.1. 
    Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3) are deleted. 
    Section R403.2. Footings for wood foundations is deleted. 
    Section R404.1. Concrete and masonry foundation walls. The language "and masonry" is deleted. 
    Section R404.1.1. Masonry foundation walls is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section R404.1.5. Foundation wall thickness based on walls supported is changed to: Foundation wall thickness. Foundation walls shall be a minimum of 10" thick. 
    Section R404.2. Wood foundation walls and the subsections thereto are all deleted in their entirety. 
    Section R404.3. Wood sill plates is changed to read: Wood sill plates shall be a minimum of 2 × 4 nominal lumber, provided further, sill plates shall be a width at least equal to the width of the studs. Sill plate anchorage shall be in accordance with Sections R403.1.6 and R602.11. 
    Section R404.4. Insulating concrete form foundation walls and the subsections thereto are deleted in their entirety. 
    Section R405.2. Wood foundations and the subsections thereto are deleted in their entirety. 
    Section R506.2.1. Fill is changed by adding the following sentence: 
All garage floors will have fill material composed only of clean stone aggregate to full depth. 
    Chapters 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 are deleted and replaced with the following language: 
All plumbing requirements are governed by the adopted State Plumbing Code of Illinois (as amended) See 225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq. (as amended). 
(Ord. No. 2003-53, § 2, 12-8-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, enacted provisions to be designated as § 6-52.1. Said provisions have been redesignated as 6-52 at the direction of the village. 
Sec. 6-53. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    All permit and inspection fees to be charged in connection with construction undertaken pursuant to this code shall be determined in accordance with the schedule pertaining to valuation, fees and charges set forth in the form of article VI of chapter Two [section 2-311] of the Crete Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-28, § 4, 9-24-90) 
Sec. 6-54. - Certificates of occupancy. 
    For any new residential structure or room addition the person issued the building permit shall be required to obtain a certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall be issued in the name of the builder or purchaser after the building officials have completed and approved the final inspections of the premises to ascertain compliance with this chapter and other pertinent aspects of the Crete Municipal Code. If the premises are suitable and ready for occupancy by meeting at least the minimal health and safety provisions of the Code but other items or provisions are yet unfinished or incomplete a conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued. A conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued if those provisions of the Code that are required but yet unfinished or incomplete are guaranteed to be completed by holding in escrow a sum of money sufficient to cover the costs to be incurred. The building inspector shall set a minimum amount of money to be held in escrow. Said escrow shall either be held by the village clerk or a legally binding escrow account shall be established with an independent third party involved with the construction such as a financial institution or title company. A notarized letter shall be required and placed on file with the building official stating the amount and items that are covered by the escrow account. 
(Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 10-14-91) 
Sec. 6-55. - Grading plan requirements. 
(a)  Preliminary plat of survey. Two copies of a plat of survey, no more than six months old, shall be submitted with the building permit application and said survey shall include the following: 
(1)  Legal description, lot number, lot size and building setback line. 
(2)  All existing utility and drainage easements. 
(3)  North arrow, scale and benchmark. 
(4)  Existing elevations of: all buildings on or adjacent to the lot, property lines, roads, curbs, ditches, storm sewers, or any other feature pertinent to the grading of the lot. 
(5)  Location and size of the proposed building on the lot, tied in with dimensions to the front and side property lines. 
(6)  Proposed elevations to show positive drainage for lot grading, including the relationship to adjacent properties and buildings. 
(7)  Proposed elevations for top of foundation, including adjacent existing buildings. 
(b)  Spotted plat of survey. Two copies of a spotted plat of survey shall be submitted to the building department after the foundation walls have been completed and before any further construction and shall include the following: 
(1)  Exact location of the structure in relation to the lot lines (front and side yard) and all dimensions for the foundation. 
(2)  Plat to be signed and sealed by an Illinois professional land surveyor. 
(3)  The elevation of the top of the foundation (as constructed). 
(c)  Final plat of survey. Two copies of a final plat of survey shall be submitted prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy and shall include the following: 
(1)  All of the information requested for the spotted survey. 
(2)  Location and measurements of any additional accessory or detached buildings. 
(3)  All concrete flatwork, i.e. driveways, patios, porches, service walks, etc. 
(4)  All easements. 
(5)  Front and side yard measurements. 
(6)  Elevation for the top of foundation and lot elevations sufficient to show the drainage of the lot relative to existing drainage facilities and adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 92-7, § 1, 5-11-92) 
Sec. 6-56. - General requirements. 
(a)  In all multifamily and townhouse structures, roof drains, downspouts and sump pump discharge shall be directly connected to the storm drainage system required by section 23-107 of the subdivisions chapter. 
(b)  In all single-family structures, sump pump discharge shall be directly connected to the storm drainage system required by section 23-107 of the subdivisions chapter if said storm drainage system is deemed accessible via adjacent or abutting properties, as determined by the village engineer applying engineering standards. 
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 4, 1-9-06) 
Secs. 6-57-6-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE 

Sec. 6-76. - Adoption of 2003 International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The 2003 International Property Maintenance Code (First Printing: December 2002) is hereby adopted as the "Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Code of the Village." 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 3, 12-8-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, enacted provisions to be designated as § 6-76.1. Said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-76 at the direction of the village. 
Sec. 6-77. - Additions, insertions, revisions, deletions and changes to the 2003 International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The 2003 International Property Maintenance Code (First Printing: December, 2002) is amended and revised by the following: Section 100.1 (p. 1, second line), insert: The Village of Crete, Illinois. Section 104.8 i is hereby deleted, and the following phraseology is adopted in lieu thereof: 
Section 104.8 Rule-making authority. 
The president and board of trustees of the village shall have the power to adopt and promulgate rules, regulations, guidelines and policy statements so as to interpret and implement provisions of this code in order to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements uniquely applicable because of local climatic or other conditions; however, except as otherwise provided, such rule shall not have the effect of waiving working stresses or fire protection requirements specifically provided in this code. 
    Section 107.2 Paragraph 5 is deleted in its entirety. 
    Section 110 Demolition. All wording is stricken and replaced with the following: 
Demolition proceedings are governed by the statutory provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code. Section 111 Appeal is deleted in its entirety. 
    New Section: The following new Section is added: 
Section - Appeals. 
All appeals of any alleged violation of this code shall be handled by citation to local traffic and ordinance violation court of the Twelfth Judicial Circuit, Will County. 
    Section 304.14 is amended by adding the following language: 
Screen inserts to protect from insects shall be required from April 1 st until October 15 th . 
    Section 602 is amended by adding the following paragraph: 
Heat supply dates are September 1 st through May 31 st . Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 3, 12-8-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, enacted provisions to be designated as § 6-77.1. Said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-77 at the direction of the village. 
Secs. 6-78-6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-31, §§ 1, 3, 4, adopted Sept. 24, 1990, adopted and amended an electrical code for the village and provided a penalty for violation of such code. Inasmuch as such provisions did not specify manner of codification, they have been designated by the editor as art. V, §§ 6-101-6-103. The user's attention is also directed to the editor's footnote to art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 6-101. - Adoption of 2005 National Electrical Code. 
    The National Electrical Code (2005 Edition) and the various additions, insertions, revisions and/or changes as provided in section 6-102 are hereby adopted by reference as if each and every provision of such code were set forth verbatim herein together with the certain additions, insertions, revisions and/or changes as provided in section 6-102 hereof. In this connection, three copies of the National Electrical Code (2005 Edition) as adopted, are on file in the office of the village clerk, marked and designated as the "National Electrical Code (2005 Edition)" and may be cited hereafter as the Electrical Code of the Village of Crete. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 2004-39, § 1, 11-22-04) 
Sec. 6-101.1. - Adoption of 2003 International Code Council Electrical Code. 
    The 2003 International Code Council Electrical Code, Administrative Provisions (First Printing: December 2002), is adopted as the administrative provisions to enforce the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, both of which are the electrical code of the village subject to the additions, insertions, revisions and/or changes in the following section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 4, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2004-39, § 1, 11-22-04) 
Sec. 6-102. - Additions, insertions, revisions and/or changes to 2005 National Electrical Code. 
    [The electrical code adopted in section 6-101 shall be revised and changed to reflect the following:] 
(1)  The use of aluminum wiring in any and all construction is prohibited. 
(2)  The use of nonmetallic-sheathed cable in any and all construction is prohibited, with the exception that the same may be used only as temporary wiring in accordance with provisions set forth in article 305 of the National Electrical Code. 
(3)  All service conductors installed above-ground and within ten feet of grade, or where subject to physical damage, shall be protected by ridged metal conduit. 
(4)  All wiring for doorbells and thermostats, where permanently concealed, shall be installed in conduit. 
(5)  Electrical services shall not enter single-family dwellings from the rear elevation. 
(6)  A one-half-inch conduit, complete with pull wire shall be installed between the water meter and its remote readout. The locations of the water meter and remote readout shall be established by the superintendent of public works or his designee. 
(7)  In commercial and industrial buildings, all switches for fire or burglar alarm systems shall be equipped with lockouts to prevent accidental turnoff. 
(8)  Fire alarms systems shall be installed in conduit. 
(9)  Electrical rooms in sprinkled buildings shall be enclosed by fire rated wall assemblies and fire rated doors (minimum one hour) with detection and being unsprinkled. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 3, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 2003-52, § 4, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 6-103. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the code [adopted in this article] shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $75.00 nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail excepting violations of stop work orders and occupancy without a permit. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of the code [adopted in this article] may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(c)  Violations of any stop work order issued by the building official are set at a minimum fine of $250.00 nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail; violations of occupancy of a structure without an occupancy permit are set at a minimum fine of $250.00 nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 4, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 2003-52, § 4, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 6-104-6-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 11. 

Sec. 6-126. - Adopted. 
    That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk, each being marked and designated as the "Illinois Plumbing Code 02/04" thereto, as published under the direction of the Illinois Department of Public Health (Title 77, Chapter I, Subchapter r, Part 890), be and is hereby adopted, together with the various additions and deletions specified in section 6-127 of this article, all of which (as hereby adopted) shall be known and may be cited as the "Plumbing Code of the Village of Crete." The code (as herein adopted) shall provide the various rules, regulations, standards, designs and guidelines to be followed within the Village of Crete insofar as plumbing installations and all plumbing related equipment and paraphernalia is concerned and shall be applied so as to safeguard environmental health and consumer safety through properly designed, acceptably installed and adequately maintained plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 90-30, § 1, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 2003-54, § 2, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2004-40, § 2, 11-22-04) 
Sec. 6-127. - Additions, insertions, revisions and/or deletions. 
    The Illinois Plumbing Code (02/04) thereto as adopted in section 6-126, are hereby amended and revised by the following additions, insertions, revisions and/or deletions, so that as fully adopted hereby, the plumbing code of the Village of Crete shall include the following additions, insertions, revisions and /or deletions, namely: 
    A-5, Circuit vent. All language pertaining to the phrase "circuit vent" and the definition thereof is deleted. 
    Section 890-1500, Wet vent. New phraseology is added concerning "wet vent" to read as follows: 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a wet vent in connection with plumbing installations within the Village of Crete. All fixtures must have their own vent or back-to-back vent. 
    Authority Section 890-110. All installation shall be in accordance with applicable state and local laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and codes as adopted by the Village Board. 
    C-1, Section 890.320, entitled "Plastic pipe, tubing and fittings for potable water piping, etc.," is deleted. 
    Page A-26, Section 890.150, is amended at subparagraph a) thereof, so that paragraph a) shall include new language after the last complete sentence thereof, which shall read as follows: 
It is the obligation of any person installing, remodeling or repairing any plumbing or plumbing fixture within the village to consult with the plumbing inspector before commencing any such work in order to verify the quality, character and type of materials, to be used in connection with the work. 
    Section 890.1130. Special fixtures and/or items designed for a particular purpose. 
(d)  Water and Drain Connections. Baptisteries, ornamental and lily ponds, aquaria, ornamental fountain basins, private swimming pools and similar type constructions requiring a special permit for their construction and/or installation (when provided with water supplied from the potable water system) shall be protected from back-siphonage as required by code. 
    Section 890.1320, paragraph (b) thereof shall read in its entirety as follows: 
Existing house drains and sewer. Existing house drains and sewer may be used in the renovation of the plumbing system of existing structures if they are in serviceable condition. Starting inside the foundation wall, cast iron or P.V.C. is required to a distance of five (5) feet outside of the building's foundation wall. At that point, a combination wye and one eight-inch bend shall be installed as a "clean out," extending up to finish grade. A six-inch by four-inch (6" × 4") mission coupling shall be installed between the 4" P.V.C. and the 6" S.D.R. 
No new building hereinafter constructed, be it primary or auxiliary structure, equipped with basement area drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. It shall be mandatory that all such structures shall have sump pumps and drains of overhead design. These drains shall be constructed to flow into the storm sewer, if one exists, or if the same does not, the water shall be disposed of in such manner that no part of the water will be discharged into the sanitary sewerage system. 
    J-7, Section 890.1370, (b) is amended so that such subsection d shall require floor drain traps and drains having a minimum diameter of three (3) inches as opposed to two (2) inches as specified in said subparagraph. 
    Section 890.210. 
Plastic pipe and fittings will be allowed for drain, waste or vent above foundation slab and for a maximum of three (3) stories, and shall consist of Schedule 40 polyvinylchloride (PVC). Above three (3) stories, cast iron, galvanized or copper pipe will be used for drain, waste or vent. Water service pipe under two (2) inches diameter shall be made of type "K" copper tube with flared fittings. Water service pipe above two (2) inches diameter shall be of ductile iron water main and fittings and shall be buried to a depth of not less than five (5) feet below grade from the "B" Box to the riser for water meter attachment. Water distribution piping inside of building shall be type "K" (soft) copper underground, and type "L" (hard drawn) copper above ground with sweat fittings. On change overs from septic to city sewer, additional clean outs may be required. Locations will be determined in field. 
Section 3/225 ILCS 320/3 
All plumbing contractors working within the village must furnish the plumbing inspector with a copy of his State of Illinois or City of Chicago plumbing license and an up-to-date certificate of insurance prior to the issuance of a plumbing permit. All commercial plumbing installations, repairs, alterations or replacements must be performed by a licensed plumber. The plumbing inspector will be responsible for maintaining up-to-date files of those plumbing contractors properly licensed. 
    Section 890.140 
In the case of improvements on residential, commercial or industrial buildings or property, the issuance of a plumbing permit is required to make the following repairs, replacements or changes: 
(1)  Conversion from galvanized water piping to copper; 
(2)  Addition of any plumbing fixture; 
(3)  Replacement of water heater or boiler; 
(4)  Installation or conversion to overhead sewer system or anti-flood system; 
(5)  Any plumbing changes or additions to any part of the waste, vent, water piping or sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 90-30, § 3, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 2004-40, § 2, 11-22-04) 
Sec. 6-128. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any provision of the aforementioned Plumbing Code of the Village of Crete (as hereby created and adopted), and anyone who shall violate any of the terms, provisions, rules and regulations of said plumbing code shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $75.00 nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail excepting violations of stop work orders and occupancy without a permit. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this code may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 90-30, § 4, 9-24-90; Ord. No. 2003-54, § 2, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 6-129-6-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SWIMMING POOLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly designated as art. IV, swimming pools, §§ 6-216-6-227, such provisions have been redesignated as art. VII by the editor in order to accommodate the inclusion of arts. IV-VI. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 11. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate swimming pools, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-9; state regulation of public swimming pools, 210 ILCS 125/1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-216. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "swimming pool" means an artificial pool of water intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, together with auxiliary structures, including dressing rooms and locker rooms, toilets, showers, and other areas and enclosures designed or intended for use of persons using the pool, and in any manner incident thereto. The term shall not include any swimming pool subject to the Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Act (210 ILCS 125/1 et seq.). 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.2) 
Sec. 6-217. - Inspections and authority to close. 
    The health officer of the village or others authorized by the board of trustees shall have the right and authority to inspect any pool, or to check the operations thereof, during reasonable daylight hours. If it is found on inspection that the operation of the pool does not meet the sanitary and safety requirements of any ordinance of the village, the officer making the inspection shall direct that the pool be closed until the sanitary and safety requirements are met. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.12) 
Sec. 6-218. - Permit. 
    No swimming pool shall be constructed within the village unless building permits have been obtained as required by ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.1) 
Sec. 6-219. - Type of construction. 
    Swimming pools shall be constructed of water-tight steel reinforced concrete poured in place, pneumatically applied concrete (gunite) with adequate steel reinforcing, dry pack concrete with adequate steel reinforcement, concrete block, brick, aluminum, fiberglass, steel, steel sunk in concrete, fiberglass sunk in concrete, vinyl lined steel, vinyl lined marine plywood treated, vinyl lined wood treated, vinyl lined concrete asbestos (transite) or other materials having equivalent or similar utilitarian value or qualities as may meet with the approval of the architectural review board. Certification of plans and specifications by a licensed architect or professional or structural engineer shall be sufficient evidence of compliance with the requirements of this section. This section shall apply to all swimming pools built on or above ground level, whether of a dismantable nature or of permanent installation, providing such pools are: 
(1)  In excess of ten feet in diameter if round (or in excess of ten feet by ten feet if of a square or of a rectangular design); 
(2)  Are of 24 inches or more in depth; and; 
(3)  Have a quantitative volume in excess of 1,200 gallons regardless of shape or figure. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.3; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 5-22-67) 
Sec. 6-220. - Recirculation requirements. 
    All swimming pools with a capacity of 1,200 gallons or more shall be of the recirculation type, in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. The equipment shall be capable of effecting one turnover of the pool volume in 24 hours or less, at a rate of filtration not exceeding three gallons per square foot per minute. At least one surface skimming device shall be provided for each 800 square foot of surface area, or fraction thereof. All skimmers shall be built into the wall and located at least 30 feet apart. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.5; Ord. No. 601, § 2, 5-22-67) 
Sec. 6-221. - Water supply. 
    The source of water for a swimming pool shall be either that supplied by the village water system or a private well. If water is obtained from a private well, the water shall meet the bacteriological standards of the state department of public health for a safe drinking water. The point of discharge to the pool, whether through a hose or a pipe, shall be firmly fixed at the deep end of the pool at a point at least 6 inches above the overflow level of the pool. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.6) 
Sec. 6-222. - Pool drainage. 
    Drain outlets from a swimming pool shall not be directly connected to a sanitary sewer line. Drainage shall be by gravity, by pumping, or by siphoning. Drainage must not be made into a sanitary sewer, but can be made into storm sewers or gutters or natural water courses. Pools must not be drained during periods of rain or storm. The drain outlet which connects to the recirculating system shall be permanently installed at a lowest point in the pool. It shall be ample in size with a free grating area sufficient to minimize chances of clogging, or occurrences of suction dangerous to the safety of bathers. The grating openings shall be of sufficiently small mesh and construction that bathers' fingers or toes will not be caught or injured. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.7) 
Sec. 6-223. - Water disinfection. 
    Chlorine disinfectant in the form of sodium or calcium hypochloride, or bromine, shall be applied daily as frequently as needed to maintain a definite chlorine residual, not to exceed 0.5 ppm, throughout the pool volume while the pool is in use. A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at all pools and be used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of chlorine treatment. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.8) 
Sec. 6-224. - Walks. 
    A walk area not less than four feet wide shall be provided to extend entirely around a swimming pool, except in the case of a portable, aboveground installation. The walk area shall be of impervious materials, shall be easily cleaned and have a definite pitch away from the pool edge. At portable aboveground pools, an area of impervious material four feet wide by eight feet long shall be constructed around the point where swimmers climb into the pool. Such walks shall be of non-skid texture. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.9; Ord. No. 601, § 3, 5-22-67) 
Sec. 6-225. - Electrical equipment. 
    All metal parts of underwater electrical fixtures shall be grounded. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.10) 
Sec. 6-226. - Safety equipment and fences. 
(a)  Pools shall be equipped with grab rails and approved metal ladders or steps firmly fastened to the construction. There shall be two or more means of egress by ladders or steps. 
(b)  Diving boards will not be permitted in depths less than seven feet of water. 
(c)  The slope of the bottom of the pool shall not exceed one foot of depth for each ten feet horizontal where the depth of water is less than five feet. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.11; Ord. No. 601, § 4, 5-22-67) 
Sec. 6-227. - Disease control. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having an infectious or contagious disease to use any swimming pool, and no person in charge of any pool shall knowingly permit such use. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44B.13) 
Secs. 6-228-6-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 6-241. - Adoption of 2003 international energy conservation code. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code (First Printing: January 2003) is adopted as the village energy conservation code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 5, 12-8-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, enacted provisions to be designated as § 6-241.1. Said provisions have been redesignated as § 6-241 at the direction of the village. 
Sec. 6-242. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 5 of Ord. No. 2003-52, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, deleted § 6-242, which pertained to additions, insertions, deletions, revisions and/or changes to the 1990 BOCA National Energy Conservation Code, which derived from Ord. No. 91-14, adopted May 28, 1991. 
Secs. 6-243-6-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-901. - Adoption of 2003 International Existing Building Code. 
    The 2003 International Existing Building Code (First Printing: January 2003) is adopted as the village existing building code and is intended to regulate additions and modifications to existing buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 6, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 6-902-6-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PERFORMANCE CODE 

Sec. 6-1001. - Adoption of 2003 International Code Council Performance Code. 
    The 2003 International Code Council Performance Code (First Printing: February 2003) is adopted as the village performance code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 7, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 6-1002-6-1100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FUEL GAS CODE 

Sec. 6-1101. - Adoption of 2003 International Fuel Gas Code. 
    The 2003 International Fuel Gas Code (First Printing: January 2003) is adopted as the village fuel gas code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 8, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 6-1102-6-1200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-1201. - Adoption of 2003 International Mechanical Code. 
    The 2003 International Mechanical Code (First Printing: February 2003) is adopted as the village mechanical code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 9, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 6-1202-6-1299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIIA. - ELEVATOR, ESCALATOR, HOISTS, LIFTS AND PEOPLE MOVER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-1300. - Codes adopted. 
    The following regulations are hereby adopted by reference: 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) 
Three Park Avenue 
New York, NY 10016-5990 
(1)  Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44-07) and Performance-Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44.7-07); 
(2)  Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators and Moving Walks (ASME A17.2-2004); 
(3)  Safety code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A 17.3-2005) (upgrades required by application of the Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators must be completed no later than January 1, 2013 (see Public Act 095-0767); 
(4)  Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2005); 
(5)  Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2007). 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
25 West 43 rd Street, 4 th Floor 
New York, NY 10036 
Safety Requirements for Personnel Hoists and Employee Elevators (ANSI A10.4-2004). 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) 
1801 Alexander Bell Drive 
Reston, VA 20191-4400 
Automated People Mover Standard (ASCE 21-05), Part 1, 2006. 
Automated People Mover Standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21.2-08), Parts 2, 3 and 4, 2008 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 6-1301. - Upgrades. 
    With respect to ASME A17.3-2005, Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators, upgrades required by this standard must be completed no later than January 1, 2013. An existing elevator is an elevator contained in a building for which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of the administrative rules or a conveyance for which a permit was issued for that covneyance prior to the effective date of the administrative rules adopted in conformance with the Elevator Safety Act. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 6-1302. - Conflict. 
    Where any provisions of this article XIIA conflict with any provisions of the Village Code, the provisions of this article XIIA shall prevail and shall be applied as the law of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3, 2-23-09) 
Sec. 6-1303. - Copies required. 
    Copies of the regulations herein adopted by reference shall be maintained by the contracted third party license elevator inspection company. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3, 2-23-09) 
Secs. 6-1304-6-1500. - Reserved. 
_____
ARTICLE XIII. - FEES 

Sec. 6-1501. - Schedule for 
permit fees; basis for determination. 
    The building valuation report, as originally prepared by BOCA and subsequently revised and published as ICC, and utilizing the most recent revision, provides the building construction cost basis for the determination of the village's permit and inspection fees. The valuation report, except for the construction cost of use group R-3 (residential, one-and two-family), will be computed as follows: 
(1)  Basic valuation. 
Base price: One-story frame home with a concrete slab or 3 feet of crawl space, per square foot of living area ..... $   32.00 
In addition to basic price: 
One floor above first floor, per sq. ft. ..... 16.00 
Basement or lower level, per sq. ft. ..... 8.00 
Plumbing: 
Single bath, kitchen and laundry ..... 3,000.00 
Additional 1/2 bath ..... 1,200.00 
Additional full bath ..... 1,800.00 
Two-car attached garage ..... 4,500.00 
Three-car garage ..... 6,500.00 
Four-car garage ..... 8,500.00 
Fireplace ..... 2,500.00 
Brick veneer, per sq. ft. wall area (no allowance for openings) ..... 3.75 
Detached garage, per sq. ft. ..... 10.00 
All usable floor space, including basements, balconies, storage areas and additional stories, shall be included in arriving at total square footage. 
(2)  Fees. Fees are hereby established and adopted as follows: 
(a)  Construction fees: 
Building
Valuation of Work     Permit Fee 
First $500.00 ..... $5.00 
$501.00 to $1,000.00 ..... 10.00 
Over $1,000.00 per $1,000.00 valuation (building fee multiplier) ..... 0.007 
Building permit for signs, per sq. ft. ..... 1.00 
Minimum 
Swimming pools: 
First 200 sq. ft. ..... 25.00 
Next 300 sq. ft. ..... 25.00 
plus per 100 sq. ft. ..... 6.00 
Over 500 sq. ft. ..... 43.00 
plus per 100 sq. ft. ..... 4.00 
CAD update fee (for all new construction) ..... 25.00 
(b)  Inspection fees: 
Residential: 
Single-family ..... 600.00 
Multiple-family per living unit ..... 600.00 
Apartments: 
First 1,400 sq. ft or less ..... 47.00 
Over 1,400 sq. ft. ..... 47.00 
plus for each 100 sq. ft. in excess of 4,000 sq. ft. ..... 2.50 
Commercial and industrial: 
First 4,000 sq. ft. or less ..... 240.00 
4,000 sq. ft. to 30,000 sq. ft. ..... 240.00 
plus per 100 sq. ft. in excess of 4,000 sq. ft. ..... 4.00 
Over 30,000 sq. ft. ..... 1,200.00 
plus per 100 sq. ft. in excess of 30,000 sq. ft. ..... 2.50 
Note: For plumbing, electrical, fire sprinkler systems and mechanical inspections, one-half of the building fee formula will be utilized. 
(3)  Electrical inspections and fees: 
a.  Circuit defined: The term circuit as used in this subsection, paragraph b. hereof shall mean any set of branch lighting conductors which have been extended from a distribution center, and which may be utilized for the transmission of electrical energy. 
b.  Circuits under 50 amperes: Multifamily, commercial and industrial inspection fee of each nominal 15-ampere and 20-ampere, two-wire circuit, including figures, sockets or receptacles, the fees shall be: 
Service: 
100-400ampere ..... 50.00 
600-ampere ..... 60.00 
800-ampere ..... 70.00 
1,000-ampere ..... 80.00 
1,200-ampere ..... 100.00 
1,600-ampere ..... 110.00 
2,000-ampere ..... 120.00 
3,000-ampere ..... 180.00 
4,000-ampere ..... 240.00 
15- and 20-ampere branch circuits: 
0 to 50 circuits, each ..... 5.00 
51 or more circuits, each ..... 2.50 
Branch circuit exceeding 20 amperes 
All circuits, each ..... 12.00 
Motor or device: 
1 st motor or device ..... 15.00 
Each additional ..... 5.00 
Minimum fee ..... 50.00 
Reinspection fee, per hour ..... 50.00 
Temporary wiring, per hour ..... 50.00 
Extra inspection fee, per hour ..... 50.00 
Carnivals, per hour ..... 50.00 
Vaults (except utility owned), per hour ..... 50.00 
Aural and/or visual communications, per hour ..... 50.00 
Burglar alarms, per hour ..... 50.00 
Antenna systems, per hour ..... 50.00 
No permit fee, normal fee plus ..... 50.00 
c.  Single-family residences: The fees for the inspection of the original installation in single-family residence, including all circuits, fixtures, receptacles and equipment shall be as follows: 
Service: 
100-400ampere ..... 50.00 
600-ampere ..... 60.00 
800-ampere ..... 80.00 
Inspection fee ..... 50.00 
d.  Plan examination fee: The fee for examination of plans shall be as follows: 
All per hour (minimum on hour) ..... 50.00 
e.  Electric lamp post and festoons: Inspection fees for the original installation of street lighting equipment shall be at a rate of $4.00 for each lamp post. Annual inspection fees shall be at a rate of $3.00 for each lamp post. 
(4)  Re-occupancy inspection: Inspection fees for re-occupancy of an existing building shall be (exclusive of any other fees) ..... $75.00 
(5)  Computation of square footage: All usable floor space, including basements, balconies, storage areas and additional stories shall be included in arriving at total square footage. 
(6)  Minimum fee; payment: No inspection shall be made for an amount less than $25.00. All fees herein provided shall be paid to the village before a permit is issued. 
(7)  Re-inspection; replacement card: Whenever re-inspection or additional inspection of premises is required because of inaccurate or incorrect information on the plan or face of the application for a permit, or because of any code or ordinance violation, or because of faulty construction, or because of no fixed or permanent address identifying building location, a charge of $50.00 shall be paid before the re-inspection is made. An additional $5.00 shall be charged for replacement cost of an inspection request card that is lost or otherwise not available at the time of inspection. 
(8)  Certification of occupancy: The fee for the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or duplicate thereof shall be as follows: 
Single-family residential building ..... 25.00 
Multiple-family residential building, each apartment or dwelling unit ..... 25.00 
Commercial or industrial ..... 75.00 
Temporary/conditional certificate of occupancy for any building type ..... 100.00 
(9)  Plan review fees: 
Building code review: 
Residential ..... 75.00 
Multifamily per unit ..... 75.00 
Commercial: 
Volume 
(cubic feet) 
Up to 20,000 ..... 70.00 
20,001 to 40,000 ..... 105.00 
40,001 to 60,000 ..... 145.00 
60,001 to 80,000 ..... 175.00 
80,001 to 100,000 ..... 205.00 
100,001 to 150,000 ..... 235.00 
150,001 to 200,000 ..... 260.00 
Over 200,000 ..... 260.00 
plus each 10,000 cu. ft. over 200,000 cu. ft. ..... 2.50 
(10)  Specific applications: 
Central air conditioning-Existing homes: 
Building permit ..... 10.00 
Electrical inspections ..... 50.00 
Total ..... 60.00 
Driveways-Asphalt or cement: 
Building permit ..... 10.00 
Building inspections ..... 20.00 
Total ..... 30.00 
Electrical Service: 
Electrical inspection ..... 50.00 
Building permit ..... 20.00 
Total ..... 70.00 
Fences: 
Building permit ..... 15.00 
Building inspection ..... 20.00 
Total ..... 35.00 
Fireplaces: 
Building permit ..... 15.00 
Building inspection ..... 30.00 
Total ..... 45.00 
Garages Detached: 
Building permit ..... 25.00 
Building plan check ..... 5.00 
Building inspections ..... 50.00 
Zoning ..... 5.00 
Total ..... 85.00 
Lawn sprinkler system: 
Building permit ..... 25.00 
Plumbing inspection ..... 50.00 
Total ..... 75.00 
Off-site open panel inspections: 
Actual cost incurred for inspector travel time, travel costs, food and lodging if required. 
Patio/service walk: 
Building permit ..... 15.00 
Building inspections ..... 10.00 
Total ..... 25.00 
Porches and Decks: 
Building permit ..... 25.00 
Building inspection ..... 20.00 
Total ..... 45.00 
Satellite dish: 
Building permit ..... 25.00 
Building inspection ..... 20.00 
Electrical inspection ..... 50.00 
Total ..... 95.00 
Storage building-200 sq. ft maximum: 
Building permit ..... 15.00 
Building inspection ..... 25.00 
Total ..... 40.00 
Swimming pools Above Ground In-ground   Building permit 25.00 7.00 per 1,000.00 in value   Building inspections 20.00 40.00   Electrical inspection 50.00 50.00   Plumbing inspection 50.00      Total 95.00 140.00 (plus pool evaluation at 7.00 per 1,000.00 in value) General repairs or maintenance:   Roofing $20.00   Window replacement (same size no structural work)  20.00   Door replacement (same size no structural work)  20.00   Overhead door replacement (same size no structural work)  20.00   Siding, Soffit, Fascia and Gutters  20.00   Miscellaneous not otherwise specified  20.00   Demolition permits  20.00  
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 10, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 3-22-10) 
_____
Sec. 6-1502. - Penalties. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail excepting violations of stop-work orders and occupancy without a permit. except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this code may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(c)  Violations of any stop work order issued by the building official are set at a minimum fine of $250.00, nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail; violations of occupancy of a structure without an occupancy permit are set at a minimum fine of $250.00, nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. 
(d)  Violations of any provision of this chapter may be cited in accordance with administrative hearing procedures as set for in article XIV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-52, § 10, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 5, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Secs. 6-1503-6-1600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING AND ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 6-1601. - Adoption of state statute. 
    Hereby adopted is 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1, et seq. as it may be amended from time to time and as allowed by said statute. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1602. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless context requires otherwise: 
    Building official means a full-time or part-time village employee whose duties include the inspection or examination of structures or property in the village to determine if zoning or other code violation exist and includes, but is not limited to, building inspectors, plumbing inspectors, electrical inspectors, code enforcement officers, patrol officers, patrol sergeants, supervisory and command police personnel, fire inspectors, firefighter and supervisory and command fire personnel and the zoning administrator; 
    Code means any Village of Crete ordinance, law, housing, building code or zoning ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation, property maintenance or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in the Village of Crete; 
    Hearing officer means a village employee or an officer or agent of the village, other than a property inspector, building official or law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to: 
(1)  Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists; 
(2)  Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building official, the building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code violation; 
(3)  Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; 
(4)  Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists. 
    Property owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1603. - Code hearing department. 
(a)  There is hereby established a code hearing department, the function of which is to expedite the presentation and correction of code violations in the manner set out in 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 et seq and this article. 
(b)  The adoption of this article does not preclude the village from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of its Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1604. - Code hearing procedure. 
(a)  When a building official finds a code violation while inspecting a property, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the property owner, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time the violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and the address of the property where the violation is observed. A copy of the violation notice and report form may be handed directly to the property owner if present. 
(b)  The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building official to the code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 days, nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported by the building official. 
(c)  One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the building official so that he may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail on the property owner along with a summons commanding the property owner to appear at the hearing. If the name of the property owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the property owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the property owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found, not less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1605. - Subpoenas. 
    At any time prior to the hearing date the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the building official or the attorney for the village, or the property owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1606. - Default. 
    If on the date set for hearing the property owner or his attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the property owner in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1607. - Continuances and representation at code hearings. 
    No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this article except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this article shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the village may be presented by the building official, by any other village employee or by an attorney designated by the village. However, in no event shall the case for the village be presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case for the property owner may be presented by the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1608. - Evidence at hearing. 
    At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or no-existence of a code violation relating to a property or structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1609. - Retaliatory action against occupants prohibited. 
    No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1610. - Defenses to code violations. 
    It shall be a defense to a code violation charge under this article if the property owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that: 
(1)  The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed; 
(2)  The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the property owner to maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations; 
(3)  An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the property owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the code violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1611. - Findings, decision, order of hearing officer. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order shall include the hearing officer's finding of fact, a decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of facts, and an order ordering the property owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not proved. 
(b)  If a code violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided in the Code for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the property owner within five days after they are issued; service shall be in the same manner as the report form and summons are served pursuant to subsection 6-1604(c). Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1612. - Fines and sanctions. 
    Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to the findings, decision and order of the hearing officer is found to be guilty of an offense shall be as a sanction fined not less than $75.00, nor more than $750.00. Violations of any stop-work order issued by the building official are set at a minimum fine of $250.00, nor more than $750.00, violations of occupancy of a structure without an occupancy permit are set at a minimum fine of $250.00, nor more than $750.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1613. - Administrative review law to apply. 
    The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the Twelfth Judicial Circuit, Will County, and the provisions of the administrative review law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.), and all amendments and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1614. - Disposition of violations. 
(a)  Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  After expiration of the period within judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with this article and applicable state law. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amounts of fines, other sanctions and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed $2,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 6-1615. - Sanctions and findings to run with property. 
    The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village as the result of a finding of a code violation under this article shall attach to the property as well as to the property owner so that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Secs. 6-1616-6-1645. - Reserved. 
Chapter 7 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW 

Sec. 7-1. - Customer service and privacy protection law. 
(a)  Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the village boundaries. 
(b)  Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-2. - Enforcement. 
    The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-3. - Penalties. 
    The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall be a minimum of $100.00 and not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
(1)  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
(2)  The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(3)  A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in [subsection] (2). 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-4. - Customer credits. 
    The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-48, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Secs. 7-5-7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE 

Sec. 7-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6). 
    Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
    Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the village. 
(1)  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
a.  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
b.  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
c.  Rental of set-top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
d.  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges. 
e.  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service including, but not limited to, service order and service termination charges. 
f.  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
g.  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
h.  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection i. 
i.  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
j.  The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b). 
(2)  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
a.  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
b.  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
c.  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
d.  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
e.  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
f.  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
g.  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
(3)  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
    Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
    PEG means public, education and governmental. 
    PEG access support fee means the amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
    Service means the provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
    Service provider fee means the amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
    Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
(Ord. No. 2007-47, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-21. - Cable/video service provider fee imposed. 
(a)  Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent of the holder's gross revenues and shall be the same percentage as any incumbent cable operator. 
(c)  Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village. 
(d)  Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting this article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village. 
(e)  Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(f)  Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the village in which a fee is paid. 
(g)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under subsection 7-21(b). 
(Ord. No. 2007-47, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-22. - PEG access support fee imposed. 
(a)  PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to [section] 7-21. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village. 
(c)  Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 7-21(d). 
(d)  Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(e)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under section 7-22. 
(Ord. No. 2007-47, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-23. - Applicable principles. 
    All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 2007-47, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-24. - No impact on other taxes due from holder. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. 
(Ord. No. 2007-47, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-25. - Audits of cable/video service provider. 
(a)  Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
(b)  Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30 days after the village's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Ord. No. 2007-47, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 7-26. - Late fees/payments. 
    All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2007-47, § 2, 12-10-07) 
Chapter 8 - DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 6-126 et seq.; storm drainage structures in subdivisions, § 23-133; zoning, ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly, art. II, §§ 8-16-8-28, pertained to flood hazard areas as derived from Ord. No. 828, § 1, adopted Dec. 22, 1980, and Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, adopted Mar. 18, 1987. Subsequently, Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(200-1500), adopted July 11, 1989, enacted new provisions pertaining to the same subject matter set out herein as §§ 8-16-8-19, 8-26-8-30, and 8-36-8-40 (see the repealer in § 8-18). Sec. 1(1600) pertaining to separability was omitted from codification as being covered by § 1-9 of the Code. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; subdivisions, ch. 23; zoning, ch. 28. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-16. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by Illinois Revised Statutes, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12m, and 5/11-30-8. The purpose of this article is to maintain the village's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. This article is adopted in order to accomplish the following specified purposes: 
(1)  To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/5, an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State of Illinois, approved June 10, 1911, as amended; 
(2)  To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion; 
(3)  To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage; 
(4)  To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding; 
(5)  To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; 
(6)  To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program; 
(7)  To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended; 
(8)  To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources; 
(9)  To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats; 
(10)  To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(200), 7-11-89) 
Sec. 8-17. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions are adopted: 
    Act: "An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State of Illinois", 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. 
    Applicant: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application. 
    Appropriate use: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permitted and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in section 8-38(2). 
    Base flood: The flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 8-28 of this article. 
    Building: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days. 
    Channel: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
    Channel modification: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or material of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a typical relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening). 
    Compensatory storage: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of the natural floodplain storage can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows. 
    Conditional approval of a regulatory floodway map change: Preconstruction approval by IDNR-OWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A letter, which indicates that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved. 
    Control structure: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation. 
    Dam: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included. 
    Development: Any manmade change to real estate, including: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, repair, or replacement of a building or any addition to a building. 
(2)  Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. 
(3)  Drilling, mining, installing, utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects. 
(4)  Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site. 
(5)  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(6)  Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts, channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other nonagriculture alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste. 
(7)  Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal. 
Development does not include maintenance of an existing building and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees. 
    DWR: Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources. 
    Elevation certificate: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated. 
    Erosion: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action. 
    Exempt organizations: Organizations which are exempt from this article per the Illinois Revised Statutes including state, federal or local units of government. 
    FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations of 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments. 
    Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood frequency: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
    Flood fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways. 
    Floodplain: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood. The SFHA's of the village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village of Crete prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated November 6, 2000. The SFHA's of those parts of the unincorporated areas that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Will County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) and dated November 6, 2000. 
    Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate the flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodproofing certificate: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
    Flood protection elevation: The elevation of the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA. 
    Freeboard: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams. 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations: Engineering analyses which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events. 
    IDNR-OWR: The Illinois Department of Natural Resources - Office of Water Resources. 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective flood hazard boundary map or FIRM. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR): Letter that revises the base flood or the 100-year flood frequency elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM. 
    Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and any other similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mitigation: Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. 
    NGVD: National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surfaces set by the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929. 
    Natural: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not restrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geological materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation. 
    Ordinary high water mark (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics. 
    Public flood control project: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damage to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or part, of a flood control project [by] persons or parties who are not public agencies. 
    Publicly navigable waters: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft. 
    Registered land surveyor: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois. 
    Registered professional engineer: An engineer registered in the State of Illinois. 
    Regulatory floodway: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or water course as designated by DWR or IDNR-OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot increase in any stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are designated for Deer Creek and Goose Creek on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000, and for Deer Creek and Goose Creek on the Regulatory Flood Plain Map prepared by DWR and dated June 1, 1976. The regulatory floodways for those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed into the village are designated for Plum Creek on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the division should be contacted for the interpretation. 
    Repair, remodeling or maintenance: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a structure. 
    Retention/detention facility: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
    Riverine SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding. 
    Runoff: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surfaces, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits. 
    Sedimentation: The process that deposit soils, debris, and other materials on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent, stream, ditch, or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, or E. 
    Structure: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home; or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. 
    Substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either, (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    Transition section: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(300), 7-11-89; Ord. No. 95-45, § 1, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 2000-35, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 8-18. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This article is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(1500), 7-11-89) 
Sec. 8-19. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that development, either inside or outside the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This article does not create liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(1300), 7-11-89) 
Sec. 8-20. - Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance adopted, as amended. 
(a)  The Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended, three copies of which shall be maintained on file in the office of the building department, each being marked and designated as the "Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance," as published under the direction of the County of Will, be and is hereby adopted, together with any amendments, all of which (as hereby adopted) shall be known and may be cited as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Village of Crete." The provisions (as herein adopted) shall provide the various rules, regulations, standards, designs and guidelines to be followed within the Village of Crete and its planning jurisdiction situated in Will County insofar as implementation of the village zoning ordinance, subdivision review and approval process, building permit and inspection process and land use is concerned and shall be applied so as to safeguard health and safety through properly designed, acceptably installed and adequately maintained stormwater management systems. 
(b)  With the adoption of the Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (hereinafter "WCSMO") the following shall be observed: 
(1)  All references to "administrator" in the WCSMO shall mean the Crete Village Building Inspector or the Crete Village Engineer. 
(2)  All references to "oversight committee" in the WCSMO shall mean the Crete Village Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-28-19) 
Secs. 8-21-8-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-26. - Enforcement officials. 
(a)  The village building inspector and the village engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 8-27. 
(b)  To fulfill such duties the village building inspector or village engineer should use the criteria listed in section 8-28, base flood elevations, to determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined that a site is within a floodplain, the village building inspector or the village engineer must determine whether the development is in a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe, the village building inspector or the village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 8-37 be met. If the site is within a floodway, the village building inspector or the village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 8-38 be met. If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the village building inspector or village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 8-39 be met. 
(c)  In addition, the general requirements of section 8-36 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section 8-37, 8-38 or 8-39. The village building inspector or the village engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 8-40. 
(d)  If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the village building inspector or village engineer shall review the requirements of section 8-29 to make sure they are met. In addition, the village building inspector or village engineer shall complete all notification requirements. 
(e)  In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this article, the village building inspector or village engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in section 8-30. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(400), 7-11-89) 
Sec. 8-27. - Duties of the enforcement officials. 
    The village building inspector or village engineer shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this article which shall include the following: 
(1)  Determining the floodplain designation. Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one square mile. 
(2)  Professional engineer review. If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one square mile then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer (P.E.) under the employ of or contract of the village for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 8-38. In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 8-38. 
(3)  Dam safety requirements. Ensure that a IDNR-OWR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the proposed development activity includes construction of a dam as defined in section 8-17. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. 
(4)  Other permit requirements. Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
(5)  Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this article and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this article and other regulations of this community when the development meets the conditions of this article. 
(6)  Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before, during, and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure they comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Elevation and floodproofing certificates. Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 8-36 of this article for public inspection and provide copies of same. 
(8)  Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this article. 
(9)  State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR-OWR, for all development projects subject to sections 8-38 and 8-39 of this article unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. Upon acceptance of Ordinance No. 89-19, as amended, by IDNR-OWR and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as per Illinois Administrative Code 708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections 8-38 and 8-39. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from IDNR-OWR. 
a.  Organizations which are exempt from this article, as per Illinois Revised Statutes; 
b.  Department of transportation projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 8-17 and all other state, federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of section 8-38(7); 
c.  An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per section 8-38(3)e; 
d.  An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to section 8-38(3)d; 
e.  Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in section 8-38(3)a, b and h; 
f.  Permit issuance for structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams; 
g.  Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and 
h.  Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist. 
(10)  Cooperation with other agencies. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this article. Submit data to IDNR-OWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency for proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program. Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of any proposed amendments to Ordinance No. 89-19. 
(11)  Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, subject however to the review and approval of IDNR-OWR and FEMA for any ordinance changes. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(500), 7-11-89; Ord. No. 95-45, § 1, 9-11-95) 
Sec. 8-28. - Base flood elevation. 
    The protection standard of this article is based on the Flood Insurance Study of The Village of Crete. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey's Flood Plain Information Repository. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR-OWR and FEMA. 
(1)  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of Deer Creek and Goose Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of The Village of Crete prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. 
(2)  The base flood or frequency flood elevation of the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Will County prepared by FEMA and dated November 6, 2000, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. 
(3)  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village of Crete. 
(4)  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village of Crete shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois Water Survey Flood Plain Information Repository. When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in the watershed as determined from adopted local and regional land use plans. Along any watercourse draining more than one square mile, the above analysis shall be submitted to IDNR-OWR for approval, once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey Flood Plain Information Repository for filing. For nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus three feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by the Illinois State Water Survey. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(600), 7-11-89; Ord. No. 95-45, § 1, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 2000-35, § 1, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 8-29. - Variances. 
    No variances shall be granted to any development located in a regulatory floodway as defined in section 8-17. However, when a development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the standards of this article place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village for a variance. The village engineer shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit his recommendation to the village board of trustees. 
(1)  No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that: 
a.  The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; 
b.  An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted; 
c.  The relief requested is the minimum necessary; 
d.  There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance; 
e.  There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities; 
f.  The provisions of sections 8-37(2) and 8-39(2) of this article are still met; 
g.  The activity is not in a regulatory floodway; 
h.  The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and 
i.  The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses. 
(2)  The village building inspector or the village engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 8-36 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: 
a.  Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; 
b.  Increase the risk to life and property; and 
c.  Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability. 
(3)  Variances requested in connection with the restoration of a site or building listed on the National Register of Historical Places or documented as worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of sections 8-40(1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(1200), 7-11-89) 
Sec. 8-30. - Penalty for violation. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. Upon due investigation, the village building inspector or the village engineer may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this article exists. The village building inspector or the village engineer shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. 
(1)  If such owner fails after ten days' notice to correct the violation: 
a.  The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this article or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the article. 
b.  Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined the amount as listed under this section number as found in the comprehensive fee and fine schedule in section 2-301 of the Crete Municipal Code of each offense. 
c.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
d.  The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property. 
(2)  The village building inspector or the village engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(1400), 7-11-89) 
Secs. 8-31-8-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF LANDS 

Sec. 8-36. - Permitting requirements applicable to all areas. 
    In addition to the requirements found in sections 8-37, 8-38 and 8-39 of this article, for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways, and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  Public health standards. 
a.  No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal waste, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE. 
b.  New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight. 
(2)  Flood-carrying capacity and notification. For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse. 
(3)  Protecting buildings. All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain also known as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section 8-38. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations: 
a.  Construction or placement of a new building. 
b.  A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by more than 20 percent or the building's market value by more than 50 percent. 
c.  Installing a manufactured house on a new site or a new manufactured house on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and 
d.  Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. 
Building protection may be met by one of the following methods: 
(1)  A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
a.  The lowest floor (including the basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation. 
b.  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected from erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties. 
(2)  A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following: 
a.  The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one foot above grade, and consist of a minimum of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation. 
b.  The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. 
c.  All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation. 
d.  No area of the flood protection area shall be used for storage of items or materials. 
e.  Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180 days shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code 870. 
(3)  Only a nonresidential structure may be structurally floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this section). 
(4)  Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, ice, fire, wind, or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50 percent of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(1000), 7-11-89) 
Sec. 8-37. - Requirements in flood fringe areas. 
    Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage and other provisions of this article are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of section 8-36. 
(1)  Development permit. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the village building inspector or the village engineer. 
a.  Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M.S.L. (1929 adjustments) datum or N.G.V.D. and all changes in grade resulting from excavation of filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section 8-36 of this article. 
b.  Upon receipt of a development permit application, the village building inspector or the village engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA, and therefor, is not subject to the requirements of this article. The building official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
c.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance. 
d.  The village building inspector or the village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant, copies of all other local, state and federal permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The village building inspector or the village engineer shall not issue a permit unless all other local, state and federal permits have been obtained. 
(2)  Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety. 
a.  If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain. 
b.  Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-half times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(700), 7-11-89) 
Sec. 8-38. - Requirements in areas of identified floodways. 
    This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory floodway for Deer Creek and Goose Creek shall be delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR-OWR according and referenced in section 8-17. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section 8-36. 
(1)  Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempt by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining development permit from the village building inspector or the village engineer. 
a.  Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village. The application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of applicant; 
2.  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
3.  Name of stream body of water affected; 
4.  Description of proposed activity; 
5.  Statement of purposes of proposed activity; 
6.  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
7.  Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from that of the applicant; 
8.  Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent; 
9.  If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the applicant form; 
10.  If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; 
11.  If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him(her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interest therein. 
12.  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
(i) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
(ii) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustments) datum or N.G.V.D., adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale; 
(iii) Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); 
(iv) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance; 
(v) A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location. 
13.  Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development. 
14.  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection (2) of this section. 
15.  If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until IDNR-OWR has indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA. 
16.  The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits, sealed by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimension of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 8-36. 
17.  If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
(i) A discussion of the purpose of and the need for the proposed work; 
(ii) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work; 
(iii) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; 
(iv) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection (3)d.1 of this section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; 
(v) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected. 
b.  The village building inspector or the village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The village building inspector or the village engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section. 
(2)  Preventing increased damages; list of appropriate uses. The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrological and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this article. Only those appropriate uses listed in 92 Illinois Administrative Code 708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, building on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved appropriate uses are: 
a.  Flood control structures, dikes, dams, and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife. 
b.  Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses; 
c.  Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls; 
d.  Underground and overhead utilities; 
e.  Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of floodflows, and including open air pavilions; 
f.  Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage; 
g.  Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modifications thereto; 
h.  Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed one foot) and aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation; 
i.  Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive non-erosive slope toward a watercourse; 
j.  Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or construction of, flood walls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the flood wall shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure; 
k.  In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs to a building that are valued at less than 50 percent of the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building; 
l.  Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not increase the buildings's footprint and are valued at less than 50 percent of the market value of the building. 
(3)  Engineering and mitigation criteria. Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR-OWR, the construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of section 8-36 of this article: 
a.  Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyances, the following factors shall be taken into consideration: 
1.  Regulatory floodway conveyance, 
"K" = 1.486 AR 2/3 
 n 
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor; "A" is the effective area of the cross-section; and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (see Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York); 
2.  The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative land cover; 
3.  Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR-OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
(i) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length. 
(ii) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length. 
(iii) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall be used. 
(iv) Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway delineation on adjacent properties. 
(v) All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows. 
b.  Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase downstream flooding. Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and one-half times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR-OWR through a determination of flood discharge and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modifications, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structures. 
c.  Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase erosion or flood heights. For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage for all events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures. 
d.  Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway approaches. The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth-foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase up stream flood stages greater than one-tenth-foot, the developer must contact IDNR-OWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam safety permit or waiver. 
1.  The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 8-28 of this article. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/Federal Highway administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation procedures. 
2.  Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection (3)b of this section. 
3.  Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection (3)c of this section. 
4.  If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, a department of transportation permit must be received. 
5.  The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted by IDNR-OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by subsection (2) of this section. 
6.  All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection (3)h of this section. 
e.  Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts, and approach roads. 
1.  The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than one-tenth-foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage. 
2.  If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects of flood stages on upstream and downstream properties. 
3.  The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with the Department of Transportation Rules 92 Illinois Administrative Code 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to the division for review before a permit is located. 
f.  On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water. Any increase in the upstream flood stages greater than zero foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extension of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees of flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR-OWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam safety permit or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section 8-17 shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Illinois Administrative Code 702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that: 
1.  The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention; 
2.  The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning; 
3.  The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and pre-sedimentation basin; 
4.  A non-profit source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; 
5.  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of section 8-38. 
g.  Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial structures. If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building. Compensation for lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities. 
h.  Excavation in the floodway. When excavation is proposed in the design of bridge and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR-OWR through engineering calculations or model testing that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
1.  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length; 
2.  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length; and 
3.  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall be used; 
4.  Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections. 
i.  If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that: 
1.  There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of the structures from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat; 
2.  Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification, and no significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values; 
3.  The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the water body affected, consistent with the following criteria: 
(i) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical. 
(ii) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will prevent erosion. 
(iii) One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation. 
(iv) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel. 
(v) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one horizontal to vertical, wherever practical. Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods of bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practice alternatives. 
(vi) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative cover. 
(vii) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where appropriate. 
(viii) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of the downstream water quality. 
(ix) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel. 
(x) There shall be no increase in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project. 
(xi) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and 
4.  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of section 8-38. 
j.  Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant. 
k.  Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria: 
1.  The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time the soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the initiation of improvements. 
2.  Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days. 
3.  Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of the eroded sediments off-site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches, and sediment basins. 
4.  A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing channels (see subsection (3)p of this section). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately. 
5.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (IEPA, 1987). 
l.  Public flood control projects. For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR-OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
m.  General criteria for analysis of flood elevations: 
1.  The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study, referenced in section 8-28 must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to be used. 
2.  If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations. 
3.  If the applicant learns from IDNR-OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built. 
n.  Conditional letter of map revision. If the appropriate use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR-OWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to issue a conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from IDNR-OWR a conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by IDNR-OWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR-OWR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before IDNR-OWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging, or excavation shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and IDNR-OWR. 
o.  Professional engineer's supervision. All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer. 
p.  For all activities in the floodway involving construction within at least 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least 25 feet of the ordinance high water mark of the channel. 
2.  Where it is possible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon completion of construction. 
3.  The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when necessary, for stream maintenance purposes. 
q.  After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The regulatory floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR-OWR and FEMA of the "as-built" plans. 
(4)  State review. For those projects listed below located on a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR-OWR for their review and concurrence prior to issuance of a permit: 
a.  IDNR-OWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection (3)d of this section. 
b.  IDNR-OWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection (3)e of the section. 
c.  The IDNR-OWR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections (3)a, b and h or this section. 
d.  The IDNR-OWR will review and approve prior to the start of construction any department projects, dams (as defined in section 8-17) and all other state, federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the municipality or county. 
(5)  Other permits. In addition to the other requirements of this article, a development permit for a site in a floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or a written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR-OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. No permit from IDNR-OWR shall be required if the division has delegated this responsibility to the village. 
(6)  Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in section 8-17 per Illinois Administrative Code 702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR-OWR dam safety permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the Village finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the village shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, IDNR-OWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA). 
(7)  Activities that do not require a registered professional engineer's review. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review; such activities shall meet the other requirements of this article, including the mitigation requirements: 
a.  Underground and overhead utilities that: 
1.  Do not result in any increase in the existing ground elevations; or 
2.  Require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway; or 
3.  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing stream bed; and 
4.  In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris. 
b.  Storm and sanitary outfalls that: 
1.  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and 
2.  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and 
3.  Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location. 
c.  Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade. 
d.  Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that: 
1.  Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length; 
2.  Materials are not placed higher than existing top of bank; 
3.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake; 
4.  Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitates the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practical alternatives. 
e.  Temporary stream crossings in which: 
1.  The approach roads will be five-tenths-foot or less above natural grade. 
2.  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage title or outfall invert. 
3.  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel. 
4.  All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
5.  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(800), 7-11-89; Ord. No. 95-45, § 1, 9-11-95) 
Sec. 8-39. - Requirements in areas where floodways are not identified. 
    In SFHA or floodplains, where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
(1)  Development permit. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the village building inspector or village engineer. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimension of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 8-36 of this article. 
a.  The application for a development permit shall also include the following information: 
1.  A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use; 
2.  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
3.  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
4.  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
(i) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
(ii) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure of work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or N.G.V.D., adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed activities and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limits, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and graphical or numerical scale; 
(iii) Cross-section views of the project and engineering reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and 
(iv) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance. 
5.  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection (2) of this section. 
6.  Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development. 
b.  Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Flood Plain Information Repository, the village building inspector or the village engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to section 8-28(4). Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this article. The building official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existing prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
c.  The village building inspector or the village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state or federal permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The village building inspection or the village engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required local, state and federal permits have been obtained. 
(2)  Preventing increased damages. No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in the article. 
a.  Within all riverine SFHA's where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of section 8-38(3)a through one for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of section 8-28(4) of this article. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR-OWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of their floodway by the department, the developer shall demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 8-38 for the regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in section 8-17 of this article. 
2.  A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR-OWR or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR-OWR. 
3.  No permit from IDNR-OWR shall be required if the division has delegated permit responsibility to the village per 92 Illinois Administrative Code, Part 708 for regulatory floodways, per IDNR-OWR's statewide permit entitled "Construction in Flood Plains with No Designated Floodways in Northeastern Illinois". 
4.  Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water as defined in section 8-17, shall obtain an IDNR-OWR Dam Safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the village building inspector or the village engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR-OWR permit, the village building inspector or the village engineer shall immediately notify the dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the village building inspector, or the village engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the village building inspector or the village engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA), and the IDNR-OWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield. 
5.  The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory floodway; however, such activities shall meet the other requirements of this article: 
(i) Underground and overhead utilities that: (a) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or (b) require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway; or (c) in the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing stream bed; and (d) in the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris. 
(ii) Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that: (a) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and (b) do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and (c) are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location. 
(iii) Construction of shoreline and stream bed protection that: (a) Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length or two cubic yards per lineal foot of stream bed; (b) materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank; (c) materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent; (d) vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation method for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practical alternatives. 
(iv) Temporary steam crossings in which: (a) The approach roads will be one-half foot or less above natural grade; (b) the crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage title or outfall invert; (c) the top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel; (d) all disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction; (e) the access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. 
(v) The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures. 
(vi) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade. 
(vii) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters. 
(viii) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70 square feet in size, nor ten feet in any one dimension (e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds). 
(ix) The construction of additions to buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than 20 percent, which are located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of floodwaters. 
(x) Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where: (a) The affected length of the stream is less than 1,000 feet; (b) the work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels; or (c) the cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site. 
6.  The flood-carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
b.  Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least one and one-half times the volume of storage lost due to fill or structure. In the case of streams or watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year floodplain elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourses. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(900), 7-11-89; Ord. No. 95-45, § 1, 9-11-95) 
Sec. 8-40. - Other development requirements. 
    The Village of Crete Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use and development: 
(1)  New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 8-36, 8-37, 8-38 and 8-39 of this article and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2). 
(2)  Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per section 8-28(4) and the floodway delineation per the definition in section 8-17 and submitting it to the state water survey and DWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data. 
(3)  Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
(4)  The village board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit development or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-19, § 1(1100), 7-11-89) 
Secs. 8-41-8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, adopted June 24, 1991, enacted provisions pertaining to soil erosion and sedimentation, designated as art. I, §§ 8-1-8-6. Such provisions have been redesignated by the editor as art. III, §§ 8-51-8-56, for purposes of classification. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; subdivisions, ch. 23; zoning, ch. 28. 

Sec. 8-51. - Purpose. 
    The village board declares that the purpose of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment, and promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling the stripping, excavating, filling, grading and/or altering of construction site property so as to promote soil conservation, minimize land erosion and watchfully guard soil deprivation and sedimentation, and to generally govern other activities, which have a tendency to disturb or break the topsoil, or otherwise results in the movement, erosion and general sedimentation of land situated generally throughout the Village. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 95-45, § 1, 9-11-95) 
Sec. 8-52. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings and be defined as set forth below: 
    Building permit means a permit issued by the village for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building. 
    Certify or certification means formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests (where required) have been performed, and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this article. 
    Cubic yards means the amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of "average and areas." 
    Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling. 
    Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Final grade means the vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan. 
    Grading means excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill. 
    Natural drainage means channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes. 
    Parcel means all contiguous land in one ownership. 
    Permittee means any person to whom a site development permit is issued. 
    Person means any individual, firm, or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of the foregoing. 
    Removal means cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or killing by spraying. 
    Site means a lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
    Site development means altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing improvements. 
    Site development permit means a permit issued by the village for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading. 
    Stripping means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of top soil. 
    Vacant means land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself. 
    Village means the Village of Crete, Will County, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 8-53. - General principles. 
    It is the objective of this article to control soil erosion and sedimentation caused by development activities in the village. As such, measures taken to control erosion and sedimentation should be adequate to assure that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event of ten-year frequency or less. The following principles shall apply to all development activities within the village and to the preparation of the submissions required under section 8-54: 
(1)  Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes (where high cuts and fills may be required) should be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible. 
(2)  Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed wherever possible. 
(3)  The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time during the property's overall development. 
(4)  Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps or filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(5)  The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs, and benefits involved. 
(6)  In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered. 
(7)  Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainage ways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion. 
(8)  Permanent grass seed or sod and structures should be installed as soon as practical during development, but in no case longer than 180 days from the beginning of development activities. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 8-54. - Site development permit (generally). 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall commence or perform any grading, stripping, excavating, or filling of land without having first obtained a site development permit from the building inspector of the village. 
(b)  Exceptions. A permit shall not be required in any of the following situations, namely: 
(1)  Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the soil and water conservation district and including the construction of agricultural structures. 
(2)  Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system to serve an existing dwelling or structure. 
(c)  Application for permit. Application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the village's building inspector on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principle contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as designated opposite code section no. 8-54 as provided in the "Schedule of Fees and Fines" (chapter 2, section 2-301 of the Crete Municipal Code). Each application shall include certification that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit. 
(d)  Submissions. Each application for a site development permit shall be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a legend and scale. 
(2)  A development plan of the site showing: 
a.  Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within approximately 100 feet of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two-foot contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern of the area; 
b.  The location of existing building, structures, utilities, water bodies, flood plains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas and other significant natural or manmade features on the site and adjacent land within approximately 100 feet of the boundary; 
c.  A general description of the predominant soil types on the site, their location, and their limitations for the proposed use; and, 
d.  Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned utilization; areas of excavation, grading, and filling; proposed contours, finished grades, and street profiles; provisions for storm drainage, including the control of accelerated runoff, with a drainage area map and computations; kinds and locations of utilities; and areas and acreage proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed. 
(3)  An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing: 
a.  All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this article throughout all phases of construction and permanently after completion of development of the site; 
b.  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seed bed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures; 
c.  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance; and 
d.  Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after development is completed. 
(4)  The proposed phasing of development of the site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary sediment control measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas, and establishment of permanent vegetative cover. 
(5)  All submissions required under this article shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements contained in "Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Northeastern Illinois," prepared by the Northeastern Illinois Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee and adopted by the Will County Soil and Water Conservation District, which standards and requirements are hereby incorporated into this article by reference. In this connection, the village board may waive specific requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this article. 
(e)  Bonds. The applicant may be required to file with the village a faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security satisfactory to the village attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by said village board so as to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and landscaping for such period as specified by the village, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. 
(f)  Review and approval. Each application for a site development permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures: 
(1)  The said building inspector will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this article. The village may also refer any application to the Will County Soil and Water Conservation District for their review and comment. After receiving an application, the building inspector shall, in writing, either: 
a.  Approve the permit application if it is found to be in conformance with the provisions of this article, and issue the permit; 
b.  Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this article, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
c.  Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
(2)  No site development permit shall be issued for an intended development site unless, either: 
a.  The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and planned unit development, has been approved by the village where applicable; 
b.  Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the village; or 
c.  The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall development program previously approved by the village for the area in which the site is situated. 
(3)  Pending preparation and approval of a plan, or revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed only in accordance with conditions established by the village. 
(g)  Appeals. The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice of the filing of the application, may appeal any decision of the village's building inspector to the village board. Upon receipt of a notice (or request) concerning appeal, the village board shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving 15 days' notice thereof. The village board shall render a decision within 30 days after the hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities on the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed management plans, or the use of any retention facilities, possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainage ways; nature and type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the proposed development activities may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. 
(h)  Retention of plans. The village shall retain all plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments in original form or on microfilm. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 8-55. - Operation standards and requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. All grading, stripping, excavating, and filling which is subject to the permit requirements of this article, and any grading, stripping, excavating and filling which is exempted from the permit requirement by paragraph (b)(1) of Section 8-54, shall be subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this section. 
(b)  Responsibility. The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, and the village or its officers or agents will not be made liable for such damage by: 
(1)  The issuance of a permit under this article; 
(2)  Compliance with the provisions of that permit or with conditions attached to it by the village board; 
(3)  Failure of village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions; 
(4)  Failure of village officials to recommend denial of or to deny a permit; or 
(5)  Exemptions from the permit requirements of this article. 
(c)  Handbook adopted by reference. The standards and specifications contained in "Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois," cited in paragraph D of section four, thereof, are hereby incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under site development and erosion and sedimentation control plans approved under section 8-55. In the event of conflict between provisions of said manual and of this article, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(d)  Inspection. The village shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavation, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the village shall be maintained at the site during progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the village at least two working days before the completion of: 
(1)  Stripping and clearing; 
(2)  Rough grading; 
(3)  Final grading; or 
(4)  Final landscaping. 
If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done in phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request inspection at the completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or area. If an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five working days after notice is received by the village from the permittee, the permittee may continue work at his own risk, without presuming acceptance by the village. Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given in writing at the site. 
(e)  Special precautions (generally). 
(1)  If, at any stage of the grading of any development site, the village determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the village may require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions be taken as are considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering geologist which may be made requirements for further work. 
(2)  Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the village may specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains. 
(f)  Amendment of plans. Major amendments of any site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the village and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the village by written authorization to the permittee. 
(g)  Expiration of permit. Every site development permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within 180 days, or is not completed by a date which shall be specified in the permit; except that the village may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 8-56. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Exceptions. The village board may, in accordance with the following procedures, authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant for a site development permit, stating fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the petition to be granted, it shall be necessary that the village board find all of the following facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition: 
a.  That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the requirements of this article; 
b.  That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and 
c.  That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property. 
(2)  Each application for an exception shall be referred to the village's plan commission for review. The plan commission shall transmit its recommendations to the village board, which shall review such recommendations prior to granting or denying the exception. 
(3)  The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for exception, within 30 days after receiving application, in the manner provided with respect to appeals. After public hearing, the village board may approve the site development permit application with the exceptions and conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site development permit application and exception application or it may take such other action as appropriate. 
(b)  Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development site or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the village may suspend or revoke the site development permit. 
(1)  Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop-work order issued by the village and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person performing the work. The stop-work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. A stop-work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the village board at which the conditions of subsection (2) below can be met. 
(2)  No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the village board. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and shall state: 
a.  The ground for complaint or reason for suspension or revocation, in clear and concise language; and 
b.  The time when and place where such hearing will be held. 
Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the village board shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Violations and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine imposed pursuant to the general penalties provision of the Crete Municipal Code. Each separate offense shall form the subject matter of a separate fine. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section or by the general penalties provision of the Crete Municipal Code, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be required to restore the site to the condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-24-91) 
Chapter 8.5 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8.5-1. - Creation; composition. 
(a)  Emergency management planning and response for the village shall be performed by the Crete Emergency Management Agency, an executive department of the village. 
(b)  The Crete Emergency Management Agency shall be composed of one coordinator and members, who shall be known as EMA officers, the number of which shall be authorized by the corporate authorities. The coordinator shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(c)  The coordinator shall have the ability to hire and fire EMA personnel; assign personnel, equipment and operations; direct activities and provide for establishing a command structure; supervise the preparation and expenditures of the agency budget; oversee maintenance and repair of equipment, buildings and vehicles; enforce discipline and maintain rules and regulations for the agency; and be the sole decision maker over EMA officers in final decisions of discipline, suspension and dismissal. 
(d)  All EMA officers appointed by the coordinator, shall have the minimum qualifications as shall be determined in writing by the coordinator and shall take an oath as prescribed by state statute. It shall be the duty of every member of the agency to conduct themselves in a proper and law abiding manner. 
(e)  Compensation for all Crete Emergency Management Agency personnel shall be determined by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 8.5-2. - Duties. 
    It shall be the function of the Crete Emergency Management Agency to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, provide, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery in accordance with applicable state statute. It shall also coordinate with and assist the police and fire departments and all other village departments as requested and as needed for the effective and efficient completion of village services. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 8.5-3. - Local disaster declarations. 
(a)  The village president, or his or her interim emergency successor, may issue, continue or terminate local disaster declaration in accordance with state statute. 
(b)  The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the emergency management and operations plan of the village. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 8.5-4. - Disaster warning devices. 
    Disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens may be a part of emergency planning dependent upon available technology and funding availability. Devices may be tested in accordance with directives established by the coordinator in accordance with state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 8.5-5. - Mutual aid. 
    Mutual aid response agreements may be entered into with other public agencies in accordance with state statute and as authorized and adopted by the corporate authorities to provide for assistance in response and recovery from a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 8.5-6. - Immunity. 
    The Crete Emergency Management Agency authorized and operated under this chapter is established in accordance with 20 ILCS 3305/10(c), and shall operate under the immunity established by the state legislature in 20 ILCS 3305/15. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 8.5-7. - Interfering with EMA officer. 
    It is a violation of this chapter for any person to obstruct or interfere with an emergency management agency coordinator or officer while they are engaged in the duties prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Secs. 8.5-8-8.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 8.5-31. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment, as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the Village Hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2012-27, § 3, 11-26-12) 
Secs. 8.5-32-8.5-60. - Reserved. 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; automobile service stations generally, § 12-221 et seq.; self-service gasoline stations, § 12-751 et seq.; fires in parks, § 17-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Open burning and incinerators. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow the open burning of any garbage or other discarded solid materials. No incinerator shall be installed or constructed unless the same shall be in conformance with Technical Release No. 140 - 2, captioned Recommendations for Incinerator Design published by the State of Illinois Air Pollution Control Board. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to the burning of leaves pursuant to section 9-3 or to bonfires. 
(Code 1965, § 5.2.1; Ord. No. 668, § 1, 11-9-70) 
Sec. 9-2. - Bonfires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or light any bonfire so close to any building or other structure as to endanger such building or structure, or to build or light any bonfire on any public street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.15, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 9-3. - Burning of leaves. 
(a)  The burning of leaves shall be prohibited in the village. 
(b)  The village fire department and the village police department shall have the right to go upon any private property to enforce the provisions of this section and to extinguish any leaves that are burning in violation of this section. 
(c)  Any person burning leaves in violation of the restrictions provided for in this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 840, Art. 10-15, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 92-23, § 1, 12-28-92) 
Sec. 9-4. - Use of trees, etc., indoors for Christmas decorations. 
    Natural cut evergreen trees or evergreen boughs or branches commonly used for Christmas tree and related decorations are prohibited for use in the interior of any church, public or other building used or generally patronized by the public. 
(Ord. No. 693, § 1(Art. 10.4.6.1), 11-13-72) 
Sec. 9-5. - Obstructing exits or stairways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or permit the obstruction, of any stairway, aisle, corridor, or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by two or more tenants or families, in such a manner as to interfere with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.22, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 9-6. - Combustible refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw any refuse of any kind on any street, alley or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.11, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 9-7. - Gasoline pumps on streets, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank, or similar structure in any public street, alley or sidewalk without having first obtained a permit therefor from the board of trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 3.1.18) 
Cross reference- Automobile service stations generally, § 12-221 et seq.; self service gasoline stations, § 12-751 et seq; streets and sidewalks, ch. 22. 
Sec. 9-8. - Explosives. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as T.N.T. in the village in any quantities, except for medicinal or laboratory purposes and for such purposes no more than one-quarter ounce shall be stored in any one building or premises. 
(b)  All explosives must be stored or kept in accordance with the rules of the state fire marshal, subject, however, to the provisions of subsection (a). 
(Code 1965, §§ 10.1.2, 10.1.3) 
State Law reference- Transportation of liquid nitroglycerine, 720 ILCS 650/1. 
Secs. 9-9-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention code, see the editor's footnote to ch. 9; fire suppression and emergency regulations, § 9-141 et seq. 
State Law reference- Fire departments authorized, 65 ILCS 5/11-6-1; liability of municipalities for firefighting or fire protection activities, 745 ILCS 10/5-101 et seq. 

Sec. 9-26. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a fire department for the village. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.1; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 9-27. - Composition. 
(a)  The fire department shall consist of a fire chief, one deputy chief, one assistant chief, two captains, up to five lieutenants and members as may from time to time be authorized by the president, board of trustees and fire chief. 
(b)  The fire chief shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and shall be an exempt position and shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the fire department. The fire chief may be removed by the village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(c)  All fire department employees, part time and paid on call, including officers, shall be appointed by the fire chief and shall have attained their 18th birthday. Qualifications of candidates for employment shall be determined in writing by the fire chief. 
(d)  All fire department employees, including the fire chief, part time and paid on call members shall receive compensation as determined by the corporate authorities. 
(Code 1965, §§ 1.17.1, 1.17.4; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 2, 1-2-08; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 2, 3-27-17; Ord. No. 2018-22, § 2, 11-12-18) 
Sec. 9-28. - Internal organization. 
    The fire department may have an association and may hold meetings and engage in association social activities. Members of the association may elect a secretary, if they so choose, who shall keep a record of all meetings and shall make a report of all meetings and all activities of the association and report same to the association members and to the corporate authorities upon request. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.4; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 3, 3-27-17) 
Sec. 9-29. - Duties. 
    It shall be the function of the fire department, in accordance with state statute, to prevent fires, to extinguish fires, to enforce all ordinances pertaining to fire safety, to prevent the spread of fire and respond to all medical emergencies. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.5; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 4, 3-27-17) 
Sec. 9-30. - Fire chief generally. 
(a)  The fire chief has the authority to promote staff to, or remove staff from, the rank of deputy chief, assistant chief, captain or lieutenant, in order to carry out the business of the fire department. 
(b)  The fire chief shall have the authority to hire and fire personnel pursuant to approval by the trustee of public safety; assign personnel, equipment and operations; direct activities and provide for establishing the command at fire or ambulance scenes; supervise the preparation and expenditures of the department budget; oversee maintenance and repair of buildings, equipment and apparatus; and, within the guidelines of any village discipline code, policy and fire department rules, shall be the sole fire department executive officer over all fire department personnel in final decisions of discipline, suspension and dismissal. 
(c)  The fire chief shall establish and maintain qualifications and job descriptions for all fire department members, rank and assignments. 
(Code 1965, §§ 1.15.1, 1.15.2, 1.17.2; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 3, 1-2-08; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 5, 3-27-17; Ord. No. 2018-22, § 3, 11-12-18) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees generally, § 2-186 et seq. 
Sec. 9-30.5. - Deputy chief generally. 
    The deputy chief shall be appointed by the fire chief and shall perform all duties as assigned by the fire chief and shall assume command and all other duties in the absence of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, § 4, 1-2-08; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 6, 3-27-17; Ord. No. 2018-22, § 4, 11-12-18) 
Sec. 9-30.6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 7 of Ord. No. 2017-09, adopted Mar. 27, 2017, deleted § 9-30.6, which pertained to assistant chief generally, and derived from Ord. No. 2008-01, adopted Jan. 2, 2008. 
Sec. 9-30.7. - Assistant chief generally. 
    The assistant fire chief shall be third in line of command succession of the fire department and shall assist the fire chief and deputy chief in the operations division activities of the fire department and such other duties as dictated by the fire chief or deputy chief. 
(Ord. No. 2018-22, § 5, 11-12-18) 
Sec. 9-31. - Command at fires. 
    In case of fire, the fire chief and his assistants in their order shall rank in the order named and the officer of highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner possible. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.3; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 9-32. - Destruction, etc., of buildings. 
    When it may be necessary for the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in command of the fire department may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.3; Ord. No. 2001-51, § 2, 12-10-01) 
Sec. 9-33. - Obedience of orders of superiors. 
    Any firemen in attendance at a fire who shall neglect or refuse to obey the orders of the officer in command at such fire, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.6) 
Sec. 9-34. - Ambulance service; scene treatment. 
(a)  The sum as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 9-34 shall be charged for each ambulance call answered by the fire department providing service, including either scene treatment or transport, within the village limits to a village resident and another sum as listed in such article shall be charged for each scene treatment or transport call answered by the fire department for a nonresident of the village. Ambulance service shall be provided to the nearest hospital capable of rendering appropriate emergency assistance; the fire department shall maintain a listing of hospital destinations. In those instances where hospital transport is not provided, however medical treatment is provided at the scene, the sum for scene treatment shall be charged accordingly at either the resident or nonresident rate. For the purposes of this section 'medical treatment' shall include application of any devices or substance to a patient, including, but not limited to, ointment; sterile water; medications provided by the subject person, family member or friend which is prescribed for the subject person; gauze; bandages; dressings; cold/hot packs; disinfectant; sting relief; diabetic sugar level test; diabetic glucose (or glucose in any form provided by family or friend.) The village shall provide the person receiving ambulance service or scene treatment with a statement of service (such statement shall include a written explanation of insurance, Medicare and public aid benefits applicable to the service.) The statement shall be on village stationary and shall be issued over the signature of the village clerk. It shall be substantially in the form appended to Ordinance No. 84-2. 
(b)  The terms and provisions of any mutual aid agreement entered into by the village with any other municipality shall supersede the provisions of subsection (a). 
(c)  The fees for ambulance service or scene treatment as set forth in this section shall be considered a debt due and owing from the user or their estate to the village as of the date upon which the service or treatment is rendered and may be collected by the village by any legal remedy available. 
(Ord. No. 84-2, § 1(1.17.12, 1.17.13), 2-13-84; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 2, 6-11-18) 
Sec. 9-35. - Enforcement of article. 
    It shall be the duty of all officers of the fire department and all police officers of the village to enforce this article and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of the provisions of this article, and to that end all firemen are hereby vested with the usual powers and authority of police officers. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.8) 
Sec. 9-36. - Resisting enforcement. 
    No person shall hinder, resist or refuse to obey any fireman or policemen who is engaged in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.8) 
Sec. 9-37. - Assistance from spectators at fires. 
    Every male person above the age of 18 years who shall be present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command at such fire and shall render all the assistance in his power, and in such manner as he may be directed in the extinguishment of the fire, and in the removal of and protection of property, and any person refusing to obey such orders, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense; provided, however, that no person shall be bound to obey any such officer, unless such officer's official character shall be known or made known to such person. Any fire marshal or any assistant or other person in command of the fire company may require any person above the age of 18 years to assist in hauling or conveying any fire apparatus to the place of the fire, and any such person who shall refuse to render such assistance when it is within his power to do so, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.7) 
Sec. 9-38. - Entering fire house. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the fire department house at any time except on business pertaining to the fire department or the fire apparatus or other village business. 
(Code 1965, § 1.17.10) 
Sec. 9-39. - Fire department responses; specialized rescue team. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, the following persons shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs of a specialized rescue team as set forth in this section: 
(1)  The owner of the property on which the specialized emergency response occurs; 
(2)  Any person involved in any activity which caused or contributed to the causation of the emergency; 
(3)  In cases involving the rescue or recovery of an individual, the individual and his/her employer if the person was in the village in furtherance of the employer's interest; and 
(4)  In cases involving the rescue or recovery of property, the owner of the property and anyone who has custody or control of the property at the time of the emergency. 
(b)  The charges for an emergency response of a specialized rescue team are as follows for the purpose of structural collapse, tactical rescue, high angle rescue, confined space rescue, below grade rescue, and/or trench rescue or any other nonwater rescue: 
(1)  Basic charge for team response: $1,000.00. 
(2)  Additional charges: 
a.  $125.00 per hour per vehicle; 
b.  $35.00 per hour per team member; and 
c.  Cost of all materials or equipment expended or consumed in providing the response and rescue activity. 
(c)  The charges for an emergency response of a specialized rescue team for underwater rescue/recovery or any other water rescue are as follows: 
(1)  Basic charge for team response: $500.00. 
(2)  Additional charges: 
a.  $125.00 per hour per vehicle; 
b.  $35.00 per hour per team member; and 
c.  Cost of all materials or equipment expended or consumed in providing the response and rescue recovery activity. 
(d)  In addition to charges for a specialized rescue team response, if a person or entity within the village requests that, pursuant to occupational safety and health laws, the village or any intergovernmental agency to which the village belongs be listed as the rescue service or as the backup rescue service on the permit of a permit-required confined space activity, the charge for such service shall be $1,000.00 per day. If a person or entity lists the village as the rescue service or the backup rescue service without notifying the village, in writing, in advance of entry into any permit-required space, the person or entity shall be charged $1,500.00 per day for each day the permit is outstanding. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the assessment of fees or other charges pursuant to any other village ordinance or resolution including, but not limited to, hazard material response and ambulance fees. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of any portion of this section shall not affect the validity of the remainder. 
(g)  Any person or entity that refused to pay or fails to pay the above-listed charges within 60 days of notice of the charge will be deemed to have violated this section and will incur a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00 for each offense, plus all legal fees and all costs caused by enforcement. Such fees and costs shall include, but not be limited to, attorney's fees and the cost of collection. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on which a violation occurs and continues. 
(h)  The board of trustees may waive or reduce the fees levied under this section in cases where the services provided were needed based on the particular facts of an accident, act of God, or unavoidable misfortune. It is the intent of the board of trustees that the fees charged under this section be reserved for situations where the services provided were required due to willful or wanton misconduct, criminal acts, negligence or nonaction of some person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, §§ 1-9, 1-28-08) 
Sec. 9-40. - Assistance to other agency. 
(a)  The members of the fire department are not authorized to go beyond the corporate limits of the municipality for the purpose of rendering aid to other fire departments, or of extinguishing fires or rendering ambulance service; however, the fire department shall render such service outside the corporate limits when the corporate authorities have agreed to provide such services by an existing written contract, or by a mutual aid agreement contract, or by a mutual aid agreement with another municipality or other government entity to render service to property located beyond the corporate limits of the municipality or on order of the chief of the fire department, or his/her representative or the village president or the trustee responsible for public safety. 
(b)  The fire department may also respond to areas outside the municipality for providing emergency ambulance and other fire emergency services to individuals not within the corporate limits of the municipality as may be determined and approved by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2008-01, § 6, 1-2-08) 
Secs. 9-41-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Scenery in theaters to be fireproofed, § 12-114; public gatherings, § 13-15. 

Sec. 9-51. - Responsibility for compliance. 
    The owner, agent, occupant or person charged with the custody of any public building, auditorium, hotel, theater, lodge hall, or church and in the case of schools, the president of the board of education, or the person in charge thereof and owning the same, shall be held liable for violations of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 10.5.1) 
Sec. 9-52. - Inspections enforcement. 
    The fire marshal and or his assistants are hereby authorized to inspect all equipment required by this article and to make or cause to be made periodic inspections concerning the operation and accessibility of exits in public places. 
(Code 1965, § 10.5.2) 
Sec. 9-53. - Fire extinguishers, fire axes, etc. 
(a)  The location and number of fire appliances shall be as follows, unless other locations shall be more accessible and convenient for the protection against fire: 
(1)  In theaters: 
a.  On stage, two one-quart chemical hand fire extinguishers, with one on each side of the stage, and one two and one-half-gallon chemical hand fire extinguisher. 
b.  In the foyer, two one-quart hand fire extinguishers, one at each end. 
c.  In the manager's office, one two-gallon chemical hand fire extinguisher or five-gallon hand pump. 
(2)  In public buildings, auditoriums, lodge halls and hotels, one five-gallon pump and a fire axe at or near the main entrance on the ground floor; a five-gallon hand pump at or near the foot of all basement stairways; two pails in the boiler room unless the boiler is an oil burner, and if it is, a two and one-half-gallon special chemical hand fire extinguisher just outside boiler room door; one one-quart chemical hand fire extinguisher on the stage and one one-quart chemical hand fire extinguisher in the lobby. 
(3)  In churches, one five-gallon pump at or near main entrance on ground floor, and one five-gallon hand pump and fire axe in boiler room. 
(4)  In schools, one five-gallon hand pump and fire axe at or near main entrance on ground floor, at head of each stairway, and in boiler room. 
Details of all installation shall be submitted to and approved by the fire chief prior to installation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to remove from its proper place any equipment required by subsection (a) except for inspections or an emergency. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10.5.3, 10.5.5) 
Sec. 9-54. - Fire drills. 
    It shall be the duty of the principal or other person in charge of pupils in every school in the village to establish and maintain a good and efficient fire drill which shall be practiced at least once a month during the time the building is used for school purposes. A written report shall be made by the principal or person in charge of such building on each fire drill held, and of the time elapsed from the first fire signal until the last person has left the building. 
(Code 1965, § 10.5.4) 
Sec. 9-55. - Doors. 
(a)  All public buildings which may be or are used for church, school, opera performance, theater, lecture room, hotel, public meeting or similar purposes, or which may be or are used for the collection of people for worship, amusement or instruction, shall be so built that all doors which lead from the main hall or place of assembly shall open outward. All means of egress for persons within such buildings shall be by means of doors which shall open outward from the main hall and from the building. 
(b)  All doors of schools and educational institutions shall remain unlocked during school hours. 
(Code 1965, § 10.5.6) 
State Law reference- Doors and means of egress in public buildings, 425 ILCS 55/1 et seq. 
Sec. 9-56. - Exit lights. 
    In all theaters and public meeting halls a red light illuminating the word "EXIT" shall be kept burning over each regular and emergency exit while the theater or hall is occupied by an audience or by patrons. 
(Code 1965, § 10.5.7) 
Secs. 9-57-9-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Automobile service stations generally, § 12-221 et seq.; self service gasoline stations, § 12-751 et seq. 
State Law reference- State regulation of volatile combustibles, 430 ILCS 20/1. 

Sec. 9-71. - Compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store, handle or offer for sale any inflammable or volatile liquids in violation of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.1) 
Sec. 9-72. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire chief and of the building inspector with the cooperation of the police department to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.2) 
Sec. 9-73. - Classification. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, flammable liquids are divided into three classes, according to flash point, as follows: 
(1)  Class I, liquids with a flash point at or below 25 degrees Fahrenheit (-4 degrees Centigrade); 
(2)  Class II, liquids with a flash point above that for Class I and at or below 70 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Centigrade); 
(3)  Class III, liquids with a flash point above that for Class II and at or below 200 degrees Fahrenheit (93- 1/3 degrees Centigrade). 
(b)  The flash point shall be determined with the Elliot, Abel, Abel Pensky or the Tag closed cup testers, but the Tag closed cap tester (standardized by the United States Bureau of Standards) shall be authoritative in case of disputes. All tests shall be made in accordance with the methods adopted by the American Society for Testing Materials. 
(c)  Representative examples of the classes of flammable liquids are: 
(1)  Class I: 
Ether; 
Carbon bi-sulphide; 
Gasoline; 
Naphtha; 
Benzol; 
Acetone; 
Collodion. 
(2)  Class II: 
Alcohol; 
Amyl acetate; 
Toluol; 
Ethyl acetate; 
Methyl acetate; 
Methyl alcohol. 
(3)  Class III: 
Kerosene; 
Amyl alcohol; 
Turpentine; 
Fuel oil. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.3) 
Sec. 9-74. - Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct, install or enlarge any tank, pump or piping equipment for the storage or handling of flammable or volatile liquids such as defined in this article without first having obtained a permit therefor. Application for such permits shall be made to the village clerk and shall be accompanied by a drawing to scale showing the location as well as plans showing the type and nature of installation or alteration. This subsection (a) shall apply to all premises, whether or not it is a service station operation. 
(b)  No such permit shall be issued until the building inspector has certified that the contemplated work fully complies with the ordinances of the village. 
(c)  The fee to be paid to the village for such a permit shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference of section 9-74. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.4A.49-2.2.4A.51; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 9-75. - Property maintenance. 
(a)  Property shall be kept free from weeds, high grass, rubbish and litter, and shall be kept neat, clean and orderly throughout. 
(b)  Open lights or flames shall not be permitted on the property. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.45) 
Sec. 9-76. - Storage in buildings generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to sell, or offer for sale, any flammable or volatile liquids as defined in this article in an amount in excess of one gallon in any building of frame construction, or any building other than a building of fireproof construction as defined in ordinances of the village; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the storage of such liquids in the fuel tanks of automobiles or in tanks for heating systems installed in compliance with the provisions of all ordinances. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.31) 
Sec. 9-77. - Fire extinguishers, etc. 
    Approved chemical fire extinguishers, foam generators or other smothering agents for extinguishing oil fires shall be provided. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.46) 
Sec. 9-78. - Small storage limited. 
    Storage of classes I, II and III flammable liquids shall be in accordance with the rules governing general storage and service stations except: 
(1)  No more than five gallons of crude petroleum, benzine, benzol, gasoline, naphtha, and their compounds may be kept on hand if stored in a proper safety container, remote from flame or open fire. Such storage must not be in any cellar, basement or pit and should be in a room with direct ventilation to the outside and preferably in an outbuilding or garage. 
(2)  Ten gallons of kerosene may be stored above ground in a proper safety can and 60 gallons may be stored for the retail trade within a building, provided storage is in an approved tank. Tank shall set in a metal pan extending at least eight inches beyond outside of tank at sides and rear and 18 inches in front. Tank should be located on the first floor where the influx of natural light is sufficient to light the room and reasonable ventilation must be provided. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.4) 
Sec. 9-79. - Red gasoline containers. 
    All receptacles used for the keeping or storing of gasoline, naphtha, benzine or benzol shall be painted red and no liquids other than gasoline, naphtha, benzine or benzol shall be placed in such containers. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 430 ILCS 20/1. 
Sec. 9-80. - Empty drums. 
    Drums or barrels in which liquids of classes I, II and III have been stored shall have taps, plugs or bungs replaced immediately after package has been emptied and shall be promptly removed from the premises. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.6) 
Sec. 9-81. - Use within buildings restricted. 
    The mixing, storing or handling of classes I and II liquids in open containers is prohibited in any building, except in the compounding of medicines and prescriptions in drug stores. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.7) 
Sec. 9-82. - Pouring into sewers prohibited. 
    No classes I, II and III liquids or solutions containing such liquids shall be poured into any sewer or drain which connects with a sewer system. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.8) 
Sec. 9-83. - Storage in public buildings. 
    No class I or II liquids shall be kept or stored in any school, public hall or place of assembly, or in any public building, except for demonstration purposes or for industrial or mechanical uses, and then only under competent supervision. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.9) 
Sec. 9-84. - Use for starting fires. 
    Flammable liquids shall not be used to start or kindle fires. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.10) 
Sec. 9-85. - Isolation from fires. 
    Flammable liquids shall be kept away from fire or open flame; fire or open flame shall be kept away from flammable liquids. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.11) 
Sec. 9-86. - Storage of Class I liquids in buildings. 
(a)  Barrels and drums used for class I liquids, whether full or empty, shall be stored in the open or on open platform in plant yard. Platform may have roofs, but all sides shall be open. 
(b)  No open light shall be permitted in such storage yard. 
(c)  Caps, bungs and plugs shall be closed tightly immediately after container is emptied. 
(d)  Gasoline and naphtha shall be handled only in barrels or drums painted red and properly labeled and no other liquids shall be handled in such barrels or drums. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.47) 
Sec. 9-87. - Tanks-Location restrictions. 
(a)  No storage tank for any flammable liquid shall be within 300 feet of any school, church, hospital or public hall. The distance shall be measured from the near edges of the tank in all directions to near point of buildings. As used in this section a "public hall" is any place which is used at any time for public meetings or the assembly of people for amusement, instruction or religious worship. 
(b)  The minimum distance from individual tanks to line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be as follows: 
Tank capacity
(gallons)Minimum distance 
(feet) 3,000 or less ..... 20 21,000 or less ..... 25 31,000 or less ..... 30 45,000 or less ..... 40 64,000 or less ..... 50 80,000 or less ..... 60 128,000 or less ..... 75 200,000 or less ..... 85 266,000 or less ..... 100 400,000 or less ..... 150 666,000 or less ..... 250 1,333,000 or less ..... 300 2,666,000 or less ..... 350  
In case of tanks for the storage of crude petroleum, the foregoing minimum distances shall be doubled. These distances shall apply also to other buildings on the property except those necessarily connected with the installation (such as oil warehouses, pumphouses and garages). The location of tanks with reference to railroad tracks over which passenger trains are moved shall conform to the Regulations of the Bureau of Explosives of the Association of American Railroads (formerly American Railroad Association), 30 Versey Street, New York City. When general oil storage is maintained in connection with a filling station, the distance from general storage tanks to filling station building, tanks and equipment shall be the same as that required to property lines. 
(c)  The minimum distance from tanks to adjacent tanks shall be as follows: 
Tank capacity
(gallons)Minimum distance 
(feet) 300 or less ..... 3 500 or less ..... 3 1,000 or less ..... 3 8,000 or less ..... 3 12,000 or less ..... 3 18,000 or less ..... 3 24,000 or less ..... 5 30,000 or less ..... 10  48,000 or less ..... 10  75,000 or less ..... 13  100,000 or less ..... 15  100,000 to 2,500,000 ..... One tank diameter  
If the tanks are of different capacity, the capacity of the larger tank shall govern the distance to adjacent tanks. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.4A.12-2.2.4A.14) 
Sec. 9-88. - Same-Construction specifications, vents, etc. 
    All tanks used for the storage of flammable liquids shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Tanks shall be covered with asphaltum or other non-rusting coating or paint. 
(2)  All pipe connections shall be made through flanges or reinforcement securely riveted, welded or bolted to the tank and shall be tight. 
(3)  All openings shall be made liquid and vapor tight, except breather vents. Gaskets used shall be such as not affected by heat or the contents of the tank. 
(4)  Covers for manholes, handholes, and gauge holes shall be made tight fitting and normally kept in place. 
(5)  Each tank over 100 gallons in capacity shall have vent openings, except safety valves, provided with approved non-corrodible flame arresters, so attached as to completely cover the openings. Vent openings shall be in no case less than one-fourth inch in diameter, and where a power pump is used in filling tanks and tight connection is made to fill pipe, vent shall not be smaller than fill pipe. 
(6)  Additional vent openings or safety valves adequate to relieve any excessive pressure due to external heat shall be provided, of a type which shall be self-closing when pressure is relieved. The total area of vents shall not be less than 24 square inches for tanks of 21,000) gallons capacity or less and not less than 18 square inches for tanks of more than 21,000) gallons capacity. 
(7)  Tanks more than one foot above the ground shall have a firm foundation and supports of non-combustible materials, bases of which shall rest below the frost line. Unprotected steel as a support for tanks shall not be permitted. No combustible materials shall be permitted under or within ten feet of any storage tanks. 
(8)  All tanks shall be electrically grounded and effectively to prevent moisture. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.19) 
Sec. 9-89. - Same-Dikes. 
(a)  Embankments or dikes are required: 
(1)  For each tank containing crude oil or other liquid which has a tendency to boil over; 
(2)  For each individual tank exceeding 50,000 gallons (1,200 barrels) in capacity; 
(3)  For individual tanks of less than 50,000 gallons or groups of tanks with an individual tank capacity of less than 50,000 gallons, when installed on the bank of a stream or other body of water, or on land permitting of rapid drainage thereto. 
(b)  Dikes shall have a capacity of not less than the capacity of the tank or group of tanks surrounded. Dikes surrounding tanks containing crude oil or other liquid which has a tendency to boil over shall have a capacity of not less than 125 percent of the capacity of the tank or group of tanks surrounded or shall have a suitable coping or deflector projecting inward, properly constructed to minimize the effect of a "boilover" wave. 
(c)  Dikes shall be constructed of earth, clay, masonry or reinforced concrete not higher than one-half the height of the tank or tanks enclosed, so constructed as to afford adequate protection. Earthwork embankments shall be firmly and compactly built of good earth or clay, free from stones, vegetable matter and other foreign material. They shall have a flat section at the top of not less than two and one-half feet wide and a slope of at least 1 to 1 (45 degrees) on both sides. Masonry or concrete dikes shall have footing below the frost line. If a concrete floor covering is provided for the area enclosed by a concrete dike, a sump shall be provided at some convenient place, attached to which shall be a pump of approved design, so that any accumulation of water or oil may be removed immediately. 
(d)  Embankments or dikes shall be continuous, with no openings for piping or roadway. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.4A.27-2.2.4A.30) 
Sec. 9-90. - Piping. 
    All piping used in connection with flammable liquids shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All piping shall be standard full weight wrought iron or steel for working pressures less than 100 pounds; for working pressures in excess of 100 pounds extra heavy pipe and fitting shall be used. No pipe less than one-half inch internal diameter will be permitted. 
(2)  Piping shall be run as directly as possible and proper allowance made for expansion and contraction. 
(3)  Pipes shall not be surrounded or covered by cinders or other materials of corrosive effect, but preferably should be laid in sand, and where carried in conduit, the openings of such conduit must be fully protected to prevent escape of liquid under dangerous conditions. Pipelines buried on railroad property shall be laid at a depth of not less than three feet; where they pass under tracks they shall be laid at least four feet below the bottom of the ties. Piping buried in village streets or other areas where other pipe lines are carried shall be placed in conduit. Joints of conduit shall be sealed to prevent leakage and pitch shall be toward tank yard. Underground piping shall be coated with asphaltum or corrosion resisting material. 
(4)  Joints may be welded or of the ordinary screw type; if the screw type they shall be made with litharge and glycerin, lamp black or shellac. 
(5)  Piping after installation shall be tested at a pressure of 50 percent in excess of the working pressure and shall be proven tight. Test shall continue 30 minutes. 
(6)  Each pipe attached to a tank shall be provided with a valve at the tank, with no branches or outlets between the tank and the valve. In case two or more tanks are cross-connected, there shall be a valve at each tank in each cross-connection. Tanks with different classes of liquids shall not be cross-connected. 
(7)  In addition to normal valves, there shall be an extra valve at each pipeline, installed on the inside of the tank and operated by an effective heat releasing device, which shall automatically prevent the flow of liquid from the tank in case of fire, even if pipelines are broken from the tank. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.4A.20-2.2.4A.26) 
Sec. 9-91. - Pumphouses. 
(a)  Motors and pumps shall be located in a separate, noncombustible building, not less than ten feet from tanks, warehouses, garage, or property lines. 
(b)  Motors shall be of the polyphase, non-sparking or explosion-proof type, and shall be grounded to permanently moist earth. 
(c)  If a pumphouse is electrically lighted, lights shall be of the vapor-proof type, wiring shall be in a sealed conduit, and the light switch shall be of the explosion-proof type, or shall be placed outside the building. 
(d)  Motor starting switches shall be of the explosion-proof type or oil bath type. 
(e)  Screened openings of not less than 64 square inches shall be constructed in opposite corners at floor line to provide proper ventilation. 
(f)  All doors of pumphouses shall open outward. Doors shall be left open at all times when pumps are in operation. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.32) 
Sec. 9-92. - Fencing. 
    The area which embraces the tank gear, including dike and all aboveground piping and pipe lines, shall be properly fenced with a metal fence. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.44) 
Sec. 9-93. - Warehouses. 
(a)  Warehouses in which flammable liquids are located shall be constructed so that refuse cannot accumulate under the floor. 
(b)  The storage of class I liquids shall not be permitted in any building. The storage of class II liquids shall not be permitted except in original sealed containers and no transfer of such liquids in such containers to other circumstances shall ever be made inside the warehouse. 
(c)  All warehouses shall be kept clean, neat and orderly, and free from accumulation of grease and oil spillage. 
(d)  The National Electrical Code shall govern the electrical installations. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.33) 
Sec. 9-94. - Garages. 
(a)  Floors of garage in which flammable liquids are located shall be of concrete or other noncombustible material, laid directly on the ground or on a well tamped and puddled fill. 
(b)  Adequate ventilation shall be provided to carry off any inflammable gases which may accumulate. 
(c)  No connection to any house drainage or to any sewer system shall be made from any garage waste basin, sink, floor drain or waste, unless an adequate grease trap is provided ahead of such connection. This subsection does not apply to lavatories, toilets, or wash basins, used exclusively for toilet or personal use, nor does it apply to downspouts carrying surface water from the roof. 
(d)  The National Electrical Code shall govern all electrical installations. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.34) 
Sec. 9-95. - Loading docks. 
(a)  Truck loading docks and platforms shall be located not less than ten feet from storage tanks, plant buildings and property lines. 
(b)  All electric lights at loading or unloading docks shall be of vaporproof construction. Electric wiring shall be in sealed conduit at docks and switches shall be of the explosion-proof type or placed at some point remote from the docks. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.4A.35, 2.2.4A.36) 
Sec. 9-96. - Pumps and pipelines. 
(a)  Gasoline and naphtha shall not be handled through the same pump and pile lines as kerosene and fuel oils. 
(b)  Pipelines shall have a definite color scheme for painting to indicate the product which is being carried by the respective lines. The color red shall be for gasoline and naphtha. Valves on lines in pumphouse shall be tagged to denote the product handled and controlled by each valve. 
(c)  Pumps delivering to or taking supply from tanks or tank car shall be provided with valves on both suction and discharge pump. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.37) 
Sec. 9-97. - Grounding of tank cars. 
(a)  Before unloading operations are started and before any connection or contact is made with piping or other loading equipment, the tank car shall be electrically grounded in an effective manner. Permanent electrical connection of not less than number 0 copper cable shall be made between the rails on which tank cars stand and the piping system of the storage plant. 
(b)  The connection may be accomplished in one of the following ways: 
(1)  The rails may be bonded by means of standard rail bonds and connected to the permanent piping system with number 0 electric cable connections at each end of the loading or unloading section; or 
(2)  A similar connection may be made between each rail on which cars stand and the permanent piping system. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.38) 
Sec. 9-98. - Permissible methods of unloading tank cars. 
(a)  The withdrawal of flammable liquids from tank cars through bottom outlets shall not be permitted. Tank cars shall be unloaded through dome (manhole) only. Pumps required to accomplish this shall be adequate type and securely installed. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), fuel oils may be unloaded by gravity. 
(c)  The use of compressed air to discharge contents of tank cars is prohibited, but this shall not be construed to prevent the use of a standard system employing an inert gas, such as carbon dioxide or nitrogen, as pressure generating medium for this purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.39) 
Sec. 9-99. - Unloading to portable containers. 
    Unloading flammable liquids from tank cars to tank trucks or to any portable containers shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.40) 
Sec. 9-100. - Dome covers for tank cars. 
    After unloading, pipe shall be inserted into dome of tank car and before any pumping is done, and the dome shall be tightly covered with wet burlap or some other type of equally effective cover. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.41) 
Sec. 9-101. - Other restrictions on tank cars. 
(a)  All connections between tank cars and pipe lines shall be in good condition and shall not permit leakage. 
(b)  Tank cars shall not be left connected to pipe lines except when loading or unloading is going on, and during all such times a competent man shall be present and in charge. 
(c)  The presence of flame lanterns, flame switch lights or other exposed flame lights or fires during the process of loading or unloading is prohibited. 
(d)  Siding use in connection with tank car unloading operations shall not be common to other users, or they shall be provided with necessary derails or with warning signs in accordance with section 4, paragraph 697(b) of the Interstate Commerce Commission regulations on the transportation of explosives. 
(e)  The unloading of tank cars and all operations in connection therewith shall be in full accord with the rules and regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.42) 
Sec. 9-102. - Tank trucks and wagons generally. 
(a)  Tanks, tank trucks, and wagons shall be constructed with double bulkheads. 
(b)  Each compartment or tank shall be numbered and the same number shall appear on pipeline at rear of truck or wagon connected with that compartment. 
(c)  A serviceable metal tag shall be fastened securely to each faucet, designating the contents of the compartment it controls by lettering not less than one-fourth inch high. Tags shall be painted according to the same color scheme as the pipe line, red always indicating gasoline or naphtha. 
(d)  Faucets shall be of the self-closing type. 
(e)  Heavy bumpers shall be provided across the rear, adequate to protect all faucets in case of a rear end collision. 
(f)  Tanks, chassis, axles and springs shall be attached and shall be long enough to reach the ground at all times. 
(g)  If buckets are used to deliver gasoline or naphtha, they shall be painted red and properly labeled. They shall be used for delivering gasoline and naphtha only and gasoline and naphtha shall not be delivered in any other buckets. 
(h)  No retail deliveries from tank trucks or tank wagons shall be permitted in any street or alley in the village, nor on any highway outside the village. 
(i)  Each tank truck or tank wagon shall carry an approved fire extinguisher suitable for extinguishing gasoline and oil fires, such as carbon tetrachloride, carbon dioxide, foam or powder. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.48) 
Sec. 9-103. - Grounding of tank trucks. 
    Before loading operations begin, tank trucks shall be electrically bonded to pipe line by means of a bonding device at loading dock. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4A.43) 
Sec. 9-104. - Hazardous materials handling. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "hazardous materials" is defined as a chemical, liquid or solid substance which are physical hazards or health hazards as defined in the International Fire Code (see chapter 9), whether the materials are in usable or waste condition. 
(b)  All businesses involved in the storage, transfer, sale, purchase or movement of hazardous materials shall establish and maintain written procedures to follow in the event of a spill. All personnel shall be trained in these procedures and the procedures shall be readily accessible in case of a spill. 
(c)  Upon observation of a hazardous material spill, all activity not related to the mitigation of the spill within the area affected or which could be affected shall cease until the spill has been removed or the hazard has been mitigated. 
(d)  Vehicular movement though the spill area shall not be permitted until the spilled material has been removed or the hazard has been mitigated. 
(e)  The fire department shall be notified of any hazardous materials spill which is considered a hazard to person(s) or property or which meet one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any dimension of the spill is greater than ten feet. 
(2)  The spill area is greater than 50 square feet. 
(3)  The flow is continuous in nature. 
(f)  Self-closing metal can(s) or other container(s) approved by the fire chief shall be maintained on the premises to temporarily store spilled material or debris resulting from mitigation and clean-up procedures. Said items shall be properly disposed of as soon as prudent by a certified disposal business for hazardous materials. 
(g)  All time and costs expended by fire department personnel in mitigating a hazardous material response shall be charged to the responsible party or the property owner upon which the spill originated and shall be a lien against the property until paid. The delineation of equipment and personnel costs to be applied to such responses shall be adopted by the corporate authorities and maintained by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2005-35, § 2, 9-12-05) 
Secs. 9-105-9-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of liquefied petroleum gases, 430 ILCS 5/3. 

Sec. 9-121. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect section 2.2.27 of the Revised Municipal Code of the Village of Crete of 1965 and such section hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 9-122. - Compliance with state laws. 
    This article shall not relieve any person from the duty of obtaining any permits relating to the storage and dispensing of liquefied petroleum gases. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4B.9; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
State Law reference- State regulation of liquefied petroleum gases, 430 ILCS 5/0.01-5/4. 
Sec. 9-123. - Adoption of 2003 International Fire Code. 
(a)  The village hereby adopts by reference the 2003 International Fire Code (First Printing: December 2002) including Appendices B, D, E, F and G and excluding Section 105 Permits as the village fire prevention code subject to additions, deletions and amendments in this chapter. 
(b)  The village clerk shall keep at least three copies of the 2003 International Fire Code (First Printing: December 2002) on file in the village hall and available for public use. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.4B.1, 2.2.4B.2, 2.2.4B.4; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83; Ord. No. 2003-55, § 2, 12-8-03) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 9-124. - Signs on containers. 
    All containers for liquefied petroleum gas shall be conspicuously posted with signs made of weather rigid material. The signs shall be visible on all sides of the container and shall display in white letters on a red background, the following warnings: 
(1)  Warning 
(2)  Stop engine 
(3)  No smoking 
(4)  No open flame 
(5)  Extinguish pilot light on cooking or heating unit 
The warnings contained in paragraphs (1) through (4) shall be printed in capital letters which shall be four inches high and not less than five-eighths-inch wide; the warning contained in paragraph (5) shall be printed in capital letters two inches high and not less than one-quarter-inch wide. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.5B; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
Sec. 9-125. - Placement of storage and dispensing facilities. 
    The location of equipment and facilities designed for the storage and dispensing of liquefied petroleum gas shall be determined and established by the fire chief. The placement of such facilities shall be in areas which do not endanger the residents of the village; the fire chief may, in his discretion, limit the placement of such facilities or equipment to industrial areas. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4B.3; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
Sec. 9-126. - Transfer operations. 
    Transfer of liquefied petroleum gases into containers, which are mounted on vehicles, shall take place only outdoors. It shall be unlawful to store any portable containers containing liquefied petroleum gases and awaiting use or resale. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4B.6; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
Sec. 9-127. - Storage limitations. 
    It shall be unlawful to store on any premises within the village more than 2,000 gallons of liquefied petroleum gases. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4B.7; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
Sec. 9-128. - Site specifications. 
    Any person who shall sell, store or dispense liquefied petroleum gases within the village shall, prior to obtaining any permit so to do, submit a plot drawing, which shall set forth dimensions of any tank or tanks together with the location of the tanks with reference to lot lines; such plot drawing or plans shall indicate the nearest roads, highways, all buildings, sizes of each tank or tanks, number of tanks and all pertinent information relating to installation of any tanks. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4B.8; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
Sec. 9-129. - Fire extinguishers. 
    At least one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 15 B.C. shall be mounted within a distance of 20 feet of the liquefied petroleum gas dispensing unit or point. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4B.10; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
Sec. 9-130. - Guard rails. 
    Steel guard rails shall be installed on all four sides of liquefied petroleum gas dispensing pumps. The rails shall be a minimum of ten feet from the tanks and dispensing units and shall be 30 inches in height. Said guard rails shall include a minimum of two means of emergency access, each such opening not to exceed 48 inches in width. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4B.11; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 6-13-83) 
Secs. 9-131-9-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE SUPPRESSION AND EMERGENCY REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as Ord. No. 87-39, §§ 3-19, adopted Oct. 5, 1987, did not specify manner of codification, such provisions have been designated herein as art. VI, §§ 9-141-9-157, by the editor. See also the editor's footnote to ch. 9 concerning the Fire Prevention Code. 
Cross reference- For additional fire department regulations, see § 9-26 et seq. 

Sec. 9-141. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
    The fire official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not re-enter the area until authorized to do so by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 3, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-142. - Interference with fire department operations. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operations. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 4, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-143. - Compliance with orders. 
    A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire official or to interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 5, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-144. - Vehicles crossing fire hose. 
    A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in command of such operation. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 6, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-145. - Definition of authorized emergency vehicle. 
    Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the laws of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 7, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-146. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
    Upon the approach of any authorized vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire official or a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 8, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-147. - Vehicles following fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 9, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-148. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency equipment. 
    A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell, or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 10, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-149. - Damage, injury of fire department equipment, personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 11, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-150. - Emergency vehicle operation. 
    The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in section 9-145, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to, "move-ups" do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic regulations. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(5)  The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 12, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-151. - Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
(b)  If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstruction or encroachments are not removed, the fire official shall proceed to remove the same. Costs incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the fire official and with the approval of the chief administrative official; and the legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 13, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-152. - Hydrant use approval. 
    A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the fire official and the water company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make use by, the water company having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 14, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-153. - Public water supply. 
    The fire official shall recommend to the chief administrative official of the municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 15, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-154. - Yard systems. 
    All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement or exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and which are located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The fire official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 16, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-155. - Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. 
    A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 17, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-156. - Sale of defective fire extinguisher. 
    A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire official, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the fire official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 18, 10-5-87) 
Sec. 9-157. - Street obstruction. 
    A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the municipality. The word street, as used in this section shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 87-39, § 19, 10-5-87) 
ARTICLE VII. - LOCK BOX EMERGENCY ACCESS SYSTEMS 

Sec. 9-158. - Established. 
    To aid the suppression of fire, a lock box emergency access system(s) ("LBEAS") is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-159. - Requirements. 
    All premises equipped with an automatic fire alarm, or used for the storage of hazardous substances, or housing a business (or businesses) in which hazardous substances are stored, various multiple-family structures and all other premises determined by the fire chief, or his designated representative or agent, as requiring immediate nonforcible entry in the event of an emergency or apparent emergency shall have a lock box emergency access system. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-160. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Lock box means a heavy gauge steel box fitted with a locking device requiring a key, which cannot be duplicated by a locksmith. 
(2)  Fire chief means the chief executive officer of the village's fire department. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-161. - Installation. 
    Each and every lock box system shall be installed on the front access wall of the building gate or main premises entrance at a height of not less than eight feet, nor more than 12 feet from the ground. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-162. - Authorization. 
    The location and intended utilization of any and all "LBEAS" must be approved by the village's fire chief, or his designated representative or agent, before installation or utilization thereof. The owner or occupant of the premises must provide the fire chief with a completed authorization, indemnification and waiver form, in substantially the form of that which is provided as an appendix to Ordinance No. 91-31. Said authorization must be counter-signed by village's fire chief. All forms must be properly executed and delivered to the village's fire chief prior to the issuance (by the fire chief) of the fire department's approval. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that the form referenced in § 9-162 as an appendix to Ord. No. 91-31 is not set out at length in the Code, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 9-163. - Contents of lock box. 
    Each lock box shall contain the following: 
(1)  Keys to locked points of ingress (whether on the interior or exterior of the premises); 
(2)  Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms; 
(3)  Keys to locked electrical rooms; 
(4)  Keys to elevator controls; and 
(5)  Keys to other areas as determined by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-164. - Access to lock box. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises to keep the contents of the lock box and information contained therein up-to-date. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-165. - Administrative rules and regulations. 
    The fire chief of the village fire department is authorized to establish additional policies and procedures in order to implement the use of "LBEAS" (under this article) and provide and promote uniformity in the acquisition, installation and use of lock box systems. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-166. - Exemptions from lock box requirements. 
    Premises satisfying both of the following criteria shall be exempt from the requirements of lock box installation: 
(1)  Premises that remain open for business 24 hours per day, 365 days per year; and 
(2)  The premises have 24-hour security personnel or other authorized personnel available to assist the fire chief and fire department personnel. 
(Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 9-167. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-55, § 3, adopted Dec. 8, 2003, deleted § 9-167, which pertained to the penalty for violation of this article and was derived from Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 1991. 
Secs. 9-168-9-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES VIII, IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 9-191-9-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 9-1001. - Penalties, compromise violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any provision of this chapter and anyone who shall violate any of the terms, provisions, rules and regulations of said fire prevention code shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this Code may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-55, § 4, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 6, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, adopted July 21, 1986, amended ch. 10 in its entirety by enacting provisions designated as art. I, Solid Waste, §§ 10-1-10-8, 10-26-10-37. In order to preserve Code format, such provisions have been codified herein as art. II, §§ 10-11-10-18, 10-26-10-37, and former provisions, §§ 10-1, 10-16-10-20, pertaining to litter and municipal collection and disposal service, as derived from the 1965 Code, §§ 3.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.4, 5.2.6, 5.2.7; Ord. No. 805, §§ 1-4, adopted Sept. 24, 1979; and Ord. No. 84-11, § 1, adopted May 24, 1984, has been deleted. 
Cross reference- Fees and fines, § 2-301, health and sanitation, ch. 11; licensing and regulation of scavengers, § 12-711 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 27. 
State Law reference- Power of village with reference to garbage, 65 ILCS 5/11-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-11. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known as the "Crete Solid Waste Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-12. - Applicability. 
    This division shall constitute a uniform law applicable in all geographical areas of the village. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-13. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth hereinafter: 
    Board shall mean the president and board of trustees of the village. 
    Dead animals shall mean dead animals not intended for use for food purposes. 
    Department of public works shall mean the supervisor of the village's department of public works and any of his authorized representatives. 
    Garbage shall mean waste products of animal or vegetable origin resulting from the growing, processing, marketing and preparation of food items including the containers in which they are packaged. 
    Hazardous waste shall mean materials which are: 
(1)  Toxic or poisonous; 
(2)  Corrosive; 
(3)  Irritating or sensitizing; 
(4)  Radioactive; 
(5)  Explosive; or 
(6)  Flammable and that present a significant hazard to human health or the environment. 
    Manure shall mean body waste of animals and fowl and cleanings from all barns, stables, corrals or pens used for stabling, caging or penning of animals or fowl. 
    Offal shall mean waste matter from butchering, slaughtering and packing operations. 
    Pathological waste shall mean: 
(1)  Equipment, instruments, utensils and fomites (any substance that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms) of a disposable nature from the rooms of patients who are suspected to have or have been diagnosed as having a communicable disease; 
(2)  Laboratory wastes, including pathological specimens (i.e., all tissues, specimens of blood elements, excreta and secretions obtained from patients) and disposable fomites attendant thereto; and 
(3)  Surgical operating room pathologic specimens and disposable fomites attendant thereto and similar disposable materials from outpatient areas, emergency rooms, private medical facilities and veterinary offices. 
    Person shall be construed to include any natural person, individual, public or private corporation, association, joint venture, partnership, municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer, or any other entity, whatsoever, or any combination of such, jointly or severally. 
    Police shall mean the chief of police of the village's department of police along with his deputy or auxiliary police. 
    Service, commercial shall mean the service provided through a commercial franchise to multifamily residences (except in those cases where the board has, by appropriate resolution, specifically approved such service as a residential service) using a bulk container of over one cubic yard, collected by mechanical means rather than manual means, and to business, commercial enterprises of all types licensed to do business in the village. 
    Service, residential shall mean service provided by a franchise to any single-family residence, or to any multifamily residence deemed to be suitable for residential service by board resolution, or to any trailer park where service is rendered individually to mobile home owners. 
    Trash shall mean waste material not of a putrescible nature; included are stumps and logs, car bodies, refrigerators, stoves, tires, building and road materials, tree trimmings, paper boxes and all such similar material. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 87-24, § 1, 6-15-87) 
Sec. 10-14. - Solid waste storage. 
    The following standard requirements are hereby established as a minimum for the sanitary accumulation and storage of solid waste pending collection and/or removal to an approved disposal facility: 
(1)  Garbage: 
a.  Garbage containers for other than bulk accumulation shall be of galvanized metal or plastic and shall be provided with tight-fitting lids, or other suitable approved container. 
b.  Individual garbage containers shall be a maximum 20-gallon capacity. All garbage cans over ten-gallon capacity shall be equipped with hand grips on opposite sides of the container. All cans of ten gallons or less capacity shall be equipped with a bail handle. Both handles and bails shall be adequate to support the weight of a full container without bending or breaking. 
c.  Containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of cracks and holes, leak-proof and rodent-proof. 
d.  Areas where garbage containers are kept shall be maintained in a clean sanitary manner, free of spilled garbage, wastewater and odors. 
e.  Bulk garbage storage units such as dumpsters shall be maintained in a clean, nuisance free manner and shall be cleaned after each emptying or with such frequency as necessary to comply with the intent of this section. 
f.  All garbage shall be prewrapped in leak-proof plastic containers before being placed in any bulk storage container. 
(2)  Hazardous wastes: 
a.  Hazardous waste materials shall not be commingled with other solid waste. 
b.  Hazardous waste shall not be stored, collected, transported or disposed of in the county except as provided in current environmental protection agency regulations. 
c.  Hazardous wastes shall be properly identified and packaged according to the particular material involved. 
d.  No hazardous wastes shall be disposed of in the village. 
(3)  Pathologic wastes: 
a.  Pathologic wastes shall be packaged tightly and in a manner which will minimize the potential for accidental exposure. 
b.  All disposable needles shall have the tips removed or be otherwise broken and shall be properly wrapped prior to being stored for collection. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-15. - Disposal; exceptions. 
(a)  Garbage, offal, dead animals, or trash mixed with garbage, offal or dead animals, or any combination thereof shall be disposed of only at an approved sanitary landfill or other permitted disposal site. Such materials shall not be disposed of by being placed in any natural or artificial body of water. 
(b)  Open burning of garbage, offal, dead animals, trash and manure or trash mixed with garbage, offal, dead animals or manure is hereby prohibited as a violation of this division; provided, however, that, this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit burning of leaves, yard clippings and similar materials as provided under chapter 9 of this Code. 
(c)  It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this division if abandoned or dumped material disposed of in a manner other than outlined in this division can be established as having originated with a particular person and such person has allowed such material to be dumped, discarded, abandoned or disposed of in an area other than an approved disposal site, unless such person has contracted for the disposal of waste material with an approved garbage franchise. 
(d)  All garbage, offal, dead animals and trash shall be removed to an approved sanitary landfill or other permitted disposal site at sufficient frequency to prevent a sanitary nuisance. In no case shall garbage be removed less than once per week. Such removal shall be at the expense of the owner and/or occupant of the premises either by a franchised collection service or by the owner or occupant. 
(e)  All construction materials, including trash, packaging, discarded materials and debris shall be securely and properly contained on the construction site during the construction period so as not to create an unsightly condition and so as not to be scattered over other properties in the area. After completion of construction and not more than 15 days thereafter, all remaining or discarded materials, trash or debris shall be completely cleared from the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-16. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this division shall be enforced as set forth in sections 10-18 and 10-39 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 98-07, § 3, 4-27-98) 
Sec. 10-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former § 10-17, Penalties, derived from Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, adopted July 21, 1986, was repealed by Ord. No. 98-07, § 4, adopted Apr. 27, 1998. See § 10-39. 
Sec. 10-18. - Remedies. 
    In addition to all other remedies available, the board shall have the power and authority to apply for an injunction to enjoin any violation of this division. In the event a court of proper jurisdiction enjoins any violation of this division, the person so enjoined shall be required to pay all costs and attorney's fees, together with reasonable expenses as necessarily incurred and associated with and required as a result of obtaining such an injunction. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Secs. 10-19-10-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE REGULATIONS FOR COLLECTORS 

Sec. 10-26. - Short title. 
    This division shall be referred to as the "Solid Waste Collection Ordinance of the Village of Crete". 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-27. - Intent and purpose. 
    This division is promulgated for the purpose of assuring that the storage, burning, collection, recycling, disposal and transportation of refuse within the geographical boundaries of the village is accomplished in a manner beneficial to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-28. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth hereinafter: 
    Applicant: A firm or individual who desires to obtain a franchise to transport or collect refuse for hire in the village. 
    Board shall mean the president and board of trustees of the village. 
    Commercial franchise: A nonexclusive commercial franchise granted by the board to refuse collector to provide commercial service within the village at large on a free enterprise basis. 
    Commercial service: The service provided by a commercial franchise using bulk containers of over one cubic yard, collected by mechanical means rather than manual means to multifamily residences and to business, commercial enterprises of all types licensed to do business in the village, (except where the village has by resolution approved it as a residential service). 
    Curbside service: A type of residential service rendered by a franchisee, by agreement with a customer, whereby garbage and trash will be placed within ten feet of the curb or road edge within village rights-of-way, and within private property lines along state and federally maintained roads, as safely as possible. 
    Exclusive franchise: A formal authorization by the board to a refuse collector conferring to such refuse collector an exclusive right and obligation to provide residential service within a prescribed geographical area of the village. 
    Franchise agreement or ( agreement): A binding agreement between the board and a franchisee setting forth the terms, duration and other conditions of the franchise. 
    Garbage: All putrescible wastes and all animal or vegetable refuse or residue that shall result from the preparation or care for, or treatment of, foodstuffs, intended to be used as food, or shall have resulted from the preparation or handling of food for human consumption, or any decayed or unsound meat, fish or vegetable matter. 
    Hazardous waste: The waste or a combination of waste and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating, or reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Nonexclusive franchise: A nonexclusive franchise granted by the board to a refuse collector to provide service within the village at large on a free enterprise basis. 
    Premises: Any structure or parcel of land where refuse is created or accumulated, or any parcel on which a structure is located or under construction. 
    Rear door service: A type of residential service rendered by a franchisee, by agreement with a resident, whereby garbage will be picked up from containers placed on side or rear yards, at or near ground level, outside fences, hedges, garages, carports or other such enclosures, or in general, located so as to be easily accessible to the collector, and trash will be picked up as near to the curb or road surface as is safely possible in accordance with the applicable provisions of this division. 
    Refuse: The definition of refuse is presented for the purpose of clarification rather than regulation, and is inclusive and shall include, but not be restricted to, all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, garbage, grass clippings, tree or shrub trimmings, wood, bedding, crockery, rubber tires, construction waste and similar waste materials (except sewage and sludges generated by sources or methods of treatment other than those sludges which have been treated via domestic wastewater treatment facilities, and industrial wastes of a toxic or contaminatory nature); it shall be construed to include trash and garbage as said terms are defined herein. 
    Residential franchise: An exclusive franchise granted by the board to a refuse collector to provide residential service within a set and specified area of the village. 
    Residential service: The service provided by a franchisee to any single-family residence, or to any multifamily residence or commercial use deemed to be suitable for residential service by a village board resolution or to any trailer park where service is rendered on an individual, separate basis. 
    Roll-offs: A type of service referring to the use of refuse containers having space and volume sufficient to contain refuse in excess of 15 cubic yards, whether used for the removal of commercial or residential refuse and/or garbage or in connection with the construction, rehabilitation, revitalization, demolition or cleaning of any new or existing residential, commercial or municipal structure. 
    Specialized container: Any portable, non-absorbent, enclosed container with a close-fitting cover and doors satisfactory to the health department which is used to store refuse in volumes greater than those allowed by a standard container. 
    Standard container: Any commercially made container designed for residential use, made of nonabsorbent material, and provided with a close-fitting cover designed or modified to be unopenable by animals, and provided with side handles. The use of plastic bags by themselves are not considered as being a standard container. Plastic bags must be placed within a standard container. 
    Trash: All refuse not otherwise included in the definition of garbage, including tin cans and glass containers used in the preparation of foodstuffs, grass clippings, fruit other than processed for consumption within the home, and wastes of all kinds incurred from normal maintenance of grounds. 
    Truck: Any truck, trailer, semi-trailer, conveyance or other vehicle used to collect refuse or to haul or transport refuse upon or along a public highway. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 87-17, § 1, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 88-18, § 1, 8-8-88; Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 2008-14, § 2, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 10-29. - General regulations. 
(a)  Accumulation and burning of refuse or garbage prohibited. For reasons of health and sanitation, it shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate upon private property in the village any refuse or garbage except in accordance with the provisions of this division and division 1 of this article, or to burn any refuse on such property. 
(b)  Transportation of garbage, trash and other refuse. All garbage, trash and other refuse hauled by any person over any road in the village shall be securely tied and covered during the hauling thereof so as to prevent leakage, spillage or blowing. No person shall allow garbage, trash or other refuse of any kind whatsoever to spill, blow or drop from any vehicle on any road in the village. 
(c)  Franchise required to collect refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, haul or transport refuse for hire within the village without first being granted by the village a franchise or a commercial franchise. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons hauling household refuse from their own residences, or to farming or agricultural operations, or to municipalities or public agencies, or industrial, commercial and business establishments, or to building contractors or any persons hauling their own refuse generated by themselves, or the one-time, period or occasional use of roll-offs, irrespective of whether said roll-off is used commercially, residentially or in connection with the construction, rehabilitation, revitalization, demolition or cleaning of any new or existing residential, commercial or municipal structure. It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit any person from hauling or disposing of refuse for hire without being franchised as a refuse collector. 
(d)  Business license and permit fee in relation to the use of roll-offs. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, collect, haul or transport garbage and/or refuse for consideration within the village by means of a roll-off without first obtaining a business permit in relation thereto. In this connection, the village hereby authorizes the issuance of appropriate business licenses upon the application of the provisions set forth in chapter 12 of said Crete Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 87-17, §§ 2, 3, 5-4-87) 
Sec. 10-30. - Franchise conditions. 
(a)  Commercial. Commercial franchises may be exclusive or nonexclusive in the discretion of the board; moreover, all such franchises shall be village-wide franchises. Service rates shall be as agreed upon between the franchisee and the customer. Commercial franchises shall be regulated by this division and other applicable village ordinances, by the provisions of the franchise agreement or agreements, the laws of the State of Illinois, and such other rules and regulations as may be set by the board. 
(b)  Residential. Residential franchises shall be exclusive for a prescribed geographical area of the village as set by the board. The board shall have the authority to make minor changes in boundaries in conjunction with affected collectors so as to allow for development changes and more efficient routes. Service rates shall be set or approved by the board or each respective franchise. Residential franchises shall be regulated by this division and other applicable village ordinances, by the provisions of the franchise agreement, the laws of the State of Illinois, and such other rules and regulations as may be set by the board. 
(c)  Issuance to authorized refuse collectors on effective date of this division. Upon adoption of this division, all existing franchises shall be deemed legitimate until the expiration of such franchise. 
(d)  Application. Any person desiring to obtain a franchise to provide residential or commercial garbage collection services or to provide any form of garbage disposal pursuant to this division must submit to the village an application therefor in writing. Such application shall be submitted on a form approved by the board, including, but not limited to, the following data: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. If the application is for a corporation or other legally constituted organization, include names and mailing addresses of all officers, directors and stockholders. 
(2)  A list of all vehicles owned or leased by such firm including vehicle identification number, manufacturer of vehicle, manufacturer of body, type of body, maximum capacity of body, and model of chassis to be used in the operation of the franchise. 
(3)  Location of disposal area proposed to be used by the applicant, and written evidence of the approval of the owner of such disposal facility of the applicant's intent if a county landfill is not used. 
(4)  Number of accounts (classified as residential or commercial) applicant expects to serve. 
(5)  A complete rate schedule which the applicant intends to charge for his services. 
(6)  An application fee, a renewal fee, a franchise transfer fee, and periodic franchise fees shall be set forth by the board, and shall be paid to the office of the village clerk for the residential and commercial franchisees to adequately cover the village's administrative costs for implementing and administering this division. 
(e)  Renewal. A franchise holder shall have the right to apply for a renewal of any such franchise within 90 days prior to the expiration of such franchise; provided that, the franchise holder, in the opinion of the board, has satisfactorily performed the services herein required, and further, that the board considers with renewal to be beneficial to the health and general welfare of the residents of the village. The board shall provide a standard procedure for processing initial and renewal franchise applications, which shall include a review of financial data, operational experiences and the like. No franchisee or licensee shall use a firm name containing the words Village of Crete or Crete, or other words implying village ownership. 
(f)  Duration. Franchisees granted exclusive rights to provide residential service within prescribed geographical limits and commercial franchises will be issued for a period of time determined by the board, not to exceed five years, and renewal may be made upon application by the franchisee and approved by the board in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  Performance bonds. Each franchise agreement shall provide for the franchisee to supply a performance bond, acceptable letter of credit, or a cash deposit (in the event of a cash deposit, such deposit shall be allowed interest). The bond shall be in an amount equal to one full billing cycle of the franchisee, covering accounts that are paid in advance. Billing cycle for those purposes shall be defined as that period which represents 90 days' service. 
(h)  Insurance. Insurance requirements are as follows: 
(1)  The collector shall furnish to the village evidence of insurance coverage for all insurance required under the provisions of this section of this division immediately upon the execution of a permit by the parties. Failure of the collector to maintain such insurance at any time during the term of the permit shall be construed to be a material breach of this division by the collector. 
(2)  The collector shall provide and maintain during the term of the permit such workers' compensation insurance as required by law for all of its employees employed in connection with the performance of the work provided for under his permit. In the case of any work which is sublet, the collector shall require the subcontractor to provide such workers' compensation insurance as required by law for all such subcontractor's employees unless such employees are covered by the policy maintained by the collector. All subcontractors shall have the approval of the board prior to performing any work under the permit. 
(3)  The collector agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the village from any and all liability, claims, damages, losses, expenses, proceedings and causes of action of every kind and nature arising out of or connected with the performance of his duties provided for under this division. The collector further agrees to, at his own expense, defend any and all actions, suits or proceedings which may be brought against the village in connection with the performance of his duties under this division and to satisfy, pay and discharge any and all judgements that may be entered against the village in any such action or proceedings. 
(4)  The collector agrees to provide and maintain at all times during the term of his permit, without cost or expense to the village, policies of insurance generally known as "public liability and automobile policies," insuring the collector against any and all claims, demands or causes of action whatsoever for injuries received or damage to property relating to the performance of the duties of the collector under the terms and provisions of this division. Such policies of insurance shall insure the collector in an amount not less than $500,000.00 to cover any and all claims connected with any accident or occurrence that may arise or be claimed to have arisen against the collector. The collector shall also obtain property damage insurance insuring the collector in an amount not less than $500,000.00 to cover the claims of any person or persons from a single or specific act that results in alleged damage to property. Such insurance policies shall provide that the village shall be entitled to 30 days' written notice of any changes in or cancellations of such policies. A certificate of insurance indicating that the collector has coverage in accordance with the requirements of this division shall be furnished by the collector to the director at the time of application, renewal or transfer. The amount shall be set by the village and included in the agreement. 
(i)  Franchisee to defend village. The franchisee shall appear and defend all actions against the village arising out of the exercise of such franchise or license and shall indemnify and save the village, its officers, employees and agents harmless and free of all claims, demands, action or causes of action of every kind and description arising out of, and in any way connected with the exercise of such franchise. As a condition of the board issuing a franchise, the applicant agrees to the terms of this division and any regulations enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 2008-14, § 2, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 10-31. - Suspension or relinquishment of franchise. 
(a)  General. The board is empowered to deny, suspend or revoke any refuse collection franchise granted hereunder when such franchisee fails to comply with this division or other rules and regulations related thereto. Such action of revocation or suspension by the board may be taken only after 14 days' notice in writing to the franchisee of the violation charged and the failure of the franchisee to remedy the violation within such time. 
(b)  Transfer. The franchisee shall not sell, assign or transfer the franchise, nor any of the rights and privileges granted thereby, without the prior written approval of the board. Any change in management of a franchise must be approved in writing by the board. Disregard of any of the preceding is sufficient for board revocation of the franchise. The franchisee shall file a statement of ownership when renewing a franchise and at such other times as required as being true and correct under the penalty of perjury. 
(c)  Insolvency/bankruptcy. If the franchisee should at any time during the term of his permit become insolvent, or if proceedings in bankruptcy shall be instituted by or against the franchisee, or if the franchisee shall be adjudged bankrupt or insolvent by any court, or if a receiver or trustee in bankruptcy or a receiver of any property of the franchisee shall be appointed in any suit or proceedings brought by or against the franchisee, or if the franchisee shall make an assignment for the benefit of creditors, then and in each and every case, the franchise and the rights and privileges granted thereby shall immediately cease, desist and be forfeited and canceled without notice, suit or other proceedings. 
(d)  Relinquishment. The franchisee may of his own volition relinquish his franchise provided that the board is granted sufficient time, but not less than 60 days, to assure that adequate refuse collection will continue. Upon termination, suspension, revocation or relinquishment of a franchise, the department may direct another franchisee to provide temporary service to the area affected, or may otherwise provide refuse disposal service to such area. 
(e)  Records required. Upon the termination, suspension or revocation of a franchise, the franchisee shall submit to the village upon demand adequate records for the purpose of resuming or continuing service to the franchisee's customers. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-32. - Village responsibilities. 
(a)  Administration. The village shall administer and enforce the provisions of this division, and all other village ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations that address or regard refuse collection. 
(b)  Franchise area map. There shall be maintained in the records of the board a franchise area map depicting the boundaries of all franchise areas authorized by the board. The boundaries therein depicted may be amended by the board from time to time by resolution, and as may be deemed by the board to best serve and promote the health and general welfare of the citizens of the village. Before amending any franchise boundary, the board shall notify the holder of such affected franchise. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed not less than 30 days prior to the adoption of such change. 
(c)  Dispute of boundaries. The director shall set a definite procedure for the review and evaluation of boundary conflicts. 
(d)  Franchise agreement. The board shall enter into a franchise agreement with each duly granted franchisee. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish from time to time by resolution such rules and regulations as are deemed necessary for protection of the health, safety and welfare of the village. 
(f)  Standardized accounting. The board may establish a standardized accounting method for residential service operations. Such method, if once established, shall set forth each item of equipment, depreciation schedules, allowable and unallowable costs, and the like, and shall then serve as the principal accounting tool in the evaluation of respective franchise rates. 
(g)  Rate reviews. The board may, in its discretion, impose a rate review of any franchisee at such time as it is deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-33. - Residential service rates. 
(a)  Generally. Residential service rates shall be set by the board and shall be set forth in the franchise agreement or amendments thereto and shall also be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 10-33. Rates may be uniform for the life of the franchise, or may vary under prescribed conditions, or may be reviewed for adjustment as called for in the agreement. Insofar as is practical and possible the aforesaid rates or fees shall be billed on Village of Crete Water and Sewer Department bill heads. The village collector shall employ other billing procedures where necessary at such collector's discretion. 
(b)  Basis of collection rates. Collection rates shall be based on respective geographical areas and haul distances, actual operational costs, known future costs, the recommendations called forth under subsection 10-32(g) of this division and such other factors and/or formulas as may be prescribed or deemed appropriate by the board. 
(c)  Reviews. Times or frequencies of reviews of collections rates shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Rate change requests. Should events beyond the control of a franchisee occur (prior to a set or prescribed rate review time) that significantly result in a substantial change in operational costs, a franchisee may formally request a rate adjustment. Such request shall be made to the village in the prescribed manner and accompanied with all necessary records, calculations, and a full description of and justification for the rate change request. In the event the board decides such a request warrants formal consideration, a public hearing shall be held prior to any rate change. Each franchisee should have an annual audit prepared by a certified public accountant in accordance with the forms set forth by the village. The cost of the audit shall be borne by the respective franchises, and included in the rate structure. Such records shall constitute the primary base on which rates would be based. Records form and format may be established by an expert accountant paid by the village. Record systems may need to vary somewhat to take into account substantial size differences in franchise operations. In the event a model or analytical tool is developed and adopted for use in rate reviews, prescribed forms and a computer program may be developed for automated processing. Established rates shall reflect real operation costs and rates may be unique to respective franchise areas. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 89-4, § 1, 1-13-89) 
Sec. 10-34. - Franchisee responsibilities. 
(a)  General. Each franchisee shall establish a written contract with the village. The conditions of the contract may include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Base rate. The base rate shall consist of the monthly charges. 
(2)  Items to be collected. The items to be collected for the base rate shall be stated. This shall include any volume, weight, or item restrictions established and approved by the village. 
(3)  Excess charges. If there are extra charges for items over the established limit, special pickups, bulky items, etc., they shall be explained. 
(4)  Frequency of collection. The collection days shall be stated. 
(5)  Holidays. The procedure for holiday collections shall be explained. 
(6)  Billing procedure. The billing method shall be explained. 
(b)  Franchise business practices. Each franchisee shall establish and have approved the following practices: 
(1)  Office location and hours. The office and operating hours of the business office shall be such that it is accessible to the public. 
(2)  Truck parking. The overnight parking of the rolling stock of the company will be at a location that is zoned for such use. 
(3)  Billing procedure. The method and frequency of billing shall be approved by the board. 
(4)  Holidays. The franchisee may, at his discretion, operate during legal holidays. If collections are not made on legal holidays, a procedure shall be established and approved by the village for the holiday schedule. If collection days are to be changed due to holidays, announcements explaining the holiday schedule shall be sent to the customer with the preceding bill or at the time a customer is given first service. 
(5)  Service refused and reinstatement of service. At the discretion of the village or franchisee, service may be refused if the owner or operator of a premises violates this division (i.e., is delinquent on the account, allows others to share the service, has overweight or oversized containers, etc.). Once the violation has been corrected, collection service can be reinstated on the next scheduled collection day. 
(c)  Complaints. Each franchisee shall be responsible for handling complaints. Each complaint shall be responded to within five working days. Any complaint not resolved or deemed unresolvable shall be directed to the board for settlement. In this connection, the board's settlement authority shall be limited to the issuance of advisory opinions. A file of all complaints shall be maintained by the board. 
(d)  Standard reporting forms. Each franchisee shall maintain records on standard reporting forms approved by the board. These forms may include such items as financial statements, depreciation schedules, asset records, cash flow analyses, etc. An annual report in a format prescribed by the board shall be submitted to the collage within 60 days of the closing date of the franchisee's business year. 
(e)  Spills. It shall be the responsibility of the franchisee to clean up any spills that may occur from his vehicle or equipment. 
(f)  Equipment. Each truck must be equipped with a minimum five-pound extinguisher, ten-man first aid kit, Class C broom and shovel. Equipment operated by franchisees must comply with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Type of trucks. The bodies of trucks used in the collection or transportation of refuse shall have beds of metal or other impervious material which can be cleaned and said beds must be reasonably watertight and leakproof. Such beds shall be cleaned and disinfected on a regular basis. The franchisee must provide adequate means to prevent refuse from escaping from such truck while collecting or transporting refuse. 
(2)  Condition of trucks. All trucks of the collector will be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition satisfactory to the department. Trucks shall be inspected for sanitary cleanliness at least once annually or more often by the department of public works and trustee of public health to assure compliance with this division. 
Each vehicle of the franchisee shall at all times have in the cab a facsimile of the registration of the truck and certificate of insurance and an identification card with the name of whom to phone in case of an accident. Each vehicle of any franchisee that services specialized containers shall be equipped to clean and sanitize the container after collection. 
(g)  Special pick-up collections. In addition to the regularly scheduled collection of refuse, the franchisee shall provide a special pick-up service, available to all customers receiving residential service, for the removal of excess refuse which normally accumulates in a household and could not otherwise be placed in a standard container, such as discarded furniture or appliances. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 2008-14, § 2, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 10-35. - Customer responsibilities. 
(a)  General. Each customer shall prepare his refuse for disposal in such a manner as to safeguard the human the health and safety of the collection crew. 
(b)  Refuse containers. Residential refuse containers shall meet the requirements as defined for standardized containers. Commercial refuse containers shall meet or exceed the requirements set forth under the definitions under standardized container or specialized container, as applicable. Any overweight, oversize, broken, rusted or otherwise unsafe container may be refused service. Such containers shall be replaced by the customer. 
(c)  Dangerous or hazardous items. Dangerous or hazardous items such as broken glass, or other materials that could possibly cause injury to the collector shall be clearly identified on the container. Acid or caustic chemicals shall be clearly identified on the refuse container, and will not be accepted at the county landfill. 
(d)  Loose refuse. No refuse shall be placed for collection that is not otherwise containerized or bundled. No refuse shall be allowed to blow away from the point of collection. Grass or leaves must be contained in appropriate recyclable paper bags or containers and appropriate fees paid for their collection. Branches and small limbs of trees of reasonable amounts will be collected by the department of public works during specified times, provided said items are properly placed at the edge of the street. Branches shall be placed all in the same direction with cut ends on the same side. Larger elements of a tree or other items not in reasonable amounts that cannot be containerized will not be considered as refuse and therefore must be collected and disposed of by a properly licensed business engaged in landscape services or tree services and the cost of such service shall be borne by the resident. The village's removal of branches and limbs, noted above, is limited only to the ordinary landscape trimmings from existing residential homes. Disposal of trees or brush that are a product of clearing a vacant lot in anticipation of building is not the responsibility of the village. "Reasonable amount" is defined as tree branches less than two inches in diameter and total bulk material less than ten cubic feet. 
(e)  House number. Each customer shall display on his residence or at the point of collection his U.S. Postal Service house number. This number shall be in plain view from the street. 
(f)  Pets. Each customer shall ensure that their pets do not bite, attack or otherwise threaten the collection crew. 
(g)  Payments. Each customer shall maintain his account in good standing. Neither the village, nor any of its officers or employees shall be liable for, or in any way responsible for, the payment of any service rates or charges due. 
(h)  Moving. Each customer shall notify the village in advance of stopping service for moving; in the case of a property sale, the customer shall provide the name and contact information of the new owner, if known or the name and contact information of the realtors involved, if any. 
(i)  Refunds. No refund will be given for a period of less than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 93-4, § 2, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 2008-14, § 2, 2-25-08) 
Sec. 10-36. - Violations and proceedings to restrain violations. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful and an offense to violate the provisions of this division. Any person who violates any section of this division shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with general provisions of this Code. The board may bring suit to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent the violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-37. - Title to waste. 
    Title to all waste collected shall be vested with the franchisee until such time as such waste is unloaded at a bulk storage or disposal facility, at which time title shall be deemed to be transferred to the owner of such facility. 
(Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 7-21-86) 
Sec. 10-38. - Unauthorized placement of garbage, waste or trash; nonresident, hours. 
(a)  No person shall place any garbage, waste or trash at any collection point or in a collection container unless said garbage, waste or trash is from the premises served by the container or from the premises at which the collection point is located. "Collection container" includes, but is not limited to, dumpster, can, toter, bags or recycle bin. "Collection point" includes, but is not limited to, areas abutting passable alleys adjacent to property where the person disposing of waste resides or operates a business, or where no alley abuts such property, that area abutting the street immediately in front of such property. 
(b)  For "collection points" located at that area abutting the street immediately in front of the premises served, no garbage, waste or trash collection container may be placed for collection prior to 6:00 p.m. of the evening prior to the designated pickup day. Empty collection containers remaining after waste pickup shall be removed from collection points abutting the street immediately in front of the premises served at or before 11:59 p.m. of the designated pickup day. 
(c)  Every residence or business must show evidence of proper waste disposal for the waste stream generated by said residence or business. 
(d)  Every residential structure which contains two dwelling units or less must show evidence of disposal collection via the Village of Crete residential franchise refuse collector for each individual dwelling unit. 
    For the purposes of this section, a "dwelling unit" is defined as one or more rooms designed for occupancy having its own cooking and sanitary facilities, or any portion of a structure which is leased or rented. 
(e)  Businesses not showing evidence of proper waste disposal shall not be issued an annual business license. 
(f)  No person shall place garbage, waste or trash which has been transported from another location into a municipal collection container on public property. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 2, 4-27-98) 
Sec. 10-39. - Penalties. 
    Whoever violates or fails to comply with this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00. Violations of this chapter may be cited on a short form ordinance complaint and may be prepaid by paying 50 percent of the minimum fine to the village clerk on or before ten days after issuance of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 98-07, § 2, 4-27-98; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 7, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquor, ch. 4; sanitation in alcoholic liquor establishments, § 4-46 et seq.; rabies control, § 5-7 et seq.; vaccination of dogs against rabies, § 5-32; plumbing code, § 6-126 et seq.; swimming pools, § 6-216 et seq.; garbage and trash, ch. 10; food dealers, food handlers, etc., § 12-371 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 27. 
State Law reference- General health power of municipality, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Spitting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or other public place, or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall, public vehicle, or other place frequented by the public or to which the public is invited. 
(Code 1965, § 5.3.12) 
Sec. 11-2. - Dense smoke. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the village so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof. 
(b)  For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey, shall be and is hereby adopted as a standard for such grading, and smoke shall be, hereby defined as and declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree of density of number three of said chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour; whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(Code 1965, § 5.3.13) 
Sec. 11-3. - Mosquito abatement. 
    The salary, equipment, materials and vehicle costs for the village mosquito abatement program shall be defrayed by a $0.70/month charge on the village services bill mailed quarterly to all residential and commercial accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2001-50, § 3, 12-10-01) 
Secs. 11-4-11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES II-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 11-31-11-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 11-1001. - Penalties. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 8, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 11.5 - LANDSCAPING AND TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-17, adopted Apr. 10, 1995, has been codified as superseding ch. 22, art. II, §§ 22-21-22-28, and designated as ch. 11.5, §§ 11.5-1-11.5-9 herein. Formerly, §§ 22-21-22-28 pertained to trees and shrubs as derived from the Code of 1965, §§ 3.2.1-3.2.8. 

Sec. 11.5-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Crete Tree Ordinance of Crete, Illinois." 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the Village of Crete, Illinois. 
(2)  Intent. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Crete that the terms of this chapter shall be construed so as to promote: 
a.  The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable trees, shrubs and other plants within the city; and 
b.  The protection of community residents from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the Village of Crete from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs or other plants located within the community. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 1, 4-10-95) 
Sec. 11.5-2. - Definitions. 
    As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
    Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice for the Village of Crete. (hereinafter, "Arboricultural Specifications Manual"). A manual prepared by the arborist pursuant to the ordinance containing regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants upon city-owned property. 
    Arborist. The Village Arborist of the Village of Crete, Illinois. 
    City-owned property. Property within the village limits of Crete, Illinois and; 
(1)  Owned by the city in fee simple absolute; or 
(2)  Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic for public easements. 
    Property owner. The record owner of contract purchaser of any parcel of land. 
    Trees, shrubs and other plants. All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn grass and flowers less than 24 inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 3, 4-10-95) 
Sec. 11.5-3. - The Village of Crete Tree Commission; establishment, composition, appointment of members, duties. 
(a)  Establishment. The Village of Crete Tree Commission (hereinafter "tree commission") is hereby established. Its functions and duties are limited to those set forth in this chapter. During any time period when no tree commission has been appointed by the corporate authorities, the board of trustees shall act in their stead. 
(b)  Composition. The tree commission shall be composed of eight commissioners. Five commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board of trustees. These five commissioners shall serve without pay and shall reside within the Village of Crete, Illinois. The remaining three commissioners shall be ex officio and shall not vote. For example, the three ex officio commissioners shall be: the director of public works, the Director of Parks and Recreation of the Crete Park District or his/her representative, and the arborist. Subject to the exceptions in subsection (c), immediately below, each commissioner of the tree commission shall serve for a term of three years. 
(c)  Appointment of members. One of the five commissioners initially appointed to the tree commission, who is not an ex officio member, shall serve for a term of one year; two of the five commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of three years. Terms shall start on a common date. Determination of the length of terms of the five commissioners initially appointed shall be by lot. The mayor shall designate the chairperson of the tree commission. 
(d)  Expiration or vacation of terms. Within 30 days following the expiration of the term of any appointed commissioner, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the board of trustees and the successor shall serve for a term of three years. Should any commissioner resign or be removed from the tree commission, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve for the unexpired period of the vacated term. A member of the tree commission may be removed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the board of trustees. 
(e)  Duties. The tree commission shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Within a reasonable time after the appointment of the tree commission, upon call of the chairperson of the tree commission, the tree commission shall meet and adopt rules of procedure for regular and special meetings to fulfil the duties imposed upon it by this chapter. 
(2)  The tree commission shall advise and consult the arborist on any matter pertaining to the Village of Crete Tree Ordinance and its enforcement. The topics under which this advice and consultation may be given may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Amendments to the Village of Crete Ordinance, and alterations or revisions to the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and alterations or revisions of the urban forestry plan; 
b.  Policy concerning selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the village; 
c.  Allocation of funds to the arbor division, and expenditures of funds by the arbor division; 
d.  Establishment of educational and informational programs; 
e.  Development of policies and procedures regarding the arborist's duties; 
f.  Issuance of permits required by this chapter. 
(3)  The tree commission, upon the request of any person who disagrees with the decision of the arborist, shall hear all issue of the disputes which arise between the village arborist and any such person whenever those issues involve matters or the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter, including disputes regarding the issuance of permits, or the concurrence or nonconcurrence of the arborist, in permits required under other ordinances or laws, or the abatement of nuisances. The decision of a majority of the appointed members of the tree commission with regard to such dispute shall be binding upon the arborist. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the jurisdiction of any court of law with respect to such disputes. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 4, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 2015-19, § 2, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 11.5-4. - Village arborist; establishment, duties. 
(a)  Establishment. The position of the arborist is hereby established. At any time period when the arborist position is vacant, the village administrator shall perform such duties as assigned by the corporate authorities. 
(b)  Duties. The arborist shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  The arborist, with the assistance of the tree commission, shall develop and each subsequent year, update the urban forestry plan. The plan shall outline urban forestry activities to be undertaken by the city, the reasons for those activities, the possible funding source(s), the means of accomplishing the activities, the alternatives available to the city to fund or accomplish the activity, the projected date of completion, and the consequences if the activity is not completed. Activities may include, but are not limited to, street tree inventory, planting, tree removal, beautification projects and educational projects. 
(2)  The arborist with the assistance of the tree commission shall develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. This manual shall contain regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants upon city-owned property. 
(3)  The arborist shall cause the urban forestry plan and the Arboricultural Specifications Manual and all revisions and amendments to it, to be published and promulgated and shall cause three copies of the manual, and all revisions and amendments to it, to be available for public inspection at the office of the village clerk. Notice that such information is available for public inspection shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Will County at least one weekday of each of four consecutive weeks immediately following the initial availability of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual or revisions or amendments thereto. The Arboricultural Specifications Manual and any revisions and additions thereto shall become effective on the tenth day following the final publication in a newspaper of general circulation required under this subsection. 
(4)  The arborist shall make available to any interested person copies of the tree ordinance, information about the activities of the tree commission, copies of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual and copies of the urban forestry plan. 
(5)  The arborist shall administer the urban forestry plan, the tree ordinance and the provisions of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. 
(6)  The arborist shall perform whatever acts are necessary, including the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs and other plants located on city-owned property conform with the urban forestry plan, the Arboricultural Specifications Manual and this chapter. 
(7)  The arborist shall issue such permits as are required by this chapter and shall obtain as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permits the written agreement of each person who applies for such permits that he or she will comply with the requirements of this chapter, the urban forestry plan and with the regulations and shall have the right to inspect all work performed pursuant to such permits. If the arborist finds that the work performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter the urban forestry plan or with the regulations or standards of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. The arborist shall provide written notice of his/her finding to the permit applicant. The notice shall contain a copy of section 11.5-5(c)(5) of this chapter and; 
a.  The permit shall be nullified and shall be void; and 
b.  The arborist may issue a written order that the permit applicant cease and desist all work for which the permit was required; and 
c.  The permit applicant shall be subject to penalty under the terms of this chapter; and 
d.  The arborist may take steps to correct the results of the noncomplying work and the reasonable costs of such steps shall be charged to the permit applicant. 
(8)  The arborist shall establish a program of public information and education that will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs and other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the urban forestry plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 5, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 2015-19, § 2, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 11.5-5. - Permits. 
(a)  Scope of requirements. No person, except the arborist, an agent of the arborist, or a contractor hired by the arborist, in any case as determined by a finding of the arborist that such work shall impact the urban forestry plan of the village or impact the protections of community residents from personal injury or property damage, may perform any of the following acts without first obtaining a permit from the arborist for which no fee shall be charged, and nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as are required by law. 
(1)  Plant on city owned property or treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any tree, shrub or other plant located on city owned property, except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to city owned property from watering or fertilizing, without a permit, any tree, shrub or other plant located on such city owned property; 
(2)  Trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on city owned property and thereby to cause damage to persons or property; 
(3)  Place on city-owned property, either above or below ground level, a container for trees, shrubs or other plants; 
(4)  Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any tree, shrub, or other plant located on city-owned property; 
(5)  Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other manmade object to any tree, shrub or other plant located on city-owned property; 
(6)  Dig a tunnel or trench on city-owned property. 
(b)  Issuance. Within seven days of receipt of the application, the arborist shall issue a permit to perform within 30 days of the issuance any of the acts specified in subsections (a) and (b), immediately above, for which a permit is requested whenever: 
(1)  Such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance; or 
(2)  Such acts are not inconsistent with the development and implementation of the urban forestry plan or with any regulations or standards of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual; and whenever; 
(3)  An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to the arborist detailing the location, number, size and species of trees, shrubs or other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used and presenting any additional information that the arborist may find reasonably necessary. 
(4)  The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the urban forestry plan and with the regulations and standards set forth in the Arboricultural Specifications Manual; and 
(5)  The applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands those provisions of the urban forestry plan, this chapter and of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual which are pertinent to the work for which the permit is sought; and 
(6)  If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any tree or part thereof, located on private property, which, as a result of such felling reasonably may be expected to fall upon city owned property and if such felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which such felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the Village of Crete harmless for all damages resulting from work conducted pursuant to the permit and shall deposit with the village clerk a liability insurance policy in the amount of $100,000.00 per person/$300,000.00 per accident for bodily injury liability and $50,000.00 aggregate for property damage liability, which policy shall name the Village of Crete as additional insured. 
(c)  Public utility companies. Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt public utility companies or their agents from the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise governed by state statute or franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 6, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 2015-19, § 2, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 11.5-5.1. - Registration. 
    Any person or business entity who, for profit: 
(1)  Diagnoses, treats, prunes, trims or braces any tree; or 
(2)  Operates any landscape business which generates landscape waste as defined in the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/3.270), shall annually register with the village. All applications for registration under this section shall have appended a legible copy of proof of liability insurance and proof of workers' compensation insurance for business entities required by law to provide workers' compensation insurance. No fee for registration shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2015-19, § 2, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 11.5-5.2. - Removal of debris. 
    No person or business entity subject to registration in section 11.5-5.1, nor property owner of the land so serviced by such person or business entity, shall leave debris, or permit debris to remain, that was generated from such service either on site or at the curb for pickup by village department of public works personnel or for pickup by village contracted franchisee collectors, residential or commercial. Further, the failure of any person or business entity described herein, or property owner, to remove all debris or landscape waste within 48 hours shall be a violation under section 11.5-8 herein below. 
(Ord. No. 2015-19, § 2, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 11.5-6. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  Definition. The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this chapter: 
(1)  Any dead or dying tree, bush, shrub, or other plant, whether located on city owned property or on private property. 
(2)  Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub or other plant, whether located on city owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub or other plant; 
(3)  Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof, whether located on city owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public; 
(4)  Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on city owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street sign on city property. 
(5)  Any tree, shrub, or other plant or portion thereof whether located on village owned property or on private property which obstructs the sight line of pedestrian, bicyclist or motor vehicle traffic as determined by the village engineer, chief of police or village administrator. 
(6)  Any landscaping located within a platted subdivision, visible from public property or right-of-way, that is substantially dead, damaged, or contains uncontrolled growth resulting in an appearance obviously inconsistent with the pruned landscaping located on properties near or within the general area; uncultivated shrubs higher than eight inches. 
(7)  Any tree which has been cut down that has not been reduced to ground level. 
(b)  Right to inspect. The officers, agents, servants and employees of the village have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance. 
(c)  Abatement. The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this chapter: 
(1)  Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on city-owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property owner or his/her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery. 
(2)  Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on privately owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property owner or his/her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance. No property owner may be found guilty of violating this provision unless and until the following requirements of notice have been satisfied. 
a.  A code enforcement officer or police officer shall cause a written notice to be personally served to the person in possession of the property, or cause to be sent by certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the preceding year or to the owner of the property; 
b.  Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other nuisance, its location on the property and the reason for declaring it a nuisance; 
c.  Such notice shall describe by legal description or by common description the premises; 
d.  Such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance; 
e.  Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no less than 30 days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year. 
(3)  The arborist is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by the arborist to be an immediate threat to any person or property. 
(d)  Violation. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to permit any landscaping declared to be a nuisance to grow or remain after having received notice in accordance with this section. 
(e)  Immediate abatement. The arborist, chief of police or trustee in charge of public safety is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any public nuisance provided that he or she determines the nuisance to be an immediate threat to any person or property. The cost of the immediate abatement of any such nuisance shall be noticed and billed to any person as described above who may be given notice; said persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs of such abatement. Said costs shall also be a lien on the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 7, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 2015-19, § 2, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 11.5-7. - Interference with arborist or other village personnel. 
    No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the arborist or his/her agents or any other village personnel while engaged in the execution or enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 8, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 2015-19, § 2, 8-10-15) 
Sec. 11.5-8. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of [this] chapter, upon being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each separate offense, each day during which any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub or other plant located on city owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(b)  Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (c) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(c)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 9, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03) 
Sec. 11.5-9. - Appeal. 
    Any party who elects to dispute any action or decision by the village arborist or tree commission shall be entitled to appeal to the village council for a final determination. 
(Ord. No. 95-17, § 10, 4-10-95) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alarm systems, ch. 3; Alcoholic liquors, ch. 4; licensing and regulation of stables, § 5-12; licensing and regulation of small animal stores, § 5-13; dog licenses, § 5-51 et seq.; licensing and regulation of contractors, § 6-29 et seq.; licensing and regulation of house movers, § 6-34; mobile home parks, ch. 14; sound amplifiers, § 15-16 et seq.; peddlers, solicitors, etc., ch. 18; signs and billboards, ch. 21; taxation, ch. 24; vehicles for hire, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Licensing committee. 
    There is hereby created a licensing committee which shall consist of the chief of police, the fire chief, the village clerk and two trustees selected by the board of trustees. Such committee shall make recommendations to the president and board of trustees concerning the issuance, suspension or revocation of any business license or business permit. 
State Law reference- Power of municipality to fix the manner of issuing or revoking licenses, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-1. 
Sec. 12-2. - Applications. 
    Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the village clerk in the absence of a provision to the contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered, and fee to be paid; each application shall contain additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the village officials in the issuing of the permit or license applied for. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.1) 
Sec. 12-3. - Buildings and premises to comply with all ordinances. 
    No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit for any thing, or act, if premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the village. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.2) 
Sec. 12-4. - Fees. 
    In the absence of a provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made, to the village clerk. When application for an annual license is made after the expiration of six months of the current license year, the license for the remainder of the year shall be issued upon the payment of one-half of the annual fee. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.3) 
Sec. 12-5. - Forms. 
    Forms for all licenses and permits, and all applications for same, may be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the village clerk and village president, in the absence of any provision to the contrary. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.1.4, 2.1.10) 
Sec. 12-6. - Inspections and tests. 
(a)  Whenever inspection of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation is provided for or required by ordinance, or is reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance or to detect violations of any ordinance, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making such inspection, any officer or employee of the village who is authorized or directed to make such inspections at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee to give to any authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same, sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the board of trustees may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection, or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the desired commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection. No license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the village, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.6) 
Sec. 12-7. - Investigations. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, where the ordinances of the village necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of the permit or license, the village clerk shall refer such application to the proper officers for making such investigation within 48 hours of the time of such receipt. The officers charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon within ten days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.7) 
Sec. 12-8. - Transfer. 
    Licenses issued may be transferred by the original licensee provided that written notice thereof is given to the village ten days before the transfer is made, but no more than one transfer of any license shall be made within any license year; provided that it shall be unlawful to transfer any peddler's, itinerant merchant's, or chauffeur's license, and any attempted transfer of such a license shall have no effect. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.8) 
Sec. 12-9. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the village for which they are issued, where no provision to the contrary is made. 
(b)  The village clerk shall mail to all licensees of the village a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual one, prior to the date of such expiration. Failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain or renew a license, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operating without a license. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.11; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 3-8-10) 
Sec. 12-10. - Multiple licenses in same building. 
    Multiple businesses operating under the same roof or in the same building or complex, whether or not separated by walls, dividers or otherwise, shall subject each owner or operator thereof to a separate license fee; moreover, each such dealer shall pay such appropriate fee or fees in accordance with the fee schedule as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-10. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 3, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-11. - Operation as a nuisance. 
    No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. 
(Code 1965, § 2.1.9) 
Sec. 12-12. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact or a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the board of trustees shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises and the suspension of any license or permit for a period not to exceed ten days. 
(b)  Within eight days after they have so acted, the board of trustees shall convene a hearing to determine whether the license or permit should be revoked. 
(c)  Licenses and permits issued under ordinances, or this Code unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the board of trustees after notice and hearing as provided in this section for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the license or permit. 
(2)  Violation by the licensee or permit holder of ordinance provisions or state law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or the premises occupied. 
(3)  Conviction of the licensee or permit holder of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(4)  Failure of the licensee or permit holder to pay any fine or penalty owing to the village. 
(5)  Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the performance of his duties in making inspections pursuant to this Code. 
(d)  Revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other applicable ordinance. 
(e)  Written notice of a hearing convened pursuant to subsection (b) shall be given, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permit holder at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(f)  At the hearing the licensee or permit holder shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The village attorney shall present the complaint and represent the village. The president shall preside and he and the village trustees shall render the decision. 
(g)  The board of trustees may delegate its functions under this section. If such delegation is to a committee, the chairman of the committee shall perform the functions provided in this section for the president. 
State Law reference- Power of municipality to fix manner of revoking licenses, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-1. 
Sec. 12-13. - Licenses required for all businesses. 
    Any business conducted within a permanent structure on a permanent or yearly basis shall be licensed in accordance with the requirements of the Crete Code. Any business not specifically listed with a corresponding fee shall have its license fee be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-13. 
(Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Secs. 12-14-12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Public buildings, § 9-51 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate amusements, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2, 5/11-42-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-26. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the village, whether specifically licensed in another article in this chapter or not. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.1.1) 
Sec. 12-27. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any amusement licensed in this article unless the premises in which such amusement is operated or permitted to be operated conforms with all ordinances relating to public buildings and public gatherings. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.1.14) 
Sec. 12-28. - Miscellaneous licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without having first obtained a license for same. The provisions of this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any other ordinance of the village. 
(b)  Applications for such license shall be made to the village clerk, and shall comply with all ordinances relating to such application. For a license pertaining to menageries, exhibitions of inanimate objects and other amusements, the fee shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the specific category and reference to section 12-28. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.1.2; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-29. - Licensing, taxation and regulation of athletic exhibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball game, boxing or wrestling matches or any other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a fee is charged without first having procured a license therefore. The fee for such license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-29. 
(b)  The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the village clerk a statement verified under oath of the gross receipts of each such game, contest or race, within one week after such exhibition. At the same time, the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the clerk a sum equal to three percent of the gross receipts, after deducting the license fee paid. 
(c)  Sufficient members of the police department shall be admitted free of charge, to all such exhibitions for the purpose of preserving and maintaining order. The village clerk may post persons at the box office of each such performance, and may examine all the books pertaining to such performance which show or tend to show the gross receipts. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.1.5; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to impose tax on gross receipts of athletic contests and exhibitions carried on for gain, 65 ILCS 5/11-54-1. 
Sec. 12-30. - Order, crowd control, etc. 
    The audience of any amusement, show, or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience. It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.1.6) 
Sec. 12-31. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police and fire marshal are authorized to inspect every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement in order to insure conformity with all ordinances. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.1.7) 
Sec. 12-32. - Smoking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on or beneath the stage or in a dressing room or in the main assembly room of any building used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than 100 persons in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures, or other entertainments are offered, presented operated, or exhibited. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in charge of such premises, to provide and place printed signs on which the words "NO SMOKING" shall appear in letters at least four inches high, in conspicuous places. At least two signs shall be upon the stage or in the wings thereof, at least two in the main assembly room, and one in each dressing room. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.1.11, 2.2.1.12) 
Sec. 12-33. - Exit lights. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall used as an assembly hall with accommodations for 100 persons or more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures, and other entertainment is offered, operated or presented to provide and place a sign on which the word "EXIT" shall appear in letters at least six inches high, over every door or other opening from such hall to every means of egress therefrom, and a light shall be provided with a red globe and placed at or over such sign, which light shall be kept burning during the entire period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.1.13) 
Secs. 12-34-12-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POOL HALLS BAGATELLE TABLES, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax, regulate pool tables, bagatelle tables, etc., 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2. 

Sec. 12-46. - License. 
(a)  No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool or bagatelle or pigeon hole table open to the public without having first obtained a license therefor as is herein required. All applications for such a license shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of tables to be used therein. 
(b)  The annual fee for any such license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-46. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.6.1, 2.2.6.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Secs. 12-47-12-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-15, § 1, adopted Mar. 18, 1987, repealed § 12-47, which pertained to minors, as derived from the 1965 Code, § 2.2.6.3. 
DIVISION 3. - BOWLING ALLEYS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax, regulate or prohibit bowling alley, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2. 

Sec. 12-61. - License. 
(a)  No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public without having first obtained a license therefor. Application for such a license shall be made in writing and shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of alleys to be used. 
(b)  The annual license fee for bowling alleys shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-61. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.7.1, 2.2.7.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-62. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble, bet or permit any form of gambling or betting in any premises used for a bowling alley. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.7.3) 
Secs. 12-63-12-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CIRCUSES OR CARNIVALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Carnivals permits required, 65 ILCS 5/11-54.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-81. - License. 
    No person shall conduct or operate a circus or carnival in the village without first having obtained a license as provided in this section. The applications for such a license shall be made to the village clerk and shall specify the place in or on which the circus or carnival is to be conducted. The fee for circus or carnival licenses shall be in an amount as listed in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-81. No license shall be issued for a performance on Sunday. The license fee for each side-show and concession operating in connection with the circus or carnival shall be in an amount as listed in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-81. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.9.1-2.2.9.4; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-82. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
    It shall be the duty of every person license under this division to obey the provisions of all ordinance provisions relating to circuses or carnivals or the premises occupied. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.9.5) 
Sec. 12-83. - Cheating. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cheat, short change, or otherwise defraud any person attending or about to attend a circus performance or carnival within the village. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.9.7) 
Secs. 12-84-12-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GOLF PRACTICE RANGES 

Sec. 12-96. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate the business of a golf practice range without a license for such activity from the village. For the purpose of this section, a "golf practice range" shall be defined as any activity which has the facilities to practice golf practicing shots, drives or putts which is open to the general public for a fee. The annual fee for such a licensee shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-96. 
(Ord. No. 712, §§ 2.2.17A.1, 2.2.17A.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Secs. 12-97-12-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax, regulate or prohibit theatricals, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5. 

Sec. 12-111. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion picture or theatrical for admission to which a fee is charged, excepting performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious, educational or charitable organization, without having first secured a license therefor as is provided in this section. 
(b)  Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with all ordinances and shall state in addition to the other information required, the place of the intended performance and the seating capacity thereof. 
(c)  Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures, or theatricals, naming a specific place or building where the performances are to be presented, may present therein any number of performances, including theatricals, during the year for which the license was secured without having to pay any additional fee. The annual fee for such license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of section 12-111 and shall be paid on or prior to May 1 of each year. For motion pictures or theatrical presentations which are to be presented in premises which are not covered by such license fee, the fee to be paid shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-111; provided that no such motion picture or theatrical shall be presented in or on any premises or building which does not fully comply with the provisions of the ordinance relating to public gatherings and the maintenance of buildings for this purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.31.4; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Cross reference- Public buildings, § 9-51 et seq.; public gatherings generally, § 13-15. 
Sec. 12-112. - Outdoor theaters. 
    Outdoor theaters, where the audience is not housed in a building, shall be conducted in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this article. Each outdoor theater shall be equipped with separate washrooms for men and for women. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.31.10) 
Sec. 12-113. - General crowd regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is presented during the time of such performance. It shall be unlawful to admit to any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the seating arrangements for the premises. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.31.6) 
Sec. 12-114. - Scenery. 
    It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theater other than inflammable scenery or such as shall have been rendered inflammable by the application of fire preventive coatings. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.31.7) 
Sec. 12-115. - Obstruction of exits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits leading from the room or enclosures in which a motion picture performance or theatrical is being given or in which an audience for such a performance is gathered. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.31.9) 
Sec. 12-116. - Miscellaneous building requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in any building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required by ordinance or by state law concerning buildings or places intended for motion picture performances or in premises which do not comply with the provisions of all ordinances. All places used for such exhibitions of theatricals must be kept adequately ventilated during the performance and for as long a time as the audience remains therein. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.31.8) 
Secs. 12-117-12-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PUBLIC DANCES 

Sec. 12-131. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dance in the village without having first obtained a license pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with all ordinances and shall specify the location of the proposed dance and the person or organization sponsoring the same. No such license shall be issued to a person who is not a person of good moral character nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented in the village by a person of good moral character. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results of such investigation to the village clerk. 
(d)  The fee for such public dances to be held in any one premises shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-131. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.38.1-2.2.38.4; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-132. - Premises generally. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance or operate a dance hall in any hall or place which does not comply with all ordinances relating to public buildings and public gatherings. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.38.5) 
Cross reference- Public buildings, § 9-51; public gatherings, § 13-15. 
Secs. 12-133-12-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SKATING RINKS 

Sec. 12-146. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain a public skating rink in the village without having first obtained a license issued pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions of the ordinances relating to licenses and shall specify the location of the proposed skating rink and the person or organization sponsoring the same. No such license shall be issued to a person who is not of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented in the village by a person of good moral character. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results of such investigation to the president and board of trustees. 
(c)  The annual fee for a skating rink license shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-146. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.44.1-2.2.44.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-147. - Exits from premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a public skating rink in any hall or building which is not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits. No hall or building which is not provided with at least two exits of four feet or more in width shall be used for such purpose. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44.4) 
Sec. 12-148. - Music. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit music at any public skating rink between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.44.5) 
Secs. 12-149-12-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MISCELLANEOUS AMUSEMENTS 

Sec. 12-161. - Licensing of amusement facilities. 
(a)  No person shall operate an amusement facility without first securing an amusement facility license from the village clerk. 
(b)  Any of the listed activities under this section number in article V of chapter 2 shall constitute an amusement facility. The annual license fee for each listed facility shall be in an amount as set forth in chapter 2, article V immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-161. 
(Ord. No. 787, §§ 1-3, 10-23-78; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-162. - Noise at go-cart tracks. 
    No operator of a go-cart track shall offer to the public for hire a go-cart whose propelling device exceeds 74 decibels while operating. 
(Ord. No. 787, § 3, 10-23-78) 
Cross reference- Noise, ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to prevent or suppress noises, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2. 
DIVISION 10. - RAFFLES 

Sec. 12-163. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and business who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civil interest of a community. 
    Charitable: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public and is licensed by the state as charitable. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public. 
    Educational: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools. 
    Fraternal: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens if government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government and is a local detachment of a state or national fraternal organization. 
    Labor: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
    Net proceeds: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, license fees, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
    Non-profit: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation and is licensed as such by the State of Illinois. 
    Raffle: Means a form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed under this Act, in which: 
(1)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to designed the winning chance; 
(2)  The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
    Religious: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purposes of religious worship. 
    Veterans: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans of military service, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 12-164. - License required. 
    No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall conduct raffles or chances without having first obtained a license therefore pursuant to this division and the "Raffles Act". 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 12-165. - Application. 
(a)  Applications shall be made in writing through the village clerk's office at least 30 days prior to the first day intended for the sale of the raffle chances. The application shall be on a form furnished by the village clerk. 
(b)  Applications for license under this article must contain the following information: 
Name of applicant; 
Address; 
Purpose of raffle; 
Area within the village where the raffle is to be conducted; 
Time period during which chances will be sold or issued; 
Sworn statement attesting to not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and secretary of the organization; 
Date, time and location at which winning chances will be determined; 
The aggregate retail value of all the prizes or merchandise to be awarded by a single raffle; 
The maximum to be charged for each raffle chance and the number of chances to be issued for each raffle; and 
The names(s) and address(es) of the operator of the raffle if not an office or member of the applicant organization. 
(c)  Validity of license. Each such license shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of raffles during a specified period not to exceed one year and may be suspended or revoked by the corporate authorities in the event of violation of the terms of this division or of any applicable state law. 
(d)  Ineligibility for license. The following are ineligible for any license under this division: 
(1)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter; 
(3)  Any person who is not good moral character; 
(4)  Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in (1), (2), or (3) has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed; any organization in which a person defined in (1), (2), or (3) is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not; and any organization in which a person defined in (1), (2), or (3) is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in the "Raffle Act". 
(e)  Not-for-profit organizations. A raffle license shall be issued only to bona fide non-profit religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations as defined in section 12-163 which operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to a non-profit fund raising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized of the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to the identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardships as the results of an illness, disability accident or disaster. 
(f)  Limitations. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle under this division and in accordance with applicable state law is limited to $250,000.00. 
    The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle is limited to $200,000.00. 
    The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold is limited to $100.00. 
    The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold is limited to 120 days. 
    Licenses issued shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of state statute or of this division. 
(g)  Fees. The fee for a raffle license to conduct a raffle shall be $20.00. 
(h)  Approval. The Village of Crete shall, within 30 days, evaluate and either approve or disapprove of said application. The village's approval of an application for a license shall constitute the license for the conduct of the raffle applied for the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 12-166. - Conduct of raffles. 
    The conducting of raffles is subject to the Illinois Raffles Act requirements, and to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Proceeds. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct that game. 
(b)  Participation in management. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(c)  Remuneration. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle unless conducted pursuant to a business raffle license. 
(d)  Premises. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under this division. 
(e)  Locations. Raffles chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license. 
(f)  Age of participants. No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances or the purchase of chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his/her parent or guardian. 
(g)  Location for determining winning chances(s). The location of the premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle shall be restricted to a business district, commercial district or where a special use permit has been granted for a school church, government or similar institution. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 12-167. - Records. 
(a)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep such records and shall also keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which chances are determined. 
(b)  Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefore issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois, and shall be placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for each revenues of the organization. 
(c)  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the Village of Crete, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. 
(d)  Records required by this section shall be preserved three years, and the organization shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 12-168. - Suspension/revocation. 
    Any license granted under this division may be suspended or revoked by the village at any time it appears that the proposed or actual operation of the raffle will be or is such as to constitute a public nuisance or to endanger the public peace, health, safety or welfare. Any license granted under this division may be suspended or revoked in whole or in part at any time that the raffle is conducted contrary to the license or to any state or village law, or when such raffle or portion thereof is conducted so as to constitute a public nuisance or to disturb the peace, health, safety or welfare. Suspension or revocation shall become effective immediately. It shall be a violation for any person to operate, engage or participate in except as a patron, any raffle which license has been suspended or revoked. The village administrator shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a license in accordance with this division; any license hold may appeal such decision to suspend or revoke if filed within 30 days by requesting a hearing before the village board. Such hearing shall be conducted pursuant to public notice given by posting on the village website and at the village hall not less than 48 hours prior to the hearing and said hearing shall be held within ten days of the request for appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Sec. 12-169. - Punishment. 
    Any raffle permit issued under this division shall be revoked or suspended if the permit holder violates any terms of the license or any other provisions of this division. Any violation of this division shall be subject to a find up to $750.00. Each day that a violation hereof exists shall be considered a separate offense. Each raffle held in violation hereof shall be considered a separate offense. Violations shall be processed under chapter 1, article II, administrative adjudication provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-13-18) 
Secs. 12-170-12-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUCTIONEERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate auctioneers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 

Sec. 12-181. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of auctioneer or to hold any auctions without a license issued pursuant to this section. The license fee for engaging in the business of auctioneer shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-181. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.2.1, 2.2.2.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-182. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall conduct an auction on any premises which are not with a zoned business district. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sales of personal property conducted by a descendant's estate conducted upon the residence of the descendant. 
(2)  Sales of personal property conducted by a resident of the village who is about to establish residence outside the village conducted upon such person's residence. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.2.1; Ord. No. 764, § 1, 7-11-77) 
Sec. 12-183. - Public order regulations. 
    All auctions shall be conducted in an orderly manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to create or permit any disturbance or disorderly conduct at any auction. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.2.3) 
Sec. 12-184. - Fraudulent statements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person selling goods at auction to make any fraudulent statements concerning the goods or article being sold. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.2.4) 
Sec. 12-185. - Inspection of goods. 
    Every article offered for sale at a public auction shall be open to inspection of any person wishing to purchase it at some time before making the bid or during the bidding. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.2.5) 
Secs. 12-186-12-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTO BODY REPAIR SHOPS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to locate and regulate the use and construction of garages, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 

Sec. 12-201. - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter the term "auto body repair shop business" shall mean a business devoting its primary effort to repairing and restoring motor vehicles damaged by collision or other casualty to their prior or equivalent condition, attendant painting, mechanical repairs and other types of servicing thereto immediately related. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1(2.2.4B.1), 4-10-67) 
Sec. 12-202. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate an auto body repair shop without first having obtained a license therefor. The annual fee to be paid for such license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-202. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 1(2.2.4B.2), 4-10-67; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-203. - Applicability of other ordinances. 
    All safety requirements relative to fire hazards and related hazards or standards imposed upon operators of automobile service stations by article V of this chapter shall be auto body repair shops. 
(Ord. No. 596, § 1(2.2.4B.3), 4-10-67) 
Secs. 12-204-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Gasoline pumps on streets, etc., § 9-7; flammable liquids, § 9-71 et seq.; self-service gasoline stations, § 12-751 et seq. 

Sec. 12-221. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the terms "automobile service station" or "automobile filling station" shall mean any place of business where gasoline, or any highly volatile fuel for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines are sold or offered for sale. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.2) 
Sec. 12-222. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all automobile service stations. Any person maintaining or operating any storage tank for gasoline for the use of his automobiles shall comply with all of the provisions of this article other than the requirement for the payment of a license fee. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.3) 
Sec. 12-223. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate an automobile service station without first having obtained a license therefor. The annual fee to be paid for such license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-223. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-224. - State law adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof the law, rules and regulations relating to the storage, transportation, sale and use of gasoline and volatile oils, and the law prescribing the color and label for gasoline or benzol receptacles, as the same exists on the date of adoption of this code. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 1, 8-12-68) 
State Law reference- Adoption by references, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-225. - Bulk sales prohibited. 
    No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any service station except into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, when such tanks are connected with the carburetion system of such vehicles, provided however that individual sales up to five gallons may be made in metal receptacles when painted red and labeled in full conformity with law, such individual sales to be limited to five gallons to any one person. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.4) 
State Law reference- Gasoline containers, 430 ILCS 20/0.01 et seq. 
Sec. 12-226. - Approval of plans. 
    Drawing or blueprints made to scale shall be submitted in triplicate to the president and board of trustees and shall be approved by them before any new service station construction, addition or remodeling is undertaken. Drawings shall carry the names of the person proposing the installation, the location, and shall in addition show the following: 
(1)  The plot to be utilized and its immediate surroundings on all sides; all property lines to be designated and adjacent streets and highways to be named. 
(2)  The complete installation as proposed, including tanks and their capacity, pumps, buildings, drives and all equipment. 
(3)  The clearance from tanks to property lines. 
(4)  The type of construction of service building or buildings, with a clear showing that there will be no basement, cellar, or excavation under any portion. 
(5)  The location of basements, cellars or pits of other buildings on property or on adjacent property, and location of tanks with reference thereto as is provided in this article. If a building has no basement, cellar or pit, this shall be stated. 
(6)  The location of sewers, manholes, catch-basins, cess-pools, septic tanks, wells or cisterns (whether on the property, or adjacent property or in adjoining streets, highways or alleys) and location of tanks with reference thereto. If there is no sewer, manhole, or catch-basin in a street or alley, or no sewer, manhole, or cess-pool, no septic tank, well or cistern on property make notation to that effect in proper place. 
(7)  The location of vent pipe outlets and the location of the fill pipe. 
(8)  The ventilation of the greasing pit if the greasing pit is located within a building or enclosure. 
Drawing shall be accompanied by an application for approval made out in triplicate on blanks furnished by the village clerk. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.19) 
Sec. 12-227. - Storage tanks, etc. 
(a)  Storage of motor fuels shall be underground and the combined capacity of all storage tanks shall not exceed 12,000 gallons. 
(b)  Tanks shall be buried so that their tops will not be less than two feet below the surface of the ground or beneath 12 inches of earth and a slab of concrete reinforced and not less than five inches in thickness and capable of sustaining a load of 250 pounds per square foot; the slab shall be set on a firm, well-tamped earth foundation and shall extend at least one foot in all directions beyond the outline of the tank. The tops of tanks shall be below the level of any piping to which tanks may be connected. Tanks shall be so located that no heavy trucks or other vehicles pass over them unless they are adequately protected by reinforcing concrete slab. Where soil conditions require, a firm foundation shall be provided. Tanks shall not be installed under any building or structure. 
(c)  Tanks shall have the following clearances: 
(1)  Individual tanks of a capacity up to 2,000 gallons shall be buried so that tops of tanks shall be lower than all floors, basements, cellars, or pits of buildings within ten feet thereto, on or off the property, or tanks shall maintain a clearance of ten feet thereto. For individual tanks of a capacity of more than 2,000 gallons and up to 6,000 gallons, this distance shall be 25 feet. 
(2)  Individual tanks of a capacity up to 2,000 gallons shall be buried so that the tops of tanks shall be lower than the bottom level of all sewers, manholes, catchbasins, cess-pools, septic tanks, wells or cisterns within ten feet, on or off the property, or tanks shall maintain a full clearance of ten feet thereto. For individual tanks with a capacity of more than 2,000 gallons and up to 6,000 gallons this distance shall be 20 feet. For individual tanks of a capacity of more than 6,000 gallons and up to 12,000 gallons, this distance shall be 25 feet. The term "sewer" includes the sewer line out of the service station building; provided, however, that these clearances shall not be required to a sewer line out of station if such sewer line is constructed throughout of cast iron with leaded joints. 
(3)  Individual tanks of a capacity up to 2,000 gallons shall maintain a ten-foot clearance to property lines. For individual tanks of a capacity of more than 2,000 gallons and up to 6,000 gallons this distance shall be 20 feet. For individual tanks of a capacity more than 6,000 and up to 12,000 gallons this distance shall be 25 feet; provided, however, that these clearances on the side adjacent to a public street, alley or highway may be waived by consent of the authorities having immediate jurisdiction over the public street, alley or highway, if it can be shown that the required sewer clearance can be maintained. 
(4)  Tanks and pumps shall maintain a clearance of at least 100 feet to any school house, hospital or churcch. The distance shall be measured from near points of tanks to near points of buildings. 
(d)  Tanks shall bear label of Underwriters Laboratories or meet equivalent specifications. Tanks shall be thoroughly coated on the outside with tar asphaltum or other suitable rust-resisting material. Tanks shall not be surrounded or covered by cinders or other material of corrosive effect. If the soil contains corrosive material, special protection must be provided. 
(e)  Each tank shall be provided with a vent pipe, connected with the top of the tank and carried up to the outer air. Pipe shall be arranged for proper drainage to storage tank and its lower end shall not extend through top of tank for a distance of not more than one inch; it shall have no traps or pockets. The upper end of pipe shall be provided with a gooseneck or T attachment, or weatherproof hood. The vent pipe shall be of sufficient cross-sectional area to permit escape of air and gas during the filling operation and in no case less than one inch in diameter. If a power pump is used in filling storage tank, and a tight connection is made to fill pipe, the vent pipe shall not be smaller than the fill pipe. The vent pipe shall terminate outside of building not less than 12 feet above top of the fill pipe, and not less than four feet, measuring vertically and horizontally, from any window or other building opening, and not less than 15 feet measured horizontally from any opening into the basement, cellar or pit of any building, and in a location which will not permit pocketing of gas. If a tight connection is made in the filling line, the terminus of vent pipe shall be carried to a point one foot above the level of the highest reservoir from which tank may be filled. The vent pipe from two or more tanks of the same class of liquid may be connected to one upright or main header; area of header shall equal the combined area of the pipes connected to it. Connection of the header shall be not less than one foot above the level of the top of the highest reservoir from which tank may be filled. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.4.5-2.2.4.9) 
Sec. 12-228. - Fill pipes. 
(a)  Fill pipes shall be carried to a location outside of any building, as remote as possible from any doorway or other opening into any building and in no case closer than five feet from any such opening. The location shall be in a place where there is a minimum danger of breakage from trucks or other vehicles. 
(b)  Each fill pipe shall be closed by a screw cap or other tight fitting cap, preferably of a type which can be locked. The cap should be locked at all times when filling or gauging process is not going on. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.10) 
Sec. 12-229. - Unloading operations for pumps. 
(a)  The unloading hose from tank truck into underground tank shall be metallic lines or its equivalent and shall be equipped with a non-ferrous nozzle or tight connection metal nipple. The tank truck shall be electrically grounded by means of its drag chain before unloading operations start and during the entire unloading operations. If an underground tank is supplied through permanent pipe connection to an aboveground, general storage tank, filling may be by power driven pump or gravity. 
(b)  Liquids shall be withdrawn from tanks by means of approved pumps, equipped with metallic lined hose and non-ferrous discharge nozzle. No pumps shall be located within a building. Wiring of electrical pumps and electrical equipment in connection therewith shall conform to the National Electrical Code. Devices which discharge by gravity shall be so designed that it is impossible to retain in the gauging compartment materially more than ten gallons of liquid, and so that it is not possible to lock the device without draining the liquid. Systems which employ continuous air pressure on storage tank in connection with gauging or vending devices are prohibited. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.11) 
Sec. 12-230. - Specifications for buildings. 
    No basement or excavation shall be permitted under any filling station building. The floor level shall be above grade so as to prevent flow of liquids or vapors into building. The floor shall be concrete. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.12) 
Sec. 12-231. - Storage of flammable liquids in buildings. 
(a)  No gasoline, naphtha, or other highly flammable liquids shall be kept inside service station buildings. 
(b)  No alcohol or other flammable anti-freeze solutions shall be kept inside service station buildings except in original sealed containers. No transfer of such liquids from these receptacles shall be made inside service station buildings. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.13) 
Sec. 12-232. - Greasing pits. 
(a)  Every greasing pit installed in a building or enclosed by three or more walls, shall be ventilated by a vent duct not less than six inches in diameter (or equivalent cross section area if a noncircular duct is used). The duct shall start within four inches of the floor and shall extend on an upward diagonal or by an easy bend over to the sidewall, thence straight up through the roof to a height sufficient to draw off gasoline vapors which may accumulate at bottom of pit. Abrupt bends must be avoided and all joints must be tight. The floor of pit should pitch slightly toward corner where the duct is located in order to facilitate flow of gases to duct. 
(b)  Gasoline or naphtha shall never be used to clean out any pit, whether pit is located in a building or enclosure, or outside in the open. 
(c)  No sewer connection shall be permitted from any greasing pit. 
(d)  If pits are electrically lighted, globes shall be of vapor-proof construction and wiring shall be in conduit. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.14) 
Sec. 12-233. - Washing and greasing rooms. 
    If sewer connection is made an adequate grease trap shall be provided to intercept gas, grease and oils. Trap shall be cleaned out at least every 30 days. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.15) 
Sec. 12-234. - Fire extinguishers. 
    Each service station shall be equipped with at least one chemical fire extinguisher suitable for oil or gasoline fires. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.18) 
Sec. 12-235. - Miscellaneous safety regulations. 
(a)  The fuel tank of no motor vehicle shall be serviced until motor and ignition has been shut off. 
(b)  No smoking shall be permitted on premises at any time. 
(c)  No open lights or flames shall be permitted except within a stove within the filling station building. 
(d)  Premises must be kept clean and neat, free from rubbish or trasch. 
(e)  Cleaning with gasoline, naphtha or other highly flammable liquids shall not be permitted in or around service stations. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.4.17) 
Secs. 12-236-12-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BARBERSHOPS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate barbershops, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 

Sec. 12-251. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a barbershop in the village without first having obtained a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall state thereon the number of chairs to be used in the establishment. The annual fee for such license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-251. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.5.1-2.2.5.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-252. - Inspections. 
    The health officer or some other person designated by the president and board of trustees is authorized to inspect every establishment licensed under this article as often as necessary to insure compliance with this article and all other ordinances relative thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.5.6) 
Sec. 12-253. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Premises used for a barber shop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and it shall be unlawful to permit waste materials of any kind to accumulate therein. It shall be unlawful to employ in such establishments any person afflicted with a venereal or contagious disease. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to use in any establishment used as a barber shop any implements or tools upon any person after the same have been used upon a person afflicted with any skin disease or scalp disease without sterilizing the tool or implement afterwards. It shall be unlawful to use any towel on any customer after the same has been used before, without having such towel sterilized and cleaned prior to such second usage. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.5.4, 2.2.5.5) 
Secs. 12-254-12-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BEAUTY SHOPS 

Sec. 12-271. - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter the term "beauty shop" shall mean the business activity which includes the styling, washing, cleansing, color rinsing, dyeing, and general treatment of the hair, primarily for female customers, as well as including, but not being limited to, various facial treatments, cosmetic applications and other services intended to beautify or enhance the appearance of the customer being serviced. 
(Code 1965, § 2, 2.53.1) 
Sec. 12-272. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate a beauty shop without first having obtained a license as herein provided. The fee for such a license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-272 and which shall also be based on the business' prior year's experience. If the operation is a new one, then the owner shall advise the collector of the number of operators employed (including the owner) and the license fee shall be determined accordingly. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.53.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-273. - Health and sanitation. 
    Each beauty shop licensee shall maintain his premises in a clean and sanitary condition. Electrical apparatus used for hair treatment and other services shall be maintained in safe and workable condition. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.53.3) 
Secs. 12-274-12-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COIN-OPERATED DEVICES 

Sec. 12-291. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or maintain for public use any coin-operated device, machine or mechanism which dispenses a product of any lawful kind or description or performs a service without first having secured a permit for such a device, machine or mechanism unless the same shall be incorporated under the meaning and application of another provision herein. The annual fee for such permit shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-291. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to devices, machines or mechanism for which another license or permit is required by another ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1(2.2.1.4(a)), 5-24-70; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-292. - Video gaming devices. 
    For video gaming terminals licensed and operated in accordance with the Video Gaming Act, an annual fee shall be paid in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-292. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 2, 7-14-14) 
Secs. 12-293-12-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEALERS 

Sec. 12-311. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any items, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs, as defined by Illinois law, without obtaining a license therefor. Such licenses shall be in addition to any or all other licenses held by applicant. 
(b)  Application to sell any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory of thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs shall be accompanied by affidavits by applicant and each and every employee authorized to sell such items that such person has never been convicted of a drug-related offense. 
(c)  Any person required to obtain such a license shall pay an annual fee in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-311. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, (2.2.56.1, 2.2.56.2, 2.2.56.6), 5-10-82; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-312. - Sales to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give any item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs in any form to any child under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1(2.2.56.3), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-313. - Records. 
    Every licensee under this article must keep a record of every item, effect, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs which is sold and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business. Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name and quantity of the product, the date and time of the sale, and the licensee or agent of the licensee's signature, such records shall be retained for not less than two years. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1(2.2.56.4), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-314. - Compliance with regulations. 
    A license under this article shall comply with all applicable regulations of the department of health services and police department. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1(2.2.56.5), 5-10-82) 
Secs. 12-315-12-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DRY CLEANERS 

Sec. 12-331. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dry cleaning: The process of cleaning fabric by immersion and agitation, or by immersion only, in volatile solvents (including, but not by way of limitation, solvents of petroleum distillate type, the coal tar distillate type and the chlorinated hydrocarbon type) and processes incidental thereto (including, but without limitation, spotting, cleaning, wet cleaning and finishing). 
    Dry cleaning establishment: Any structure, store, building or other place where the service of dry cleaning, wet cleaning as a process incidental to dry cleaning, dyeing, spotting, and/or finishing any fabric is rendered for hire, or is sold, resold, or offered for sale or resale. 
    Fabric: Any article of wearing apparel, household furnishing, rugs, textiles, fur and leather. 
    Finishing: The process of pressing and/or reshaping any fabric, which is designed to restore as nearly as possible the shape, dimensions, and contour of said fabric. 
    Spotting: The process designed to remove spots or stains which remain in a fabric after it has been subjected to the other processes of dry cleaning. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.13.1) 
Sec. 12-332. - License. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, operate or maintain any dry cleaning establishment in the village without first securing a license therefor as is herein required. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall be referred to the chief of the fire department who shall investigate or cause to be investigated the premises intended to be used, and shall report the result of the investigation to the president and board of trustees before the issuance of a license. No such license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation not complying with all the provisions of this article, with the provisions of the building code and all ordinances relating to flammable liquids. 
(b)  The annual license fee shall be an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-332. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.13.2, 2.2.13.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-333. - Inspections. 
    The chief of the fire department or other officials designated by the president and board of trustees shall have the right to enter any building or premises situated in the village and occupied by any dry cleaning establishment, in order to examine the same and to determine whether or not the building and premises, or any material, chemical or compound kept therein, or used thereon, or any article or fabric dry cleaned, dyed, spotted or finished, as received, used, kept, maintained or stored on the premises or building conforms to the ordinances and regulations of the village or constitutes a fire hazard within the village. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.13.6) 
Sec. 12-334. - Building and sanitation requirements. 
    No dry cleaning establishment shall be operated in a frame building. Such establishment shall be kept free from flammable wastes so far as possible, and it shall be unlawful to maintain or permit a stove or open flame of any kind in the premises. Smoking in such premises is hereby prohibited, and appropriate signs to that effect shall be posted in conspicuous places in the establishment. The premises must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and must be kept free from rats, mice and vermin. No person afflicted with a contagious or venereal disease shall be employed in any dry cleaning establishment. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.13.4) 
Secs. 12-335-12-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FLORISTS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate florists, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 

Sec. 12-351. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "florist" shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling flowers, shrubs or ornamental plants at retail. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.14.1) 
Sec. 12-352. - License. 
    No person shall do business as a florist in the village without first having secured a license therefor. Application for a license to do business as a florist shall be made in writing to the village clerk and must state thereon the nature of the business and the proposed location. The license fee for doing business as a florist shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-352. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.14.1-2.2.14.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-353. - Sanitary regulations. 
    No owner or operator of a florist shop shall permit any dead or dying vegetation to remain in or upon the premises so as to cause noxious or disagreeable odors. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.14.4) 
Secs. 12-354-12-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - FOOD DEALERS, FOOD HANDLERS, ETC.[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 11. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate places for eating, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5. 

Sec. 12-371. - Food dealer's license. 
(a)  The term "food dealers" as used in this section shall be construed to mean and include every person engaged in conducting or operating any of the following businesses: 
(1)  Fruit and vegetable store or establishment for the retail sale of fresh fruits, berries and vegetables; 
(2)  Grocery store, or establishment for the sale at retail of butter, cheese, vegetables or other provisions; 
(3)  Ice cream parlor; 
(4)  Meat market, or establishment for the retail sale of fresh meat, poultry or fish; 
(5)  Retail beverage store, or establishment for the sale at retail of any malted, cereal, carbonated or vinous non-intoxicating beverages as defined by law; 
(6)  Confectionery, or establishment for the sale of candy. 
The term "food" as used in this section shall be construed to include beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business in the village without first having secured a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in compliance with the ordinances relating thereto, and shall state the kind of food intended to be sold or handled. All applications for a license to conduct a business connected with the storage, handling, sale or preparation of food or drink intended for human consumption shall be referred to the health officer, who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises to be used, and report his finding thereon, recommending or advising against the issuance of the license. The annual fee for such a license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-371. Any person licensed to sell any of the foods or beverages for the sale of which a license is required by the terms of this section may conduct on the same premises and in connection with the licenses business any other business mentioned in this chapter without paying any additional fee therefor; provided that the fee paid for the licenses business is at least as great in amount as the fee required for the other business so conducted, but this section shall not be so construed as to relieve any such applicant from the regulator requirements for such business. Any food dealer's license may be revoked by the president and board of trustees for repeated violation of any ordinance relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises, and the articles sold. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.15.1, 2.2.15.4, 2.2.15.8, 2.2.15.9, Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-372. - Food delivery vehicle license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of any vehicle, including wagons and motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by manpower, for the storage or carrying of any meat, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables, bread or bakery goods, or any other provisions intended for human consumption, including beverages and milk, in the village for the purpose of delivery of any such foodstuffs to any place in the village for such purposes, unless a license for such vehicle is first secured. 
(b)  Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk, and shall recite the names of the persons from whom such deliveries are made and the nature of the goods carried. The clerk shall issue such licenses and shall give the president of the village a list of all such licenses issued. The annual fee for such licenses shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-372 and shall be issued for one year beginning on the first day of January of each year. Such fees shall be paid to the village clerk who shall turn them over to the village treasurer. No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food dealing establishment in the village. 
(c)  Any license issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by the village president for any violation of any law or ordinance relating to the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.16.1-2.2.16.3, 2.2.16.6; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-373. - Ice dealer license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of the retail sale of ice in the village without first having obtained a license therefor. Applications for such a license shall contain the number of vehicles or vending machines to be used for delivery of ice. Whenever the number of vehicles or vending machines licenses is increased, notice of this fact shall be given to the village clerk and the fee provided herein shall be paid. The annual fee for an ice dealer's license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-373. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.23.1, 2.2.23.2, 2.2.23.4; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-374. - Restaurant. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "restaurant" shall be construed to include any place where food or drink (other than alcoholic liquor) is prepared or served to the public for consumption on the premises, and the term "food" shall include beverages other than alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the village without having first obtained a license therefor. The annual fee for such licenses shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-374. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk on a form to be furnished by him, and shall comply with the provisions of all ordinances relating to licenses. All applications for a license to conduct a restaurant shall be referred to the health officer and the county health department, who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises to be used, and report their finding thereon, recommending or advising against the issuance of the license. 
(c)  Any restaurant license may be revoked by the president and board of trustees for repeated violation of any ordinance relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises or the articles sold. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.41.1-2.2.41.3, 2.2.41.5; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-375. - Milk dealer's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale or distribution of milk or cream in the village without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall comply with all ordinances governing such applications, and shall state, in addition to the other information required, the source of the supply of the milk to be sold, and the ownership of the cattle from which the milk is produced. The annual fee for such a license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-375. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.30.1-2.2.30.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-376. - Food refrigeration locker plant license. 
(a)  As used in this section the term "food refrigeration locker plant" shall mean and include any establishment wherein compartments are rented, leased or made available to other than the owner of the establishment for the refrigeration of food. The term "food" shall mean and include any edible or beverage used or intended to human consumption. 
(b)  No person shall operate a food refrigeration locker plant without having first secured a license therefor. Application for such license shall conform to the provisions of all ordinances relative thereto. In addition to all other information contained in such application, it shall state the number of units maintained on the premises, and the size of each unit; each application shall also state whether a unit is maintained in which food will be stored belonging to several individuals in addition to the separate units rented to other than the owner of the premises. The annual fee for such a license shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-376. No license shall be issued for any food refrigeration locker plant which does not comply with the laws of the state pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.17.1-2.2.17.3, 2.2.17.9; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
State Law reference- Cold storage plants, 225 ILCS 650/1 et seq. 
Secs. 12-377-12-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 12-391. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to prohibit the infringement of any business in any established residential areas and in doing so to regulate the term and frequency of personal property sales, such as garage sales, porch sales, basement sales, yard sales, and other similar types of sales so as not to disrupt the residential environment of the area. It is not the intent of this article to seek the control of sales of individuals selling a few of their household or personal items. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 1(2.2.55), 7-11-77) 
Sec. 12-392. - Permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to hold a personal property sale, shall first obtain a permit by applying to the village clerk prior to the sale. The sale shall be personal property of the permittee only. A permittee shall not offer for sale personal property previously acquired with the intent of re-sale. 
(b)  The fee to be paid for the permit shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-392. The permit must be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises of the permittee which shall be clearly visible from the street. 
(c)  A person shall be permitted to have up to four sales pursuant to this article XIII during each consecutive 12-month period. No permit shall be assignable. 
(d)  The permit shall be letter size (81/2 × 11 inches) of suitable weighted stock and of a bright color. The permit shall contain the name and address of the permittee, the dates of the sale, the date issued, and shall be signed by the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 1(2.2.55.1-2.2.55.4), 7-11-77; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 1-14-13) 
Sec. 12-393. - Hours of sale, duration of sales, etc. 
    A sale for which a permit is required by this article shall be conducted only between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. The sale may be for two consecutive days. If the weather should be rainy and/or inclement to the extent that such personal property sale will be impractical, the permittee shall notify the village clerk, who shall assign alternative dates without an additional permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 1(2.2.55.2), 7-11-77; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 1-14-13) 
Sec. 12-394. - Signs. 
    A person issued a permit pursuant to this article may exhibit up to four signs advertising the sale and providing directions to the general public as to how to reach the sale. Such signs may be posted on parkways, provided that all such signs must be freestanding and self-supporting. Such signs may not be posted more than 24 hours prior to the sale and must be removed within one hour following the conclusion of the sale. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a personal property sale to post any sign or signs on utility poles, trees and/or street signs within the village. 
(Ord. No. 765, § 1(2.2.55.5), 7-11-77; Ord. No. 88-17, § 1, 8-8-88; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 1-14-13) 
Secs. 12-395-12-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - HANDBILLS, ETC. 

Sec. 12-411. - Litter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or scatter any cards, circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise or any advertising matter on any public street or sidewalk or other public place in the village. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.18.1) 
Sec. 12-412. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, adopted March 13, 2006, deleted § 12-412, which pertained to a license for house to house distribution of handbills and was derived from Code 1965, § 2.2.18.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, adopted April 28, 1980; and Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 1987. 
Secs. 12-413-12-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - HARDWARE STORES 

Sec. 12-431. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate a hardware store without first having obtained a license as herein provided. Such license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-431. No license shall be issued except upon payment of this fee. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.19.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-432. - Safety precautions. 
    Each hardware store licensee shall store, inventory or stock all merchandise chemicals, flammables and other potentially dangerous items, and electrical devices, whether for sale, or used in services to the public in such a manner as to properly safeguard the public from injury or unnecessary exposure and shall be subject to such safety regulations of the village as may pertain thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.19.2) 
Secs. 12-433-12-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES 

Sec. 12-451. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a hotel, or a building or part thereof used or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for 20 or more persons for a period of one day or more without first having obtained a license therefor. The annual fee for such licenses shall be in an amount as that set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-451. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a rooming house, bed and breakfast, or building, apartment or portion of a building, in which any person or persons not related to the owner or occupant of such premises by blood or marriage are furnished sleeping accommodations for hire, without first securing a license therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-451. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.21.1, 2.2.21.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 2, 11-25-02) 
Sec. 12-452. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected, every hotel or rooming house operated in the village as frequently as may be necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.21.7) 
Sec. 12-453. - General condition of premises. 
    All premises used for hotel or rooming house purposes shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition in all portions of such premises. Hotels that are open for use by guests or by the public shall be kept lighted at all times they are so open to use. All such premises shall be kept heated between October 1 and May 1 to a temperature of not less than 68 degrees between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and to a temperature of not less than 55 degrees at all other hours. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.21.3) 
Sec. 12-454. - Exits. 
    No building shall be used for a hotel unless it is furnished with the number of exits and fire escapes required by the building ordinances of the village for the construction of a new hotel. No premises shall be used for a rooming house unless there are at least two exits to the outdoors from such premises. It shall be unlawful to block or permit the blocking of any exit from any premises used for a hotel or rooming house. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.21.4) 
Sec. 12-455. - Sanitary facilities. 
    Water closets and lavatories shall be available to all guests using any hotel or rooming house; and there shall be at least one bathroom equipped with water closet, shower or tub, and lavatory facilities for each ten residents on the premises. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.21.5) 
Sec. 12-456. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any fugitive from justice to stay in any rooming house or hotel. Each hotel proprietor shall keep or cause to be kept a register of guests as required by state law, and each operator of a rooming house shall keep a list of all persons staying therein. Such registration or list shall be available for inspection by any member of the police department at any time. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.21.6) 
State Law reference- Required books and records, 35 ILCS 145/4. 
Secs. 12-457-12-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - JUNK DEALERS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate secondhand and junk stores, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-3. 

Sec. 12-471. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of junk dealer or to keep any junk shop, store, yard or place for the purpose or sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper or empty bottles, without having obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions of all ordinances relating to licenses. The fee to be paid for such a license, which license shall be an annual license, shall be an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-471; provided that a junk dealer not maintaining a store or yard in the village shall pay the amount as listed in such article for each vehicle so used. 
(b)  Restriction. It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to collect, obtain, possess or "pick up" any recyclable items placed for collection in front of any business or residence as part of any recycling program sanctioned by the village. All junk dealer licenses issued within the village shall contain a statement in relation to the aforementioned restriction, together with a statement advising the licensee of the boundaries of the areas within the village in which a recycling program is being conducted. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.24.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 12-472. - Stolen goods. 
    Every keeper of a junk shop or junkyard who shall be in possession of or receive any goods, article or things of value which may have been lost or stolen, shall upon demand produce such articles or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.24.4) 
Sec. 12-473. - Vehicles. 
    Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.24.5) 
Secs. 12-474-12-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - LAUNDRIES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to locate and regulate the use and construction of laundries, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 

Sec. 12-491. - License. 
    No person shall operate or conduct a laundry in the village without having first obtained a license therefor; provided that establishments licensed as dry cleaning establishments need not obtain a laundry license in addition to the dry cleaning license. Application for such licenses shall be made in writing to the clerk and shall state thereon the location intended to be occupied. The annual fee for a laundry license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-491, and no license shall be issued except upon the payment of the fee. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.26.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-492. - Sanitation. 
    Premises used for laundries must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate on such premises; and the premises must be kept free from rats, mice, and vermin. It shall be unlawful to employ any person with a venereal or contagious disease in a laundry. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.26.3) 
Sec. 12-493. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police, or other officials designated by the president, are authorized to inspect, or cause to be inspected every establishment licensed under this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.26.4) 
Secs. 12-494-12-510. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - LUMBERYARDS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate lumberyards, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 

Sec. 12-511. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "lumberyard" shall mean any place used for the storage of lumber, wooden containers or wood in an amount exceeding 5,000 board feet. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.28.1) 
Sec. 12-512. - License. 
    No person shall establish, conduct or maintain a lumberyard in the village without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk in writing and shall state thereon the location and size of the lumberyard for which such license is intended. The annual fee for a license for a lumberyard shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-512. No license shall be issued without payment of this fee. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.28; 2.2.28.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-513. - Inspections. 
    The fire marshal is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected every lumberyard in the village to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.28.6) 
Sec. 12-514. - Fire extinguishing equipment. 
    It shall be the duty of every person owning or operating a lumberyard to have the same equipped with sufficient fire apparatus to handle any small fires which may start and to prevent their spreading. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.28.4) 
Sec. 12-515. - Piling lumber. 
    It shall be unlawful to pile any lumber in a lumberyard in such a way that the lumber is hanging over or in danger of falling onto any adjoining property, street, alley or public way. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.28.5) 
Secs. 12-516-12-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - MACHINE SHOPS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to locate and regulate the use and construction of machine shops, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 

Sec. 12-531. - Definition. 
    The term "machine shop" as used in this article shall be construed to include every workshop in which machines are made or metal parts thereof are repaired, or where parts of machines or tools, implements, gears, dies, screws, or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped, or repaired by means of a lathe of other machinery. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.29.1) 
Sec. 12-532. - License. 
    No person shall conduct, operate or manage a machine shop in the village without having first secured a license therefor; provided that this article shall not be construed as requiring an additional license for any class of machine shop specifically licensed under any other ordinance of the village. The annual fee for such license shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-532. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.29.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-533. - Inspections. 
    The health inspector is authorized to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.29.5) 
Sec. 12-534. - Sanitation. 
    No building, structure or part thereof shall be used for or in connection with any machine shop in any way so as to endanger the health or property of the employees or of the public. The owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or manager of any such machine shop shall cause all floors or other surfaces around or beneath any machine or work bench to be kept in good order and repair and shall have suitable and convenient and sanitary receptacles for receiving wastes and cloths used in and about the machine shop for the purpose of cleaning machines or parts thereof or which are intended for any other use. No person suffering from any actively contagious or infectious disease shall be employed in or about any machine shop where cutting compound or fluid is used. All such cutting compound or fluid shall be kept free from infectious or harmful matter. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.29.3) 
Sec. 12-535. - Operation at night. 
    No machine shop shall be operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any place in which a majority of the buildings within a radius of 400 feet are used exclusively for residence purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.29.4) 
Secs. 12-536-12-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - MOBILE HOME SALES 

Sec. 12-551. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "mobile trailer home" shall have the same definition as the term "trailer coacch." 
(Ord. No. 649, § 2.2.48.16, 12-22-69) 
Sec. 12-552. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or operate the business of selling mobile trailer homes, or items incidental thereto, in the village, without first having obtained a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the village clerk in compliance with ordinances relating to license applications. The annual fee for such a license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-552. No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character, nor to any corporation if any officer thereof is not a person of good moral character. 
(Ord. No. 649, §§ 2.2.48.17-2.2.48.19, 12-22-69; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-553. - General regulations. 
    A licensee under this article, shall cause safe stowage and parking of mobile trailer homes and shall take all other necessary safety precautions against fire or otherwise for the public safety and well being. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 2.2.48.20, 12-22-69) 
Secs. 12-554-12-565. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - MOTELS OR AUTO COURTS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to locate and regulate the use and construction of cabin accommodations, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 

Sec. 12-566. - Definition. 
    The terms "motel" or "auto court" used in this article shall be construed to mean any parking lot or garage for the accommodation of motor vehicles where transient sleeping accommodations are afforded or provided on the same premises for the public or for the occupants of such automobiles. A hotel which furnishes parking space or has a garage in connection with the hotel shall not be construed as an auto court. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.3.1) 
Sec. 12-567. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a motel or auto court without having first obtained a license therefor. Each applicant for such a license shall file an application with the village clerk, and shall state thereon the name and address of the applicant, name and address of the owner or manager thereof, location of the auto court, and the maximum number of persons and vehicles to be accommodated. This application shall be accompanied by plans of the toilet, bath and wash basin facilities, slop sinks, water faucets, sewer connections, driveways, and other improvements. The annual license fee for such a license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-567. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.3.1, 2.2.3.2, 2.2.3.4; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-568. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police is authorized to inspect, or cause to be inspected, each auto court in order to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.3.6) 
Sec. 12-569. - Fire walls. 
    No parking space shall be provided for motor vehicles within ten feet of any building or structure used for housing accommodation in an auto court unless the wall facing such parking space is constructed of fireproof materials and unless the windows in such wall, if any, are equipped with reinforced fire resistant glass. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.3.3) 
Sec. 12-570. - Lights. 
    Any area or premises of an auto court open to use by the public or by persons staying in or being accommodated in the court shall be kept adequately lighted at night; provided that such lights must be so shaded or otherwise regulated so as to prevent them from shining upon any adjacent premises. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.3.7) 
Sec. 12-571. - Sanitary requirements. 
    No premises shall be operated as an auto court unless they are equipped with adequate toilet and other sanitary facilities to serve the total number of persons accommodated therein. All such sanitary facilities shall be properly connected with the sanitary sewer system serving the village if the premises are located on a street served by such sewer. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.3.5) 
Sec. 12-572. - Parking of house trailers. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of an auto court for the accommodation of house trailers unless all ordinance requirements pertaining to trailer camps are complied with; provided that where a license fee for a trailer camp has been paid, it shall not be necessary to pay an additional fee for the operation of an auto court on the same premises. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.3.8) 
Sec. 12-573. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any violation of any ordinance or law on or in any auto court; such premises must be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and all waste material must be removed therefrom at least once every 24 hours. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.3.6) 
Secs. 12-574-12-589. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - NURSING HOMES, ETC.[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal licensing of nursing homes, 210 ILCS 45/3-104. 

Sec. 12-590. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the term "nursing home" shall mean any institution, place or family used for the reception or care, for a longer period than 24 hours, of three or more children or infants apart from their parents. A nursing home is further defined to mean any institution used for the reception or care of persons who are dependent or not capable of properly caring for themselves, and shall be understood to include homes for aged or infirm, orphan asylums, refuges and shelters and also boarding homes caring for three or more women with their children when such children are less than 14 years of age. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.32.1) 
Sec. 12-591. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly constituted authorities of the United States, the county, the village, or of the state, or any association or institution for the care of children which has been accredited, certified or licensed by the state pursuant to an act of the legislature, to regulate the treatment and control of dependent, neglected and delinquent children, to open, conduct, manage or maintain any nursing home without first obtaining a license therefor. Any person desiring such license shall make application in writing to the village clerk. Such applications shall conform to all ordinances relating to applications for licenses and shall state the location or proposed location of the home, the purpose for which it is to be opened, conducted or maintained, the accommodations for the inmates thereof, the nature and kind of care, instruction or benefits given or proposed to be given therein, the name and address of the officials and/or board of officials conducting, managing or maintaining such home, the name and address of the chief physician, surgeon, or attending physicians, or surgeons attending therein. The license fee for nursing homes shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-591. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.32.2, 2.2.32.3, 2.2.32.5; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Secs. 12-592-12-605. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - PAINT STORES 

Sec. 12-606. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate a paint store without first having obtained a license therefor. The fee for such a license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-606. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.34.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-607. - Safety regulations. 
    Each licensee under this article shall store, inventory or stock all merchandise, chemicals, flammables and other potentially dangerous items, and electrical devices, whether for sale, or used in services to the public, in such a manner as to properly safeguard the public from injury or unnecessary exposure and shall be subject to such safety regulations of the village as may pertain thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.34.2) 
Secs. 12-608-12-620. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - PARKING LOTS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to locate and regulate the use and construction of parking lots, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 

Sec. 12-621. - Definition. 
    The term "parking lot" as used in this article shall be construed to mean and include any place maintained for the outdoor parking of cars, excepting on a street, alley or other public place, where such parking is permitted upon the payment of compensation. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.1; Ord. No. 607, § 1, 7-17-67) 
Sec. 12-622. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for, any person to operate a parking lot without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall contain all necessary information to insure compliance with the provisions of this article, including a description of the location, size, number of cars, to be accommodated, and a statement of any services other than parking, or of any article or commodities for sale, offered to patrons of the parking lot. In addition, the applicant shall furnish a plot plan showing streets and alleys affected. The annual fee for such license shall be in an amount set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-622. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-623. - Fire protection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any parking lot unless there are available on the premises adequate fire extinguishers and personnel competent to use the same. There shall be maintained on each parking lot at least one hand chemical fire extinguisher having a capacity of one quart of liquid or two and one-half pounds of carbon dioxide for each ten cars for which accommodations are offered, which extinguishers shall always be maintained in good order and in accessible places. Where accommodations are provided for more than 100 cars, there shall be maintained in addition to the hand extinguishers required, at least one portable chemical fire extinguisher having a capacity of two and one-half gallons of liquid or 15 pounds of carbon dioxide. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.4) 
Sec. 12-624. - Driveways. 
    No driveway for a parking lot shall be constructed excepting in full compliance with the ordinances relative to the issuance of permits for driveways; it shall be the duty of the operator of each parking lot to maintain the sidewalk and parkway over which such driveway passes in good condition. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.5) 
Sec. 12-625. - Operation of other businesses. 
    If any business other than that of operating a parking lot is conducted on the same premises with a parking lot, such business shall be conducted in full compliance with all ordinances pertinent thereto, and any license required for the operation of such business must be procured and the fee required therefor must be paid. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.6) 
Sec. 12-626. - Intoxicating liquors. 
    It shall be unlawful to serve intoxicating liquor for consumption in any car parked in a parking lot or to drink any intoxicating liquor while therein. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.8) 
Sec. 12-627. - Pavement and litter control. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot unless the surface thereof is covered with concrete, asphalt, macadam or similar paving. Such parking lot shall at all times be kept clean and free from dust and refuse. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.9) 
Sec. 12-628. - Buildings. 
    Any buildings constructed on a parking lot shall be constructed in full compliance with the ordinances pertaining thereto, and shall have exterior walls of nonflammable material; provided, that any structure used or to be used for office purposes only may have less than the minimum area requirements prescribed for residences or commercial buildings. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.10) 
Sec. 12-629. - Condition of vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful to park or store, in any parking lot, any vehicle which is not in a condition ready for use, or to permit the parking of any abandoned, junked or partially disabled vehicle in any such lot. It shall be unlawful to use any parking lot for storage or parking of any vehicle for the purpose of displaying the same for sale, or to use any parking lot or portion thereof as an automobile repair shop. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.35.11) 
Sec. 12-630. - Miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  At the entrance of each parking lot there shall be posted in words and figures large enough to be read by prospective patrons, a statement of the rates to be charged and the closing hours. There shall be at least one attendant on the premises at all times during which the parking lot is open for business. 
(b)  If a parking lot is maintained in connection with an establishment serving food for consumption on the premises, and food or drinks are served to the occupants of cars, sufficient adequate containers must be maintained for all trash and refuse, and the refuse must be removed and the premises must be kept thoroughly clean by the proprietor. 
(c)  No parking lot shall be established or operated in any place where such establishment or operation would be in violation of the zoning or any other ordinance. Not more than one car for each 200 square feet of area shall be accepted for parking in any such place. Each parking lot shall be so marked as to show the parking space allotted for each car, and shall have sufficient entrances and exits to permit the entrance and egress of cars without obstruction to traffic. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.35.3, 2.2.35.7) 
Secs. 12-631-12-645. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - PAWNBROKERS[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate pawnbrokers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5. 

Sec. 12-646. - License. 
    No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker without having first obtained a license therefor. An application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made to the village clerk and shall state thereon the name of the applicant; the place of business; and the number of employees intended to be engaged. The chief of police or any other officer of the village designated by the board of trustees shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report back to the board of trustees whether or not such applicant is a person of good character; no license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. No such license shall be issued to any person who is not 18 years of age or older. The annual fee for a pawnbroker's license shall be as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-646. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.36.1-2.2.36.3; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-647. - Records. 
    Every pawnbroker doing business in the village shall keep a record of every transaction as required by state statute. Every pawnbroker doing business in the village shall comply with the identification procedures as required by state statute and in addition obtain the individual's thumbprint which shall be maintained in the record book as a part of the entry. Said records shall be open to inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business. It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to complete and make available for inspection by any police officer before the hour of 12:00 noon, each and every business day, the records required to be kept pursuant to this article, reflecting the completed transaction of the previous day. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.36.4; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-648. - Weapons. 
    No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack or sawed-off shotgun and no pawnbroker shall display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.36.5) 
Sec. 12-649. - Minors. 
    No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any person less than 18 years of age without the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor for each particular transaction. No pawnbroker shall employ a person who is less than 18 years of age to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.36.6) 
Sec. 12-650. - Stolen goods. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him, or which it is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(b)  In any event that stolen property is identified pursuant to this notice, or during an inspection of records by any police officer, the police department shall seize said stolen property and provide the pawnbroker with a receipt identifying all items seized within 72 hours. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.36.7; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-651. - Acting as secondhand dealers. 
    No pawnbroker shall conduct the business of a secondhand dealer without having obtained the license required for such dealer in addition to his pawnbroker's license. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.36.8) 
Secs. 12-652-12-670. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIOS 

Sec. 12-671. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate a photographer's studio without having first obtained a license therefor. The fee for such a license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-671. No license shall be issued except upon payment of this fee. Applications for such licenses shall conform to all applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.37.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-672. - General safety regulations. 
    Each licensee under this article shall store, inventory or stock all merchandise, chemicals, flammables and other potentially dangerous items, and electrical devices, whether for sale, or used in services to the public, in such a manner as to properly safeguard the public from injury or unnecessary exposure and shall be subject to such safety regulations of the village as may pertain thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.37.2) 
Secs. 12-673-12-690. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - PUBLIC GARAGES[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to locate and regulate the use and construction of parking lots, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 

Sec. 12-691. - License. 
    No person shall operate or maintain a public garage in the village without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications for such a license shall be made in writing to the village clerk, and shall state the location of the garage and the number of cars which can be accommodated therein. The annual fee for such license shall be an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-691, and no license shall be issued until the fee is paid; provided that any required maintenance fee for a commercial driveway need not be paid where the driveway is for a licensed garage. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.39.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-692. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police and the fire marshal are authorized to make or cause to be made such inspection of public garages as may be necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. Any police officer shall be permitted at any reasonable time to view every car stored or kept in any public garage, and it shall be unlawful to hinder any such inspection or to conceal any motor car or motor vehicle from such inspection. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.39.7) 
Sec. 12-693. - Location restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate, maintain or conduct a public garage within 300 feet of any church, school or hospital in the village. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.39.5) 
Sec. 12-694. - Smoking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light a cigarette, pipe or cigar in any public garage. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.39.3) 
Sec. 12-695. - Buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any public garage in a frame building, or in any building or structure used for school, church or theater purposes, or in any building which does not conform to the requirements of the building ordinances. The premises of every garage must be kept clean and free from flammable waste material. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.39.4) 
Sec. 12-696. - Changing identification marks, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change the identification marks on the engine of any car or automobile in any public garage, and it shall be unlawful to change the license tags on such cars excepting in accordance with the register of motor vehicles kept by the Secretary of the State. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.39.6) 
Secs. 12-697-12-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIX. - SCAVENGERS[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, ch. 10. 

Sec. 12-711. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "private scavenger" shall mean a person who collects the garbage and refuse of another for removal pursuant to a contract with the person being served. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.54.1) 
Sec. 12-712. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or activity of a private scavenger without first having obtained a license as herein provided. The annual fee for such license shall be in an amount as listed in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-712. No license shall be issued except on payment of this fee. 
(b)  Restriction. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaging in the business or activity of private scavenger to collect, obtain, possess or "pick up" any recyclable items placed for collection in front of any business or residence as part of any recycling program sanctioned by the village. All scavenger licenses issued within the village shall contain a statement in relation to the aforementioned restriction, together with a statement advising the licensee of the boundaries of the areas within the village in which a recycling program is being conducted. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.54.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 6-13-88) 
Sec. 12-713. - Safety precautions. 
    Private scavengers shall utilize and operate safe and effective equipment and shall undertake all reasonable precautions to prevent any injury to property or persons in this village. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.54.3) 
Sec. 12-714. - Vehicles. 
    Any vehicle used by a private scavenger in his business shall be watertight, and equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for the transportation of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be driven through or over any street during or on a Sunday. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.42.4) 
Sec. 12-715. - Disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any private scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse in any place within the village limits. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.42.5) 
Secs. 12-716-12-730. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXX. - SECONDHAND STORES[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate secondhand dealers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-3. 

Sec. 12-731. - License. 
    No person shall operate or conduct a secondhand store in the village without having first obtained a license therefor. The annual license fee for a secondhand store shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-731. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk in writing, and shall state the location intended to be used. Upon receipt of any such application, the clerk or any person authorized by him or by the president and board of trustees to do so shall investigate the character of the applicant and shall report to the board of trustees the result of such investigation. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.43.1, 2.2.43.2; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-732. - Records. 
    Every person operating a secondhand store shall keep a record of all articles purchased, which records shall be, together with the articles themselves, open to inspection of any member of the police department at all reasonable hours. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.43.3) 
Sec. 12-733. - Operation as pawnbroker. 
    No person operating a secondhand store shall do business as a pawnbroker without also securing a pawnbroker's license. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.43.4) 
Secs. 12-734-12-750. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXI. - SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE STATIONS[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Cross reference- Gasoline pumps on streets, § 9-7; flammable liquids, § 9-71 et seq. 

Sec. 12-751. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article the term "self-service gasoline station" shall mean that portion of the property where flammable or combustible liquids used as motor fuel are stored and subsequently dispensed, from fixed approved dispensing equipment into fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the station attendant. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.2), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-752. - Compliance with state law. 
    The provisions of this article shall be in addition to any rules and regulations relating to the operation, storage, transportation, sale and uses of gasoline and volatile oils promulgated by the state. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.4, 2.2.4C.6), 5-10-82) 
State Law reference- State regulation of gasoline stations authorized, 430 ILCS 15/2. 
Sec. 12-753. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a self-service gasoline station in the village without first having obtained a business license for same. The annual fee to be paid to the village for such license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-753. No such license shall be issued unless the station and equipment to be used therein fully complies with the ordinances of the village and unless approved by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department may, for failure to comply with this article, or for other good and just causes, refuse to issue or renew, suspend or revoke a self-service gasoline station license. The fire chief shall serve notice of such refusal, suspension or revocation upon the applicant for, or the holder of such license, by personal service or by certified or registered mail, if the applicant for or the holder of such license, within ten days after the notice of such refusal, suspension or revocation is served, files in the office of the chief of the fire department or in the office of the village clerk, a petition for reconsideration, the fire chief shall grant a hearing with regard to the petition. Any order of the fire chief may be appealed to the president and board of trustees within ten days of its entry. Such order shall not prevent the imposition of any fines or penalties otherwise imposed for violation of this article. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this section to any self-service gasoline station unless a state permit has been issued for such station. In the event the state shall have suspended or revoked its permit, the village license shall automatically be suspended or revoked for the concurrent period. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.1, 2.2.4C.5, 2.2.4C.6), 5-10-82; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-754. - Live-in facilities prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to provide for the use of the live-in facilities or combinations for the benefit of any owner, operator, or employee of a self-service gasoline station on the premises of such station. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(a)), 5-20-82) 
Sec. 12-755. - Attendants. 
(a)  All self-service gasoline stations shall have at least one attendant who is at least 18 years old on duty while the station is open to the public. The attendant's primary function shall be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of flammable liquids while such liquids are actually being dispensed; this shall not be interpreted as prohibiting the "split-island" type of operation. 
(b)  The attendant shall have immediate access to emergency cut-off switches provided at a location remote from the dispensing devices, which location shall be subject to approval by the department of public safety or chief of the fire department. 
(c)  The attendant shall supervise the dispensing of motor fuels. The attendant shall refuse service to any person who is smoking or who appears, for any reason, to be unable to dispense the motor fuel safely and shall shut off the dispensing unit if a patron fails to follow instructions in compliance with this article. 
(d)  All attendants and other employees shall be thoroughly instructed in the operation and use of the communication system, the control station, the fire extinguishing equipment, the operation of the dispensing units and safety regulations for the dispensing of motor fuels. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(b)-(f)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-756. - Minimum age of persons operating pumps. 
    No person under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to operate pumps at a self-service gasoline station and a sign shall be prominently displayed indicating this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(g)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-757. - Access, etc., to dispensing area. 
    The dispensing area of a self-service gasoline station shall at all times be in clear view of the attendant and the placing or allowing of any obstacle to come between the dispensing area and the attendant control area shall be prohibited. The attendant shall at all times be able to communicate with persons in the dispensing area. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(c)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-758. - Dispensing units and devices generally. 
(a)  Approved "self-service" dispensing devices are permitted at gasoline stations when available and open to the public, provided that all dispensing of motor fuels, except low pressure gas (lpg), by a person other than the service station attendant is under the supervision and control of a qualified attendant and the dispensing nozzle is a listed automatic closing type without a latch-opening device. 
(b)  Gasoline or other dispensing nozzles at a self-service gasoline station shall not be of the "latch-open" type. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.2(c), 2.2.4C.3(i)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-759. - Location of gasoline dispensing units. 
    Dispensing pumps at a self-service gasoline station shall be located at least 13 feet inside station property lines and no more than ten feet from any building opening. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(h)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-760. - Protection of dispensing units. 
    Dispensing units at a self-service gasoline station shall be mounted either on a concrete island or protected against collision damage by suitable means in a manner approved by the fire chief and the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(l)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-761. - Fire extinguishers. 
    At least one type ABC fire extinguisher, with a capacity of ten pounds, shall be at the attendant's control station at a self-service gasoline station. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(j)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-762. - Pump operating instructions. 
    Signs giving instructions for the operation of gasoline or other fuel dispensing equipment, in block letters at least one-half-inch in height shall be conspicuously posted at each self-service gasoline station and a sign bearing the following words in block letters at least two inches in height shall be conspicuously posted on each gasoline or other pump island where self-service is offered: 
    "STOP ENGINE" 
    "NO SMOKING" 
    "WARNING-IT IS UNLAWFUL TO DISPENSE GASOLINE INTO UNAPPROVED CONTAINERS" 
    All signs required by this section shall be constructed of weather-resistant material. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(k)), 5-10-82) 
Sec. 12-763. - Portable containers. 
    No portable containers of more than six gallons shall be filled with gasoline, at a self-service gasoline station except as dispensed directly into the fuel tanks attached to a motor vehicle. All portable receptacles for gasoline shall be red and shall be labeled in letters of a contrasting color and a height of not less than one-half-inch, and it shall be unlawful to put any other liquids or oils except gasoline in such receptacles theretofore used for gasoline so long as such receptacles are so painted red and labeled "gasoline." In all circumstances, the container shall be of material approved by the state division of fire protection. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1(2.2.4C.3(m)), 5-10-82) 
State Law reference- "Red can" law, 430 ILCS 20/1. 
Secs. 12-764-12-775. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXII. - TELEVISION, RADIO, ETC., APPLIANCE STORES 

Sec. 12-776. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate a television, radio and electrical appliance store, retail, without first having obtained a license as herein provided. The fee for such a license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-776. No license shall be issued except upon payment of this fee. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.46.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-777. - Safety provisions. 
    Each licensee under this article shall store, inventory or stock all merchandise, chemicals, flammables and other potentially dangerous items, and electrical devices, whether for sale, or used in services to the public, in such a manner as to properly safeguard the public from injury or unnecessary exposure and shall be subject to such safety regulations of the village as may pertain thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.46.2) 
Secs. 12-778-12-790. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXIII. - TOBACCO DEALERS 

Sec. 12-791. - License. 
    No person shall engage in the business of selling at retail of cigars or tobacco including selling by automatic vending devices, without obtaining a license therefor. Applications for such license shall be made in writing to the village clerk, and he shall cause an inspection to be made of the character of the applicant. No such license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good character. The annual fee for such a license shall be an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-791. The annual fee for each cigarette vending machine shall be an amount as listed in such article V, chapter 2. Any license issued under this section may be revoked for a violation of any provision of this article or of any ordinance relating to tobacco dealers or the premises used. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.47.1, 2.2.47.2, 2.2.47.5; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-792. - Inspections. 
    The chief of police is authorized to inspect premises licensed pursuant to this article in order to insure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.47.3) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to inspect tobacco, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-3. 
Sec. 12-793. - Sanitation. 
    Premises and buildings used for the sale of cigars and tobacco in any form must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.47.3) 
Sec. 12-794. - Minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give cigars or tobacco in any form to any male or female child under 18 years of age, except on written order of any adult known to the dealer. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.47.4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 685/4. 
Secs. 12-795-12-810. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXIV. - UNDERTAKERS 

Sec. 12-811. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an undertaking establishment or to operate as an undertaker or mortician in the village without first having obtained a license as herein provided. Such license shall be an annual license and shall be issued upon payment of a fee in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-811. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.49.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Secs. 12-812-12-825. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXV. - MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2006-7, adopted March 13, 2006, retitled art. XXXV, used car dealers, to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate dealers in used goods, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-3. 

Sec. 12-826. - Definition. 
    As used in this article the term "motor vehicle dealer" shall mean a person, dealing in the sale, purchase or trade, at wholesale or retail, of used or current model automobiles, motor bikes or motorcycles which are merchantable and operable and are equipped in accordance with regulations provided by the Secretary of State of Illinois, in accordance with statues made and provided therefor. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.50.1(a); Ord. No. 618, § 1, 2-26-68; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 12-827. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct the business of being a motor vehicle dealer without a license therefor for each location. 
(b)  Any person desiring to obtain such a license shall make application therefor, in writing, to the village clerk. All application forms shall be prescribed and furnished by the village clerk and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and post office address of the applicant; 
(2)  Whether the applicant is a person, or persons, firm, partnership or corporation; 
(3)  The street number of the building, structure, or place in which the applicant intends to carry on, maintain, conduct or engage in such business; and 
(4)  Such other information as the village clerk shall require. 
The application shall be signed by the applicant or its proper officers. 
(c)  The application of no person or partnership shall be considered until such person or members of said partnership have become bona fide residents of the state. 
(d)  The annual fee for such a license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-827. 
(e)  In the event any person issued a license under the provisions of this section has such license revoked, no license shall be granted to such person to conduct or carry on such business, within six months after such revocation. 
(f)  Any licensee who discontinues business for a period exceeding 30 days, will automatically relinquish all rights or interest in the license, and the license shall be automatically revoked. 
(g)  Each licensee shall display the license in a conspicuous place in his place of business. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.50.1-2.2.50.6, 2.2.50.12, 2.2.50.16, 2.2.50.18; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 12-828. - Police to investigate dealers. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make an investigation of any motor vehicle dealer whom he might have reason to believe is not conforming to this article or any other ordinance or law pertaining to the possession and sale of used automobiles. Such officer shall investigate any used automobile dealer for violation of this article on information given him of such violations. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.50.27; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 12-829. - Storage of abandoned vehicles, etc. 
    A motor vehicle dealer shall not keep upon his premises any wrecked, disabled, partially dismantled, dilapidated, inoperable or other motor vehicles retained by such dealer for the sale of parts, or store any automobile parts or equipment for sale or other disposal either at wholesale or retail. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.50.1(a); Ord. No. 618, § 1, 2-26-68; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 12-830. - General duty of licensee. 
    Every person licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be strictly responsible for the conduct of his employees insofar as the sales or purchases of automobiles or motor vehicles are concerned; it shall be his duty to see that no automobiles or motor vehicles are sold or purchased by his agents or any other person in and upon his premises, other than his own automobiles or motor vehicles, unless such person has a license as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.51.20) 
Sec. 12-831. - Records. 
    Each licensee under this article shall keep a book or other suitable record which shall contain an accurate description of any motor vehicle purchased, taken or received by such licensee. Every such entry shall be made at the time when such motor vehicle is purchased, taken or received. Such book or record in which such entries are made shall be kept and preserved in and at the place of business of such licensee in the village. In the case of used motor vehicles, the description shall include the engine number, if any, the maker's number, if any, and any other information that shall be required by the committee or the village clerk. The book or record provided for herein shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any member of said committee, or any member of the village police force or any member of the state police. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.50.13; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, 3-13-06) 
Secs. 12-832-12-845. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXVI. - VARIETY STORES 

Sec. 12-846. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and operate a variety store without first having obtained a license as herein provided. The fee for such license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-846. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.51.1; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 12-847. - Safety regulations. 
    Each licensee under this article shall store, inventory or stock all merchandise, chemicals, flammables and other potentially dangerous items, and electrical devices, whether for sale, or used in services to the public, in such a manner as to properly safeguard the public from injury or unnecessary exposure and shall be subject to such safety regulations of the village as may pertain thereto. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.51.2) 
Secs. 12-848-12-854. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXVII. - LANDSCAPERS AND LANDSCAPING BUSINESSES 

Sec. 12-855. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm (whether a partnership, joint venture or other form of business entity) or corporation to conduct or operate a landscaping business, or to do any landscaping work, without first having obtained a license. For the purposes of this section, the terms "landscaping" and "landscaping work" shall synonymously mean any work involving the removal and/or relocation of dirt and/or the addition of dirt, shrubbery, flowering plants and the like by any person, firm or corporation holding himself or itself out as having professional qualifications so to do for the purposes of aesthetically improving the appearance of any lot, parcel or tract of land or beautifying any structure or building located thereon. The fee for such license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-855. License applicants shall submit a copy of insurance coverages at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 88-7, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, 3-13-06) 
Sec. 12-856. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-07, § 3, adopted March 13, 2006, deleted § 12-856, which pertained to landscaping permits and was derived from Ord. No. 88-7, § 1. 
ARTICLE XXXVIII. - ANTENNA TOWER AND SATELLITE DISH INSTALLERS 

Sec. 12-857. - License. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm (whether a partnership, joint venture or other form of business entity) or corporation to conduct or operate a satellite dish installation business or antenna tower installation business or to perform any satellite dish installation or antenna tower installation without first having obtained a building permit or business or contractor's license. Prior to the beginning of any such satellite installation or antenna tower installation work the person, firm or corporation intending to perform such work shall register with the village administrative offices and pay the appropriate building permit fee or show proof of business license or contractor's license. The business license fee shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 12-13. 
(Ord. No. 95-23, § 3, 5-22-95) 
Secs. 12-858-12-870. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXXIX. - ADULT USE OWNER/OPERATOR/MANAGER[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, adopted June 14, 1999, enacted provisions which pertained to adult use owner, operator, manager. Such provisions, §§ 12-771-12-774, were redesignated as 12-871-12-874 in order to conform to the numbering system established for this Code. 

Sec. 12-871. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
    Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale, rental or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin-operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities," or "specified anatomical areas;" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material. 
    Adult entertainment cabaret: A public or private establishment which: (i) features or permits topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or female impersonators; (ii) features or permits entertainers or exhibitors who display "specified anatomical areas"; or (iii) features or permits entertainers or exhibitors who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in explicit simulations of, "specified sexual activities". 
    Adult motion picture theater: A building or area used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult novelty store: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing "novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for "specialized sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material. 
    Adult use: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses. 
    Specified sexual activities: For the purpose of this article "specified sexual activities" means: (i) human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (ii) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and (iii) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. 
    Specified anatomical areas: For the purpose of this article, "specified anatomical areas" means: less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals, (ii) pubic region, (iii) buttock; (iv) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 12-872. - Registration. 
    The owner of a building or premises in which adult uses, in whole or part, operate and the owner of any business in which adult use are in whole or a part of said operation shall register the following information with the village clerk: 
(1)  Legal name. In the case of any business entity other than an individual, individuals or a sole proprietorship, a copy of the legal incorporation or declaration of partnership papers shall also be filed with the village clerk. In case of a land trust, the names of the beneficial owners and/or a copy of the land trust agreement and declaration of trust shall also be filed; 
(2)  Address of the premises; 
(3)  The name of the business or establishment; 
(4)  The name(s) and address(es) of all business operators, beneficial owners and/or the major stockholders of the business or establishment if different than that provided above; 
(5)  The date of initiation of the adult use; 
(6)  The nature of the adult use; 
(7)  If the building or premises are leased, a copy of said lease. 
(Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 12-873. - License. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to conduct or operate any business which includes in whole or in part an adult use without first having obtained a business license for same. The annual fee to be paid to the village for such a license shall be $750.00. Prior to issuance, a background check shall be conducted by the chief of police or other officer appointed by him on the applicant. No license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving any sex offense, any offenses involving exploitation or injury to minors, or contributing to the delinquency of a minor. 
(b)  The license issued subject to the conditions of subsection (a) above, may be suspended or revoked by the corporate authorities based upon reasonable cause including, but not limited to, any ordinance violation or any violation of state statute, county ordinance or federal law being committed on said premises by the owner or operator of said business. Further, the license issued subject to the conditions of subsection (a) above, may be suspended by the corporate authorities based upon reasonable cause including, but not limited to, any ordinance violation or any violation of state statute, county ordinance or federal law being committed repeatedly by patrons on said premises. "Being committed repeatedly" for the purposes of this section shall mean four violations or more within any 30-day period. Interim emergency suspensions up to five days may be issued by the president with the concurrence of three trustees in case of any situation involving the danger of fire, safe patron evacuation or other public health and safety without a formal hearing. For all other suspensions or for a revocation of the license issued pursuant to subsection (a) above, the licensee has a right to a hearing before the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 12-874. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
    The provisions of this article shall be in addition to any rules, regulations or ordinances as applicable to adult uses or other business or activities occurring on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, 6-14-99) 
Secs. 12-875-12-879. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XL. - PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS BROKER 

Sec. 12-880. - Records. 
(a)  Every broker, broker's agent or broker's employee, shall keep a record of all transactions involving the purchase, sale, barter, exchange or other conveyance or receipt of any precious metal or gem as defined in section 12-883 below. Such record shall be hand written or legibly printed, or may be maintained in a computer database. All entries into the record shall be in the English language. 
(b)  The record maintained as stated above shall be made at the time of the transaction and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name, age, date of birth, gender, place of residence, general description of the individual with whom the transaction is had and the signature of the individual and their thumbprint on the receipt of the permanent record. The record shall also include the date and time of the transaction and the signature of the broker, agent or employee who consummated said transaction. 
(2)  A photocopy of a valid state-issued driver's license or state-issued identification card bearing the photograph of the customer with whom the transaction was consummated. If the customer does not have a valid state-issued photo identification or driver's license, broker, broker's agent or employee shall photograph customer with said photo depicting a clear and visible view of the customers face and head. Customers name shall be inscribed on the back of said photo, and the photo shall be maintained with the other record of said transaction. 
If the customer does not have a valid state-issued driver's license or identification card containing a photograph, name and address of the customer, two kinds of identification must be shown, and one of the two forms of identification must include the customer's residence address. These forms of identification shall include, but not be limited to the following: Social Security card, utility bill, employee or student identification card, credit card, or a civic, union or professional association membership card. 
(3)  A description of every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged by giving the manufacturer's name and other marks of identification appearing on the article including, but not limited to, the serial number and engravings, if any, on the article, and a complete description of all components or pieces of each article, including any stone, gems and the weight and composition of the metal comprising the article. 
(4)  The price or consideration received, and the name and address of the receiving party in the case of sale, and the sales price in the case of a purchase, and the method of payment. 
(c)  All entries in the record shall be signed and dated by the broker, his agent or employee making the entry. 
(d)  Such records shall be retained for a period of one year from the date of the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-881. - Daily report. 
    It shall be the duty of the broker to complete and make available for the inspection by the chief of police or his designee before the hour of 12:00 noon, each and every business day, a copy of the records required to be kept under this article, reflecting the completed transactions of the previous day. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-882. - Inspections. 
    The record as required above, the goods, articles, metals, stones or other things purchased, received or kept for sale or exchange, shall be open to inspection by any member of the police department of the village at all reasonable business times, or any person duly authorized in writing for such purpose by the chief of police as his or her designee. In any event that stolen property is identified during any inspection, the police department shall seize said stolen property and provide the precious metal and/or gem broker with a receipt identifying all items seized within 72 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-883. - Definitions. 
    Gems. Include, but are not limited to: Diamonds, opals, citrine, garnet, sapphire, ruby, emerald, tourmaline, quartz, turquoise, morganite, kunzite, topaz, aquamarine, zircon, tanzanite, alexandrite, coral, pearl, amethyst, apalite, jade, peridot, moonstone, lapis, malachite, iolite, diopside, tiger's eye, onyx, ivory, or any composition or jewelry containing any amount of said gems. 
    Precious metals. Include, but are not limited to: Any metal or alloy thereof containing any amount of gold, silver, sterling silver, platinum, copper, brass, nickel, palladium, rhodium, iridium, osmium, rhenium, mercury, indium, bismuth, or gallium, and includes U.S. minted currency containing any of the above metals. 
    Precious metals and/or gem broker. Any person having an interest in or employed by or acting as an agent of or on behalf of any person having an interest in a business whose undertakings involve the purchase or sale of precious metals or gems as defined herein in section 12-883, but excluding those persons or businesses licensed by the State of Illinois under the "Pawnbroker Regulation Act, 205 ILCS 510 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-884. - Precious metals or gem brokers license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business within the corporate limits of the Village of Crete as a precious metals or gem broker, as defined hereinabove, without having first secured a license therefore from the Crete Village Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-885. - Precious metals or gems brokers license application. 
(a)  Application for a precious metals or gems brokers license to the village clerk shall be made upon a form provided by the office of the village clerk. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application: 
(1)  Name; place of residence and length of residence at such address; Social Security Number; and date of birth. 
(2)  Identification: Copy of current state photo identification or driver's license. 
(3)  Date of previous application: The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this chapter, if any. 
(4)  Revocation history: Whether a license issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked. 
(5)  Conviction of a violation; history: Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the ordinance of any other Illinois municipality regulating the activities of a precious metals or gems broker license or similar such ordinances or laws of other jurisdictions otherwise named. 
(6)  Convictions history: Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States, or had a legal disposition of a sentence for a crime involving theft or dishonesty. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)  Every applicant may be required to submit to fingerprinting by the police department in connection with the application for a precious metals or gem brokers license. The applicant shall pay the fee as set by the Illinois State Police for fingerprint submissions. 
(d)  The office of the village clerk shall cause to be kept an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all brokers licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the denial of applications. The clerk shall forward a copy of said record to the chief of police on a quarterly basis. 
(e)  No brokers license or broker's employee permit, shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the law of the State of Illinois or federal law of the United States within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, nor to any person who has been convicted of any criminal offense involving theft, possession of stolen property or dishonesty, or whose broker's license issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-886. - License fee. 
    Each broker's license applicant shall pay a $375.00 application fee for the original application fee, and $250.00 for each annual renewal license application fee. Except, a person or business licensed by the village and State of Illinois to do business as a pawnbroker pursuant to 205 ILCS 510 et seq., shall not also be required to obtain a precious metals or gems broker's license. However, those licensed by the village and State of Illinois to transact business as pawnbrokers shall otherwise comply with all the rules and regulations established herein in sections 12-880 through 12-890 inclusive. Should there be any conflict between the terms of this article and the Pawnbroker's Regulation Act cited above, the provisions of the more restrictive law shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-887. - Issuance of license for precious metals or gems broker's license. 
    The village clerk, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, and after the return of the fingerprint check by the state police shall, within 30 business days, approve or deny the application. If the person does not possess the qualifications for a license, as herein required, and the issuance of a license to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter, then the village clerk shall deny the application. If the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the license shall be issued so long as the application fees have been fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-888. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No broker licensed hereunder shall operate or allow its business to operate before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  No broker, broker's agent or employee shall accept any precious metal or gem as defined herein, from a minor under the age of 18, or person known to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or any person known to him/her to have been convicted of a felony, theft or crime of dishonesty. 
(c)  No broker, broker's agent or employee shall sell, transfer, exchange, or dispose of, or melt, transfigure or transform from the design and form in which it was received any precious metal or gem as defined herein within seven days of the date it was received. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-889. - Employee permit. 
    No broker shall allow an agent, employee or other person to act on his behalf transacting any purchase, sale, exchange or other transfer of any precious metal or gem as defined herein in section 12-883, until such agent, employee, or person has applied for and been approved by the village of a broker's employee permit. A broker's employee permit application shall be provided by the village clerk. The employee permit applicant shall be subject to the same processing regulations, rules and prohibitions as established herein and imposed upon a broker license applicant by section 12-885. The cost of fingerprinting shall be borne by the employee permit applicant or broker, and paid at the time the permit application is made. The fee for an employee permit shall be $50.00 to be paid to the village clerk at the time application is made. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Sec. 12-890. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be civil in nature and prosecuted under the terms of the Village of Crete Administrative Adjudication Ordinance and the rules and regulations contained therein. Fines for violations may be imposed up to $750.00 per incident. 
(b)  A broker's license or employee permit may be suspended or revoked in the sole discretion of the village president, if after properly written notice to the licensee and hearing by the village president, or his/her designee, it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that said broker, broker's agent or employee committed a criminal offense in the operation of the licensed business, and especially, any criminal offense involving, dishonesty, theft, or the transfer or possession of stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 5-9-11) 
Secs. 12-891-12-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XLI. - PENALTIES[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ordinance No. 2011-09, adopted May 9, 2011 renumbered existing art. XL "Penalties" to art. XLI, as set out herein. 

Sec. 12-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 9, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 13 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses involving liquor and underage persons, § 4-2. 

Sec. 13-1. - Portions of State Criminal Code adopted. 
(a)  The following provisions of the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
Article 2. General definitions: 
Sections 5/2-5 through 5/2-22; 
Article 12. Bodily harm: 
Section 5/12-1 Assault; 
Section 5/12-2 Aggravated assault; 
Section 5/12-3 Battery; 
Section 5/12-5 Reckless conduct; 
Article 15. Definitions: 
Section 5/15-1 Property; 
Section 5/15-2 Owner; 
Section 5/15-3 Permanent deprivation; 
Section 5/15-4 Deception; 
Section 5/15-5 Threat; 
Section 5/15-6 Stolen property; 
Section 5/15-7 Obtain; 
Section 5/15-8 Obtains control; 
Section 5/15-9 Value; 
Article 16. Theft and related offenses: 
Section 5/16-1 Theft; 
Section 5/16-2 Theft of lost or mislaid property; 
Section 5/16-3(a) Theft of labor or services or use of property; 
Section 5/16-3.1 False report of theft and other losses; 
Section 5/16-5 Theft from coin-operated machines; 
Article 16A Retail theft: 
Section 5/16A-2 Definitions; 
Section 5/16A-2.1 through 5/16A-2.13 Definitions 
Section 5/16A-3 Offense of retail theft; 
Article 16B Protection of Library Materials: 
Section 5/16B-1 Definitions; 
Section 5/16B-2 Library theft; 
Section 5/16B-2.1 Criminal mutilation or vandalism of library materials; 
Article 16D Computer Crime: 
Section 5/16D-2 Definitions; 
Section 5/16D-3 Computer tampering; 
Article 17 Deception: 
Section 5/17-1 Deceptive practices; 
Section 5/17-20 Obstructing gas, water and electric current meters; 
Article 19 Burglary: 
Section 5/19-4 Criminal trespass to residence; 
Article 21 Damage and Trespass to Property: 
Section 5/21-1 Criminal damage to property; 
Section 5/21-1.1 Criminal damage of fire fighters apparatus hydrants or equipment; 
Section 5/21-1.3 Criminal defacement of property; 
Section 5/21-2 Criminal trespass to vehicles; 
Section 5/21-3 Criminal trespass to real property; 
Section 5/21-5 Criminal trespass to state supported land; 
Section 5/21-6 Unauthorized possession or storage of weapons; 
Article 21.1 Residential Picketing: 
Section 5/21.1-2 Prohibition - Exceptions (residential picketing); 
Article 24 Deadly weapons: 
Section 5/24-1 Unlawful use of weapons; 
Article 26 Disorderly Conduct: 
Section 5/26-1 Disorderly conduct; 
Section 5/26-2 Interference with emergency communication; 
Section 5/26-3 Use of a facsimile machine in unsolicited advertising or fund-raising; 
Article 31 Interference with Public Officers: 
Section 5/31-1 Resisting or obstructing a peace officer; 
Section 5/31-3 Obstructing service of process; 
Section 5/31-4 Obstructing justice; 
Section 5/31-8 Refusing to aid an officer; 
Article 32 Interference with Judicial Procedure: 
Section 5/32-5.3 False personation of a parent or legal guardian; 
Section 5/32-7 Simulating legal process; 
Article 34 Construction and Effective Date: 
Section 5/34-1 Effect of headings; 
Section 5/34-2 Partial invalidity. 
(b)  The following provisions of the Obscene Phone Call Act (720 ILCS 135/0.01 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
Section 135/1 Transmission of obscene messages prohibited; 
Section 135/1-1 Harassment by telephone. 
(c)  The following provisions of the Abandoned Refrigerator Act (720 ILCS 505/0.01 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
Section 505/1 Abandonment of refrigerators, iceboxes, or ice chests prohibited. 
(d)  The following provisions of the Air Rifle Act (720 ILCS 535/0.01 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
Section 535/1 Definitions; 
Section 535/2 Selling, renting or transferring to children-Prohibition; 
Section 535/3 Carrying or discharging on public streets; 
Section 535/4 Permissive possession; 
Section 535/6 Seizure and removal. 
(e)  The provisions of the Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference in their entirety as if set out at length herein. 
(f)  The following provisions of the Illinois Commercial Transportation Law (625 ILCS 5/18c-1101 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
Sections 18c 7503 (625 ILCS 5/18c-7503) Trespassing on railroad property. (The penalty provisions contained in said section shall be applied as provided therein.) 
(g)  The following provisions of the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.), as amended, are adopted by reference: 550/4 (720 ILCS 550/4)(a), (b), (c). 
(h)  The provisions adopted by reference in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) shall be subject to all applicable definitions, defenses and presumptions provided for by state law; provided, however, that guilt need only be established by a preponderance of the evidence. Further, all amendments to said statutes shall be considered as adopted upon their effective date. 
(i)  Any person violating any of the provisions adopted in this section shall be punished as provided in section 13-70. 
(Ord. No. 85-10, 8-26-85; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-8-00; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 1, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2008-04, § 4, 1-14-08) 
Sec. 13-2. - Disturbing assemblages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering in the village. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.8, 1-10-66) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to prevent disorderly conduct, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-3. 
Sec. 13-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-01, § 2, adopted Jan. 8. 2001, repealed § 13-3, Hunting, derived from Ord. No. 5-83, § 10.12.3.9, 1-10-66. 
Sec. 13-4. - Advertising unlawful business. 
    It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in the village. It shall be unlawful to advertise any gambling house or gambling resort in any street, alley or public place within the village. 
(Ord. No. 583, §§ 10.12.1.4, 10.12.3.13, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 13-5. - Discharge of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or airgun in the village. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.16, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 13-6. - Fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to give any pyrotechnic display in the village, except in connection with public exhibitions as is herein provided. 
(b)  No public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be given unless a permit therefor is first secured from the president and board of trustees. All such public displays shall be under the supervision of a competent person, and shall be superintended by the chief of police or some other member of the police department assigned to this duty by him. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, store, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling any fireworks. 
(Code 1965, § 10.1.1) 
Sec. 13-7. - Vandalism. 
(a)  Acts of vandalism resulting in damage to real or personal property within this village have increased, posing a threat to the value of property and the welfare of residents. It is in the best interest of the village that such acts be prosecuted by the village as a local offense; that penalties therefor be imposed which are related to the nature of the act and the type of offender; and that parents or legal guardians of minors found guilty of such acts be held responsible for any monetary penalty or order of restitution or reparation imposed. The diligent pursuit of such interest will tend to increase parental supervision of minors and reduce the incidence of juvenile vandalism, thus advancing the welfare of residents of the village. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Legal guardian shall include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of this state, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act. 
(2)  Minor shall mean a person who has attained 11 years of age but who has not yet reached 18 years of age. 
(3)  Marking graffiti is defined as placing any letter, word, symbol, drawing, name or any mark whatsoever upon public property or in the public way or upon private property, real or personal, without the permission of the owner, using paint, marker or any fluid or solid, or by etching. 
(c)  No person shall: 
(1)  Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without his consent; or 
(2)  Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another person without his consent. 
(3)  Performing marking of graffiti or assisting another in the marking of graffiti. 
(d)  Every person found guilty of violating subsection (c) shall be subject to either or both of the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not in excess of an amount listed in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 13-7. 
(2)  A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year. 
(e)  The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include that the defendant: 
(1)  Not violate any criminal statute or quasicriminal ordinance of any jurisdiction; and 
(2)  Report to and appear in person before such person or agency as directed by the court. 
(f)  The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition, require that the defendant: 
(1)  Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training; 
(2)  Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism; 
(3)  Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and 
(4)  If a minor, to reside with his parent or in a foster home; attend school; attend a nonresidential program for youth; or contribute to his own support at home or in a foster home. 
(g)  When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for conditional discharge the court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional discharge may impose an additional period of not more than two years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are violated during such additional period. 
(h)  When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed for conditional discharge, the court: 
(1)  May order summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons. The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the sentence of conditional discharge until the final determination of the charge, and the term of conditional discharge shall not run so long as the offender has not answered the summons or warrant. 
(2)  Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing. 
(3)  Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of confrontation, cross examination and representation by counsel. The village has the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the preponderance of the evidence. 
(4)  Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the offender unless such failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay. 
(5)  May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on motion of the village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to all parties and a hearing. 
(i)  If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue the offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of the initial penalty. 
(j)  A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final appealable order. 
(k)  The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this section, provided that the minor has not paid said fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that the parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 1(10.13), 6-27-77; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 94-19, § 6, 9-26-94) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1. 
Sec. 13-8. - Public intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition on or in any street, alley or public place of the village. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.2, 1-10-66) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to prohibit intoxication, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-3. 
Sec. 13-9. - Public bathing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place or in any place open to public view unless such person is adequately garbed in a bathing suit. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.17, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 13-10. - Scaffolds. 
    Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or can fall onto any public street, alley or other public way in the village shall be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded; it shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools or articles on any such place in such a manner that the same can fall onto such street, sidewalk or other public way from a greater height than four feet. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.19, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 13-11. - Articles on windows. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any moveable article on any window ledge, or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other public place at a height above four feet from the ground, in such a manner that the same can or is in danger of falling onto such street, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.20, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 13-12. - Posting bills. 
    It shall be unlawful to post any bills or advertisements on any public property without the authority of the board of trustees. It shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any property without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 10.12.3.18, 1.10-66) 
Sec. 13-13. - Water pollution or obstruction of water-supply. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the village. 
(Code 1965, § 5.3.3) 
Sec. 13-14. - Throwing missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any missile on any street, alley or public place. 
(Code 1965, § 10.12.3.12; Ord. No. 583, 1-10-66) 
Sec. 13-15. - Public gatherings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to hold, manage or conduct any meeting or entertainment of any kind in the village, in any premises other than a building constructed in full compliance with the ordinances and laws pertaining thereto for auditorium, theater or lodge room purposes, except in compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Inspections. No such gathering or entertainment shall be held or presented in any premises other than a building as described above unless such premises have been examined by the fire marshal or building inspector not more than three days before the date of such gathering and found to be free from any fire hazard and found to be suitable for the purpose. No structure enclosed by a roof shall be used for such purpose unless the same is constructed of nonflammable materials. Provided that tents or structures covered by canvas or similar materials may be so used if such canvas or other material has been properly treated so as to be rendered fire-resistive. 
(2)  Exits. Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises used for such purposes to permit rapid egress of all persons attending, and there shall be at least two separate exits located at least 30 feet from each other. There shall be two lineal feet of doorway or exit space for each 100 people accommodated. 
(3)  Seats. Any stands or rows of seats used in such premises shall be so constructed as to be safe for the use designated, and shall be sufficiently strong to carry the same weight and stress as is required for the construction of the auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than 100 pounds per square foot. It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of persons to exceed the number of actual seats maintained for their accommodation. 
(4)  Doors. All doors or gates on exits from premises used for such purposes shall open outward and no such exit shall be so constructed or locked that egress from inside the premises is blocked. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person conducting, calling for or managing any gathering in any premises other than a theater, lodge room or auditorium building constructed as provided in subsection (a), to notify the village clerk of the date of such intended use at least ten days before such meeting is to take place; upon such notice the fire marshal and/or the building inspector are authorized to inspect the premises to determine whether or not they comply with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that this section be fully complied with, whether or not such condition is embodied in the permit. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10.4.1-10.4.6) 
Cross reference- Public buildings, § 9-51 et seq. 
Sec. 13-16. - Curfew for minors; parental responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be in any street or alley or other public place in the village at the following times: 
(1)  For persons less than 13 years of age, between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day on any day of the week. 
(2)  For persons at least 13 years of age, but not yet 18 years of age: 
a.  Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
b.  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday. 
(b)  It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while: 
(1)  Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian or sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age approved by the child's parent, guardian, or custodian; 
(3)  Participating in, going directly to, or returning directly from said event: 
a.  Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less than 18 years of age to perform; 
b.  A school recreational activity; 
c.  A religious event; 
d.  An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage; 
e.  An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article 1, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, or both; 
f.  An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision of one or more adult. 
A citation for violation of subsection (a) of this section may be issued by a police officer only if he reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in subsection (b) apply. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, custodian, or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person has violated this section if someone under 17 years of age of whom such person has custody or control is present upon any public assembly, building, business, street or highway or other public place or public way in violation of subsection (a) of this section, and none of the defenses enumerated in subsection (b) hereof apply. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined an amount [from] $75.00 to $500.00. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10.7.1-10.7.4; Ord. No. 600, § 1, 5-8-67; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1, 4-26-04) 
State Law reference- Curfew authorized, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-5. 
Sec. 13-17. - Interference with village officers or employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the village engaged in the duties of his office. 
(Code 1965, § 1.18.10) 
Sec. 13-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-01, § 3, adopted Jan. 8. 2001, repealed § 13-18, Escape from village jail, derived from the 1965 Code, § 1.19.5. 
Sec. 13-19. - Communications with prisoners in village jail. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner held in the village jail without the permission of the keeper of the jail. 
(Code 1965, § 1.19.6) 
Sec. 13-20. - Display of sexually explicit materials to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or supervision of any commercial establishment, open to persons under the age of 18 to display a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, posted, image, record, recording tape, video tape, or motion picture film, the cover of which depicts, in whole or in part, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy or bestiality; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered; 
(5)  Sado-masochistic conduct; 
(6)  Human excretory function; or 
(7)  Any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate any human body part or activity listed in subsections (1) through (6) above. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the commercial establishment, such item is available to the general public for handling and inspection, or, the cover or outside packaging of such item is visible to members of the general public. 
(c)  Any item regulated by this section shall not be deemed to be "available to the general public" if such item is located in a separate room in relation to which persons under the age of 18 are prohibited access and the items contained in such room are not visible by the general public from a position outside of such separate room. In this connection, it shall be the duty of the person having custody, control or supervision of such separate room to post in a conspicuous place a sign which prohibits the entry of persons under the age of 18 to such separate room. Also, it shall be the duty of the person having custody, control or supervision of such commercial establishment to actively enforce the age restriction imposed herein and to make a reasonable attempt to ascertain the true age of any person desiring access to the separate room by requiring production of driver's license, birth certificate, or other governmental or educational identification card or paper. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section that the material involved in such charge or complaint was displayed or disseminated by a person or persons under the age of 18 years of age while such person or persons were employed by a person having custody, control or supervision of such materials as defined as sexually explicit in this section for appropriate commercial purposes, or displayed, presented or disseminated to a person at a recognized and established school, church, museum, medical clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency, and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such persons or organizations, provided that such display, presentation or dissemination is in aid of a legitimate scientific, governmental, or education purpose. 
(Ord. No. 87-42, § 2, 12-28-87) 
Sec. 13-21. - Nudity and seminudity prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity having a liquor license under any provision of the Crete Municipal Code, or any agent, officer or employee of any such person or entity, to knowingly allow or otherwise participate in any kind of agreement or arrangement by virtue of which any person is allowed or required to appear before or amidst the public, in attendance at an establishment to which said license has been issued, in the nude or in any kind of apparel, which as worn or by virtue of its design, fit or material, makes visible or tends to make visible all or any portion of such person's: (1) genitalia; (2) pubic hair or pubic hair region; (3) anus and/or anal crevice; and (4) if such person is a female, her breast at, below and including the areola. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or enter into any kind of agreement or arrangement which allows or requires such person (or persons) to appear before or amidst the public, in attendance at an establishment licensed under any provisions of the Crete Municipal Code, in the nude or in apparel permitting visibility of all or any portion of such person's anatomy as described in subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  Any person or entity having a liquor license under any provision of the Crete Municipal Code, or any agent, officer or employee of any such person or entity, who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined and/or sanctioned in accordance with the general penalties provision of the Municipal Code of the Village of Crete, as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, § 1, 9-24-90) 
Sec. 13-22. - Unlawful possession of paint, marking instruments or etching equipment. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Etching equipment means any tool, device, equipment, acid or material that can be used to make permanent marks on metal, glass, plastic, concrete or stone. 
(2)  Prohibited marking instrument means any marker or device which can be used to mark which contains a fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of three-eighths of an inch or greater. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess paint in a spray can or any prohibited marking instrument unless under the direct supervision of a parent or legal guardian, or while as a student under the direct supervision of their teacher, or while as an employee under the direct supervision of their employer or adult representative of their employer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess paint in a spray can, liquid paint in any type of container or any prohibited marking instrument on the property of another, or on public property or in or on any public building, structure or facility. It shall be a defense to any action for violation of this subsection (c) that the owner, manager or other person having control of the property, building, structure or facility consented to the presence of the paint or prohibited marking instrument. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess paint in a spray can, liquid paint in any type of container, any prohibited marking instrument, or etching equipment while on the public way, or on any public property with intent to utilize to deface, paint, mark or etch any building, structure or property. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 under the designation of section 13-22. 
(Ord. No. 94-19, § 7, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 13-23. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  The following provisions of the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
Section 600/2 Definitions; 
Section 600/3.5 Possession of drug paraphernalia; 
Section 600/4 Exempt items-Determinations; 
Section 600/5 Forfeiture and seizure of property; 
Section 600/6 Legislative intent-Inference of legitimacy. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 4, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 13-24. - Underage possession of a tobacco product. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Tobacco products shall mean any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase or possess any tobacco product; provided, that the possession by a person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person or in the minor's or parent or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 5, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 13-25. - Littering prohibited. 
(a)  The following provisions of the Litter Control Act (415 ILCS 105/1 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
Section 105/2 Legislative findings and determination; 
Section 105/3 Definitions; 
Section 105/4 Dumping, deposit, etc. of litter prohibited; exemptions; 
Section 105/5 Dumping, deposit, etc. from motor vehicle prohibited; deposit of garbage or refuse in receptacles along public highways; 
Section 105/6 Accumulation of litter prohibited; 
Section 105/7 Abandonment of motor vehicle; presumption; 
Section 105/9 Presumption of violation by operator-throwing, deposit, etc., of litter from motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 6, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 13-26. - Truancy prohibited. 
(a)  The following provisions of the School Code Article 26, Pupils -Compulsory Attendance Statute (105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length herein: 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial school to be present in any public place, building, street or assembly in the village other than school, during any hours when school is in session during the regular school term unless he or she is: 
(1)  Traveling to or from school by the most direct route; or 
(2)  Accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or school official; or 
(3)  Engaged in school-related activities with written approval of school authorities; or 
(4)  Engaged in personal business, including but not limited to employment, medical care or religious activities, with prior notice from a parent or legal guardian to school authorities. 
(c)  A police officer may stop and detain a person whom the officer reasonably suspects to be violating this section for the purpose of verifying the person's identity, age, school enrollment, and authority to be absent from school. The police officer shall immediately inform the person of the reason of the detention and they will be released upon verification of the authorization to be absent from school. The person shall not be removed from the scene of the investigatory detention unless he refused to provide the officer with the necessary information. 
(d)  A person violating this section shall be issued a notice to appear in the municipal court and, if practical, shall be taken to school authorities or a parent or legal guardian. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person having custody or control of any person subject to this section to knowingly permit such person to violate this section. 
(Ord. No. 20011-01, § 7, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 13-27. - Fighting, noise, riot and other breaches of peace. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in, cause or provoke any fight, brawl or riotous conduct; or 
(2)  Make, aid, countenance or assist in making, any improper noise, riot, disturbance, diversion or other breach of the peace, or use threatening, abusive or profane language or obscene gestures toward any person, leading to a breach of the peace, in the streets or elsewhere in the village; or 
(3)  Jostle or roughly crowd another person unnecessarily in a public place or on school grounds or elsewhere in the village. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 13-28. - Defacing exterior building wall murals. 
    No person shall mark, paint, injure or in any other manner deface, whether or not permanent damage is caused, any exterior wall mural created pursuant to chapter 19, article III of the Crete Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-38, § 3, 11-26-07) 
Sec. 13-29. - Unlawful possession of weapon on school grounds by persons under 21 years of age. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of a weapon on school grounds when he or she, while under the age of 21 years: 
(1)  Carries or possesses any knife, razor or device containing an edge that can be used for cutting, including but not limited to, folding, antique, household and commerative knives; or 
(2)  Carries or possesses a club, bat, bludgeon, black-jack, slung-shot or sand-club; or 
(3)  Carries or possesses any firearm ammunition or cartridge; or 
(4)  Carries or possesses any tear gas gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance; or 
(5)  Carries or possesses any stun gun or taser or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character which uses electricity to give a shock to another individual while protecting the possessor by design from receiving a simultaneous shock; or 
(6)  Carries or possesses any firearm which emits a projectile using air, gas or a spring device; or 
(7)  Carries or possesses a look-a-like device described in sections (a)(1) through (6) above or a look-a-like firearm. 
(b)  Defined terms. For the purposes of this section: 
    Firearm ammunition or cartridge means a tubular metal or plastic case having a projectile affixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the propellant contained in such tube between the projectile and the cap. 
    Look-a-like device means any object which is designed, fashioned or held in such manner that a reasonable person in seeing the object or outline of the object would believe the object to be one of the items described herein, which the ordinance from which this section derives makes unlawful to carry or possess. 
    Person means any person under the age of 21 years who is not an employee of the school where the act of carrying or possession occurs. 
    School grounds means the real or improved property of any public or private elementary or secondary school and any administration building or grounds regardless of the time of day or the time of year and any public way within 500 feet of said real property. 
    Stun gun or taser means: (i) any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as, batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning; or (ii) any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as batteries and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human, can send out current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning. 
(c)  Exemption. It is not a violation of subsection (a) for any enrolled student to utilize an object described in subsection (a)(1) while participating in shop class or any school authorized and supervised activity, e.g., homecoming float preparation, dance decoration, etc., if said object is approved by school officials. It is not a violation of subsection (a) for any person to utilize an object described in subsection (a)(1) while engaged in consuming foods in an authorized dining or eating area at a school authorized time if said object is approved by school officials. It is not a violation of subsection (a) for any enrolled student or enrolled student from another school to utilize authorized sporting equipment while engaged in school sponsored or authorized sport activities. 
(d)  If any person has previously been convicted of a felony or an unlawful use of weapon charge under any state statute and is in violation of both this section and 720 ILCS Article 24, Deadly Weapons, said person shall be charged under the applicable state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2008-36, § 2, 9-8-08) 
Secs. 13-30-13-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-60. - Statutes adopted by reference as ordinance violations. 
    Those certain portions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes adopted by reference in this chapter shall be subject to all applicable definitions, defenses and presumptions provided for by state law; provided, however, that guilt need only be established by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 8, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 13-61-13-69. - Reserved. 
Sec. 13-70. - Penalties. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined not less than $100.00 or more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs paid by compromise payment are prepaid prior to court or the violator fails to appear in court, or at the administrative hearing, the court, court clerk or hearing officer shall add to the mandatory minimum fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance section listed herein in subsection (c) below may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(c)  Those ordinance sections subject to compromise payment from this chapter are as follows: 
16B Protection of library materials; 
5/26-3 Use of a facsimile machine in unsolicited advertising or fundraising; 
505/1 Abandonment of refrigerators, ice boxes, or ice chests prohibited; 
535/3 Carrying or discharging on public streets (Air Rifle Act); 
13-24 Underage possession of a tobacco product; 
13-25 Littering; 
410 ILCS 82/1 et seq. Smoke Free Illinois Act. 
(Ord. No. 2001-01, § 9, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 10, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2008-04, § 5, 1-14-08; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 2-8-10) 
Chapter 14 - MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; mobile home sales lots, § 12-551 et seq., parking of house trailers at motels, § 12-572; planning and development, ch. 19; zoning, ch. 28; special use permits for mobile home parks, § 28-166. 
State Law reference- Mobile Home Park Act, 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home: A structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons, provided that any such structure served by individual utilities and resting on a permanent foundation, with wheels, tongue and hitch permanently removed, shall not be construed as a "mobile home." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 210 ILCS 115/2.1. 
    Mobile home park: A tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of lands upon which five or more independent mobile homes are located for permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 210 ILCS 115/2.5. 
Sec. 14-2. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate any mobile home park in the village without first having obtained a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the clerk in compliance with the ordinances relating to license applications, and shall contain the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed park, and the number of trailers to be accommodated. Each such application shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch showing the size and location of all buildings and structures. 
(b)  The annual fee for such a license shall be in an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 14-2. 
(c)  No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character, nor to any corporation if any officer thereof is not a person of good character. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.48.2, 2.2.48.4, 2.2.48.5; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
State Law reference- Municipal licensing of mobile home parks, 210 ILCS 115/18. 
Sec. 14-3. - Supervision. 
    A mobile home park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker at all times, who shall be responsible, with the licensee hereunder, for the compliance with the provisions of this article relating to the conduct of such parks. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.6) 
Sec. 14-4. - Moral character of employees. 
    It shall be unlawful to hire or keep as manager, superintendent or person in charge of a trailer camp any person who is not a person of good character, or any person who has been convicted of a felony. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.6) 
Sec. 14-5. - Mobile home spaces. 
    Each mobile home in a mobile home park shall be allotted a site of not less than 1,000 square feet. No mobile home shall be parked closer than five feet to the side lot lines of the park, if the abutting property is improved property, or closer than ten feet to a public street, alley or building. Each individual mobile home site shall abut or face on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than 20 feet in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public highway or alley. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet between the sides of every mobile home and at least five feet between the ends of every mobile home. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.7) 
Sec. 14-6. - Water supply. 
(a)  An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes from the village water supply system shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the mobile home park. The water shall be obtained only from faucets, conveniently located in said camp. No common drinking cups shall be permitted. A water meter shall be installed in each mobile home park. 
(b)  If obtained from private wells, the water shall meet the bacteriological standards of the state for a safe drinking water. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.8) 
Sec. 14-7. - Sanitary facilities. 
    Each mobile home park shall provide toilets, baths or showers which shall comply with the provisions of the ordinances relating thereto, with separate accommodations for men and women. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.9) 
Sec. 14-8. - Garbage. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent or caretaker to provide for the collection and removal of garbage and other waste material and to otherwise maintain the mobile home park in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.10) 
Sec. 14-9. - Lights. 
    The park shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all times so that the grounds shall be safe for occupants and visitors. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.48.11) 
Chapter 15 - NOISE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; nuisances, ch. 16; noise at go cart tracks, § 12-162. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to suppress noise, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOUND AMPLIFIERS 

Sec. 15-16. - License. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone, or other device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or public place without first having secured a license therefor. Any person desiring a license for the use or operation of such devices, shall file an application therefor with the village clerk, upon a form provided by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the name of the owner of such device, the date upon which it is intended to be used, and such other information as may be prescribed. The fee to be paid for such a license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 15-16. Such license shall be issued upon the payment of the license fee to the village clerk, and shall permit the use of any such device subject to the terms and conditions of this article, only upon the date specified on such license and no other. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to radios in homes or in private pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated in such a manner as not to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from such vehicle, nor to noisy devices, bands or other musical devices used in any public parade in accordance with the ordinances of the village. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10.6.1-10.6.5; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 15-17. - Time and location restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall use or generate or employ any device licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article within the village limits at any time other than: 
Sunday through Thursday 8:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. Friday through Saturday 8:00 a.m.-10:30 p.m.  
(b)  No person shall use, operate or employ any device licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article within a radius of two blocks from any hospital or within the radius of two blocks from any church or other place of public worship while services are being held there. 
(Code 1965, § 10.6.5; Ord. No. 2004-36, § 2, 10-11-04) 
Sec. 15-18. - Prohibited noise. 
    No person shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from any device for which a license is required by this article any noise which can be reasonably expected to provoke a breach of the peace, or any false representation of any matter, product, or project advertised thereby, the sale of which is prohibited by any law, ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1965, § 10.6.5) 
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5; buildings which are unsafe under building code, § 6-35; noise, ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to define, prevent and abate nuisances, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Prohibited generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property under his control. 
(b)  For the purposes of this subsection the term "public nuisance" shall be defined as any activity, inactivity, neglect, omission, commission, abandonment, inadvertent or otherwise, or the like, which does, or tends to, permits, or results in a condition or conditions or circumstances which deleteriously affects the public health, public safety, public welfare, public morals, public sensibilities, public rights and enjoyment of residence or property, panders to vicious tastes, creates attractive nuisances for minors, results in dilapidated, abandoned and dangerous buildings or improvements or unfinished or uncompleted improvements on real property, permits the growth of noxious or poisonous weeds or growth and accumulation of trash dumps or the like. Any person who shall be responsible for the maintenance of a public nuisance shall be guilty of an offense. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, public nuisance shall also include any refusal, failure, inactivity, inattention or neglect by the property owner, or person having control or possession of the property, whether inadvertent or not, concerning the removal or covering of graffiti, or letters, words, symbols, drawing, names or marks placed upon private property, real or personal, occurring 48 hours after notification by the village to remove or cover said graffiti or marks. Any person who shall create or maintain a public nuisance involving graffiti shall be guilty of an offense. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection (c) shall be fined at least $50.00, but not more than $500.00. Each day a public nuisance involving graffiti exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1965, §§ 5.3.8, 5.3.11; Ord. No. 612, §§ 1, 2, 10-12-67; Ord. No. 94-19, § 9, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 16-2. - Abatement. 
    The chief of police and the health officer are each hereby authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the village, whether such nuisance is specifically recognized by ordinance or not. 
(Code 1965, § 5.3.11) 
Sec. 16-3. - Stagnant water. 
    Any stagnant pool of water in the village is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any such nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or its control. 
(Code 1965, § 5.3.4) 
Sec. 16-4. - Refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit anywhere in the village any uncovered piles of refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of dead animals. Such refuse must be buried at least two feet below the surface of the ground or burned in properly constructed incinerators or otherwise properly disposed of. Any uncovered pile of refuse is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1965, § 5.3.5) 
Sec. 16-5. - Premises. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any building structure or place, to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way. Any such structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
Sec. 16-6. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  Nuisance declared. Any motor vehicle used in connection with the following list of offenses, whether charged by state statute or by local ordinance adopting state statute by reference, is hereby declared a public nuisance and is subject to impoundment, imposition of an administrative fee and release in accordance with this section and where applicable in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code: 
(1)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 1961; or 
(2)  Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or 
(3)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act; provided further, possession of cannabis is limited to cases involving 2.5 grams or greater; or 
(4)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offence in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act; or 
(5)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit an offense in violation of sections 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1 of the Criminal Code of 1961; or 
(6)  Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing; or 
(7)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined by and in violation of the Cannabis Control Act, or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act; provided further, illegal possession of cannabis is limited to cases involving 2.5 grams or greater; or 
(8)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the period of expiration is greater than one year; or 
(9)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age; or 
(10)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges that the driver violated sections 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or 
(11)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit any offense in violation of article 16, or an offense in violation of article 16A where the value exceeds $150.00, said articles being of the Criminal Code of 1961; or 
(12)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit a violation of 720 ILCS 5/11-6, indecent solicitation of a child; 720 ILCS 5/12-2, aggravated assault; 720 ILCS 5/12-4, aggravated battery; 720 ILCS 5/12-4.2, aggravated battery with a firearm; 720 ILCS 5/12-4.3, aggravated battery of a child; 720 ILCS 5/12-4.6, aggravated battery of a senior citizen; 720 ILCS 5/18-1, robbery; 720 ILCS 5/18-2, armed robbery; 720 ILCS 5/19-1, burglary; 720 ILCS 5/19-3, residential burglary; 720 ILCS 5/20-1, arson; 720 ILCS 5/20-1.1, aggravated arson; 720 ILCS 5/20-2, possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices; 720 ILCS 5/21-1, criminal damage to property; or 720 ILCS 5/25-1, mob action; of the Illinois Criminal Code, or similar provision of local ordinance; or 
(13)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit a violation of 720 ILCS 600/3.5, possession of drug paraphernalia of the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, or similar provision of local ordinance; or 
(14)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204 or aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this article, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle according to police department procedure. When the motor vehicle is towed, the police department shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner's or lessee's right to request an administrative hearing. The police department shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will remain impounded pending the completion of the administrative hearing provided for in this article, unless the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle or a lienholder posts with the village a cash bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by ordinance and pays for towing and storage charges. 
(c)  Administrative fee. The owner of record of such motor vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment shall be liable to the village of an administrative fee of $450.00 in addition to any towing and storage charges. This article is in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate, any existing state or federal laws or any ordinance that relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any fee in this article shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be assessed or imposed by a court for any criminal charges. This article shall not apply: 
(1)  If the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered; 
(2)  If the motor vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the motor vehicle; or 
(3)  If the motor vehicle is subject to successful forfeiture proceedings under 725 ILCS 150/1 et seq., the Drug Asset Forfeiture Procedure Act; 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq., the Seizure and Forfeiture of Vessels, Vehicles and Aircraft Act; or state or federal forfeiture laws. For purposes of this article, the "owner of record" or "owner" of a motor vehicle is the record title holders as registered with the Secretary of State of the licensing or title issuing state. 
(d)  Vehicle possession. 
(1)  Except as provided otherwise in this article, a motor vehicle shall continue to be impounded until: 
a.  The administrative fee, plus any applicable towing and storage charges, are paid, in which case possession of the motor vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the motor vehicle; or 
b.  The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law. 
(2)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien holder or other person shall be entitled to take possession of a motor vehicle impounded under this article until the administrative fees applicable under this section have been paid. 
(3)  The owner, lessee, or a lienholder may post a bond in cash equal to the administrative fee provided herein and pay for all towing and storage charges whereupon the motor vehicle will be released in advance of the administrative hearing. 
(e)  Preliminary hearing. Whenever the owner of a motor vehicle seized pursuant to this article requests a preliminary hearing, said owner must make a request for said preliminary hearing within 48 hours of the seizure and impoundment. Said request shall be made in person and in writing at the police department administrative offices, Monday-Friday, excluding holidays, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., using the tow hearing request form. If the request for a preliminary hearing is timely filed, the chief of police or his designee shall conduct such preliminary hearing within 24 hours after the request, or by a date mutually agreeable to the parties, Monday-Friday, excluding holidays, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the preliminary hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this article, the chief of police or his designee shall order the continued impoundment of the motor vehicle, as provided in this article, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts with the village a cash bond as set forth in subsection (d). The chief of police or his designee will then set the matter for a hearing as set forth in subsections (f) and (g), unless the owner affirmatively waives the right to a hearing. However, if the chief of police or his designee finds that no such violation occurred, the chief of police or his designee shall order the return of the motor vehicle or cash bond, but the owner shall be responsible for any towing and storage charges. 
(f)  Notice of hearing. The registered owner or lessee of any impounded vehicle and any lienholder of record shall be provided a notice of hearing. The notice shall: 
(1)  Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's address as registered with the Secretary of State; 
(2)  Be served upon interested parties within ten days after a vehicle is impounded by the municipality; and 
(3)  Contain the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than 45 days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing. 
(g)  In addition to the requirements contained in subdivision (b)(4) of section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code relating to administrative hearings, the following requirements will be followed concerning administrative hearings: 
(1)  Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three years; 
(2)  The notice of violation and reports of police officers shall be records kept in the ordinary course of business and shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice and shall be admissible in any hearing or legal proceeding; 
(3)  At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle impoundment; 
(4)  If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the municipality; 
(5)  All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the administrative review law; and 
(6)  Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or lienholder of the record until all administrative fees and towing and storage charges are paid. 
(h)  Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within 35 days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(i)  Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or administrative fee imposed under this section which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the administrative review law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(j)  Whether or not a preliminary hearing is requested and held in accordance with subsection (e) above, the administrative hearing may be waived in writing by the person paying the administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 3, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2012-21, § 3, 7-9-12) 
Sec. 16-7. - Firearm inventory secured storage. 
(a)  The failure of any person, business or corporation who offers for retail sale or repair firearms (hereinafter "inventory") and fails to secure said inventory in accordance with the specifications contained in paragraph (b) below and operate a central station intrusion alarm monitoring system during hours when the location is closed or is otherwise unattended is hereby deemed to be maintaining a public nuisance and is guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Definitions: 
    Central station alarm monitoring means employing alarm intrusion system monitoring by either a local or national control station; reliance solely on an exterior alert sound dependent on third persons hearing the alert and calling the police is not adequate. 
    Firearm means the same definition as contained in 430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq., the Firearms Owners Identification Act (as amended). 
    Secure means: If referring to a room that the doors, walls, ceiling and floor satisfy the UL Standard for Safety Burglary Resistant Vault Doors and Modular Panels UL Standard 608 - Class M; and if referring to a container, the container satisfies the UL Standard for Burglary Resistant Safes UL Standard 687 Class TL-15. 
(c)  As a condition of a business license, the person, business owner or corporation officer shall produce for inspection to the chief of police, or his designee, the proposed secure manner in which the inventory shall be maintained during closed business hours or when unattended and also provide proof of an alarm system which employs central station alarm monitoring. Proof of the "secure" manner shall be by producing evidence of a ul standard certificate equal to or greater than described herein for construction materials or container to be used, or by presenting the room or container to the village building inspector and chief of police, or their designees, for inspection who shall make a determination whether said materials or container satisfy or exceed the UL standards described herein. Appeals from adverse determinations concerning adherence to the 'secure' standards herein or alternative central station alarm monitoring shall be filed with the village clerk and considered by the village president and board of trustees within 28 days. A written decision shall be filed with ten days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14, § 3, 7-25-16) 
Secs. 16-8-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANTS AND WEEDS 

Sec. 16-21. - Abatement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any such premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this article, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within five days. 
(b)  If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five days after such notice the superintendent of public works may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense thereof, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by the owner or occupant of the premises concerned, and the same shall constitute a lien on said property until fully discharged. 
(Code 1965, §§ 10.2.5, 10.2.6) 
Sec. 16-22. - Prohibited weeds. 
    Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, or other weeds of a similar kind, found growing in the village are hereby declared to be nuisances, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in the village. 
(Code 1965, § 10.2.1) 
Sec. 16-23. - Prohibited heights. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, agricultural crops, or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding eight inches on improved lots or 12 inches on unimproved lots; any such plants or weeds exceeding such height are declared to be a nuisance. Open areas containing such growth in excess of these heights shall not be considered a nuisance provided such open areas are a minimum of 100 feet from the property of a complainant or the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1965, § 10.2.2; Ord. No. 89-18, § 1, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 2005-20, § 2, 6-27-05) 
Sec. 16-24. - Barberry bushes. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance to plant or permit the growth of the bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry, further known as Barberis Vulgaris , or its horticultural varieties within the village. 
(Code 1965, § 10.2.3) 
Sec. 16-25. - Poison ivy, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to knowingly permit, allow or maintain any poison ivy or other noxious weed or plant on any lot owned, controlled or leased by him in the village. 
(Code 1965, § 10.2.4) 
Secs. 16-26-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES III-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 16-51-16-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 16-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 11, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 17 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK RULES 

Sec. 17-16. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to parks and playgrounds within the village. 
Sec. 17-17. - Authority to remove violators from parks and playgrounds. 
    Any police officer of the village is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, from any park or playground in the village any violator of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 4, 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-18. - Park hours. 
    No person shall be in or upon any park or playground during any hours in which such park or playground is closed pursuant to ordinance of the Crete Park District, provided such hours are posted for public notice. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 1, 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-19. - Firearms and fireworks. 
    No person shall carry or discharge firearms, pellet guns, air pistols, slingshots, BB guns, explosives, rockets, fireworks or any other item containing any substance of an explosive nature, unless authorized by the Crete Board of Park Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(B), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-20. - Throwing stones or other missiles. 
    No person shall throw or cast any stone, rock, or other missile, other than athletic equipment while engaged in the athletic activity. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(C), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-21. - Fires. 
    No person shall light or make use of any fire or burn any combustible item, except in containers or fire pits specifically provided therefor and except as may be authorized specifically by the board of park commissioners of the Crete Park District or the recreation director of superintendent of maintenance of the Crete Park District. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(D), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-22. - Liquor and drunkenness. 
    No person shall bring into, sell, give away or drink any intoxicating liquors in parks or playgrounds. No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain within the parks or playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(E), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-23. - Littering. 
    No person shall deposit, dump, throw or place any garbage, refuse, paper, trash or rubbish of any kind in or upon any part of any park or playground. All refuse or garbage created by lawful activities within the parks shall be deposited in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(F), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-24. - Animals. 
    No person shall take into or allow upon any park or playground any animal, including dogs and other pets. No person shall trap, catch, wound, kill, or treat cruelly any bird or animal, nor attempt to do any of the aforesaid, within the parks and playgrounds. No person shall molest or rob any nest of any bird or animals, or attempt to do so, within the parks or playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(A), (G), 6-27-77) 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5. 
Sec. 17-25. - Damage to park property. 
    No person shall break, cut, injure, deface, climb upon or in any way destroy any tree, shrub, plant, grass, turf, building, fence, bridge, lamp, post or other structure or property within the parks or playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(H), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-26. - Breach of peace and disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall knowingly engage in any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another person and as to provoke a breach of the peace. No person shall conduct, or gather with other persons in bodies or crowds, for unlawful purposes or for any purpose which results in annoyance, obstruction or disturbance of other users of the parks and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(I), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-27. - Use of areas for unintended purposes; use of restricted areas. 
    No person shall engage in any sport, game or amusement in the parks or playgrounds except in areas or playing fields provided therefor as may be designated by the board of park commissioners of the Crete Park District or the recreation director of the Crete Park District and then only under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed. Nor shall any person enter upon any portion of any park or playground where persons are prohibited by signs from going by direction of the board of park commissioners of the Crete Park District or maintenance superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(K), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-28. - Traffic. 
    No person shall bring or use any motor vehicle, bicycle, motorcycle or mini-bike, upon any park or playground. This section shall not apply to licensed motor vehicles which are located in parking areas or upon marked driveways or roadways. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(L), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-29. - Resisting or interfering with officers. 
(a)  No person shall resist, interfere with, hinder or prevent any police officer, park district commissioner or park district employee in the discharge of his duty or fail or refuse to obey any lawful command of any such police officer, commissioner or employee. No person shall in any manner assist or give aid to any person in custody of a police officer to escape or attempt to escape from custody. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee of the Crete Park District while engaged in construction, repairing, or maintenance of any park property. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(J), (M), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-30. - Improper speech and conduct. 
    No person shall use any abusive, threatening, insulting, indecent, profane or obscene language, or language calculated to occasion a breach of the peace, nor be guilty of any indecent act or behavior in the parks or playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(N), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-31. - Use of playground equipment by adults. 
    No adult shall in any manner use any of the playground apparatus, equipment or devices made exclusively for the use of children. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(O), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-32. - Obstruction of travel. 
    No person shall place, or cause to be placed any item, goods, or property of any kind so as to obstruct travel in the parks or playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(P), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-33. - Commercial activities. 
    No person shall offer any article or item for sale or exchange, buy or offer to buy any item or article, take up any collection or solicit or receive contributions of money or items of value in parks or playgrounds without a permit from the board of park commissioners of the Crete Park District. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(Q), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-34. - Public meetings. 
    No person shall call or hold any public meeting or give any concert or public entertainment of any kind in the parks or playgrounds without the express consent of the board of park commissioners of the Crete Park District. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(R), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-35. - Advertisements and signs. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Display any placard, sign or advertisement in the parks or playgrounds; 
(2)  Distribute, cast or place any handbills, pamphlets, circulars, advertisements or notices of any kind in the parks or playgrounds; 
(3)  Post, stencil or otherwise affix any notice or bills of advertisement or other papers upon any structure or thing in or upon the parks or playgrounds; 
without the express consent of the board of park commissioners of the Crete Park District. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(S), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-36. - Gambling. 
    No person shall engage in any game of chance, gambling or use of any gambling devices in the parks and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(T), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-37. - Sleeping in parks. 
    No person shall sleep overnight or camp overnight in any park or playground, without a written permit issued by the board of park commissioners of the Crete Park District. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(U), 6-27-77) 
Sec. 17-38. - Drugs. 
    No person shall bring into, sell, give away, possess, use or be under the influence of any cannabis as defined in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/3) or any controlled substance as defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.), in any park or playground, other than such controlled substances which has been legally prescribed for the individual by a licensed physician. 
(Ord. No. 763, § 2(V), 6-27-77) 
Secs. 17-39-17-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES III-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 17-71-17-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 17-1001 - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 12, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 18 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to license, tax and regulate peddlers, hawkers, etc., 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hawker: Every peddler who seeks for purchasers either by outcry, or by means of horn, whistle, rattle, bell, drum or other signal, or by actual exhibition or exposure of his goods, wares or merchandise, or by placards, shall be deemed a hawker. 
    Peddler: Every person who, without outcry, blowing of horn, or by otherwise in a similar manner attracting attention of his goods, wares or merchandise, shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, fruits or vegetables, traveling from place to place, on, along or upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the village, or at the doors of houses, apartments or stores, or from a wagon, pushcart or other vehicle. 
    Political/religious solicitor: Every person who shall solicit funds or support for religious or political organizations or causes. 
    Solicitor: Every person whether a hawker, peddler, transient vendor, itinerant merchant or other, who goes upon any premises for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof to sell items, to solicit orders or seek support for a cause, other than religious or political, and further excepting for official government purposes including canvass or census. 
    Transient vendor or itinerant merchant: Every person, transiently or temporarily engaged in the business of selling, bartering, or exchanging, or offering for sale, barter or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.20.1; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 18-2. - Reports of renting premises to transient vendors. 
    The owner, proprietor, manager or agent of any store, loft, warehouse, yard, office space, dwelling, house or show sales room space which shall be rented or engaged by a transient vendor or itinerant merchant shall report to the chief of police, within six hours after such renting, or engaging, the name of any itinerant merchant or transient vendor as aforesaid who shall so rent or engage, giving the location of the store, loft, warehouse, yard, office, office space, dwelling, house or show or sales room or space so rented or engaged. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.20.12) 
Sec. 18-3. - Harassing public. 
    No person acting as a solicitor, or political/religious solicitor, shall harass any person by continuing to engage said person to look at his goods, wares, or any object or to support a cause or listen to a position after being requested to cease. This includes requests for money for personal or other purposes. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.20.8; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 18-4. - Solicitation from roadway. 
(a)  No solicitation from a roadway in accordance with state statute is permitted within the village limits excepting: 
(1)  At the intersection of Main Street (IL Route 1) and Exchange Street. 
(b)  Further, solicitation from the roadway at the above-listed intersection(s) is permitted only if: 
(1)  The participants are 16 years of age or older; and 
(2)  The participants are wearing high visibility vests; and 
(3)  The activity occurs within the time period and on the dates authorized by the chief of police, having taken into consideration the safety of the solicitors, safety of motorists, the orderly flow of traffic, road construction in the area, weather conditions, adult supervision and natural light as per time of year. 
(c)  No person soliciting in accordance with state statute and authorized by this section shall obstruct or interfere with the traffic or travel of any vehicle on the public streets or highways within the village. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.20.8; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 3-14-05; Ord. No. 2009-68, § 2, 11-23-09) 
Note- Former entitled, "Obstructing traffic". 
Sec. 18-5. - Fraud. 
    Any solicitor or political/religious solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud or misrepresentation or imposition shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.20.9; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 3-14-05) 
Secs. 18-6-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-08, § 2, adopted Mar. 14, 2005, deleted art. II, which consisted of §§ 18-21-18-26, pertained to a license for peddlers, solicitors, etc., and was derived from Code 1965, §§ 2.2.20.2-2.2.20.6, 2.2.20.8, 2.2.20.11; Ord. No. 820, § 1, adopted Apr. 28, 1980; and Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 1987. 

Secs. 18-21-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 18-31. - Village policy on soliciting. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the corporate authorities of the village that the occupant or occupants of the residences or other buildings in the village shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residence. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 3, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 18-32. - Notice to solicitors. 
(a)  Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter, shall comply with the directions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Notice of the determination by the occupant or the refusal of invitations to solicitors, to any residence or nonresidential building, shall be given in the manner following: 
(1)  A card, decal or written notice, at least three inches by four inches (3" × 4") (8cm. × 10cm.) in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entranceway or door to the residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows: 
"NO SOLICITORS INVITED" 
or 
"NO SOLICITORS" 
(2)  The letters shall be at least one-third inch ( 1/3 ") (8mm.) in height. 
(c)  Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence that no solicitation is permitted at that building. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 3, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 18-33. - Duty of solicitors. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the village upon which a residence or nonresidential building as herein defined is located, to first determine whether the notice provided for in this chapter, if any is attached, and to further be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If the notice states "NO SOLICITORS INVITED" or "NO SOLICITORS," then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
(b)  Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 3, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 18-34. - Uninvited soliciting prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared unlawful and a trespass for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 3, 3-14-05) 
Sec. 18-35. - Time limit on soliciting and peddling. 
    It is hereby declared unlawful and a nuisance for any person acting as a solicitor to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m., or after 9:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Ord. No. 2005-08, § 3, 3-14-05) 
Secs. 18-36-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES IV-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 18-61-18-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00 and/or sentenced up to six months in the county jail. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 13, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 19 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Village datum, § 2-3; industrial revenue bonds, § 2-5; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; flood hazard areas, § 8-16 et seq.; mobile home parks, ch. 14; house numbering, § 22-41 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 23; zoning, ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-231 et seq. 

Sec. 19-36. - Established; purpose. 
    There is hereby established a citizens commission which shall be known as the Crete Area Economic Development Commission for the purpose of structuring sound economic development programs, through conducting such research and inventory of resources and preparation of industrial facts profiles to be used as presentations to industrial prospects considering expansion or location in the Crete area. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 1.25.1, 1-9-79) 
Sec. 19-37. - Members. 
    The membership of the Crete Area Economic Development Commission shall be composed of seven persons, one of whom shall be elected chairman. The appointments to the commission shall be made by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The term of office of such members shall be three years. In addition to the seven regular members of the commission, the village president shall serve as an ex officio member. The chairman of the plan commission or his designee shall also be an ex officio member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 1.25.2, 7-9-79) 
Sec. 19-38. - Finances. 
    The Crete Area Economic Development Commission shall be authorized to expend no municipal funds other than those appropriated and approved by the president and board of trustees; however, the commission is authorized to encourage the creation of a non-profit economic development corporation as a legal entity to raise such funds as needed and handle such other financial responsibilities in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 1.25.3, 7-9-79) 
Sec. 19-39. - Volunteer services. 
    The Crete Area Economic Development Commission is authorized to enlist the volunteer services of such other members of the community who will assist in achieving the goals of sound economic growth, recognizing broad community involvement will assure broad community support. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 1.25.4, 7-9-79) 
Sec. 19-40. - Reports. 
    The Crete Area Economic Development Commission shall make periodic reports on its progress and shall make their recommendations to the president and board of trustees at least once every six months. 
(Ord. No. 803, § 1.25.5, 7-9-79) 
Secs. 19-41-19-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXTERIOR BUILDING WALL MURALS 

Sec. 19-50. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the corporate authorities to promote the creation of exterior building wall murals (hereinafter "murals") to foster village pride, create an atmosphere and character for the village, stimulate tourism and economic vitality and encourage preservation, restoration and property maintenance standards. Accordingly, proposed murals shall be first submitted and presented for approval by the corporate authorities and may be painted only after written approval. 
(Ord. No. 2007-38, § 2, 11-26-07) 
Sec. 19-51. - Criteria. 
    The following criteria shall be followed: 
(1)  The mural must be an original concept, created entirely for the proposed mural. 
(2)  The organization or person proposing the mural shall relinquish any copyright. 
(3)  The surface of the mural must be properly prepared and the paint applied in such a manner to ensure there will not be peeling, cracking or significant fading for a period of a least five years. 
(4)  The mural shall relate to the history, current status or future of the village and complement the structure upon which it is placed and surrounding properties using good architectural standards regarding the design and colors utilized. 
(5)  The mural shall be maintained pursuant to property maintenance standards in article IV of chapter 6 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
(6)  No part of a mural may be utilized for advertising. 
(Ord. No. 2007-38, § 2, 11-26-07) 
Sec. 19-52. - Committee. 
    To facilitate the process of identifying appropriate locations, murals and artists, the corporate authorities may establish a committee led by one trustee and composed of volunteer citizens. This committee may establish such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to accomplish the preparation of proposed mural submittals to the corporate authorities for approval. 
(Ord. No. 2007-38, § 2, 11-26-07) 
Secs. 19-53-19-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES 

Sec. 19-71. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act. 
(b)  Conflicts with other ordinances. The ordinance codified in this article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(c)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-72. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Antenna: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes: Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code and all codes adopted by the village. 
    Applicant: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
    Application: A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application. 
    Collocate or collocation: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
    Communications service: Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service. 
    Communications service provider: A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider. 
    FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
    Fee: A one-time charge. 
    Historic district or historic landmark: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: 
(1)  Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or 
(2)  Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending. 
    Law: A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution. 
    Micro wireless facility: A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
    Municipal utility pole: A utility pole owned or operated by the city in public rights-of-way. 
    Permit: A written authorization required by the city to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project. 
    Person: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization. 
    Public safety agency: The functional division of the federal government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents. 
    Rate: A recurring charge. 
    Right-of-way: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include city-owned aerial lines. 
    Small wireless facility: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
    Utility pole: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function. 
    Wireless facility: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications; and 
(2)  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. 
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: 
(i)  The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or 
(ii)  Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna. 
    Wireless infrastructure provider: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the city. 
    Wireless provider: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
    Wireless services: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities. 
    Wireless services provider: A person who provides wireless services. 
    Wireless support structure: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-73. - Regulation of small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in paragraph (9) regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 
(1)  In rights-of-way in any zoning district; or 
(2)  Outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. 
(b)  Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the village, together with the village's small cell facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure: 
a.  Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989; 
b.  The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility; 
c.  Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed; 
d.  The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility; 
e.  A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and 
f.  Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's knowledge. 
g.  In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation. 
(2)  Application process. The village shall process applications as follows: 
a.  The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure. 
b.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a completed application. 
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application. 
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
c.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed application. 
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application. 
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
d.  The village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this article. 
If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider. 
The village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the village denies an application. 
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the village's review period. 
The applicant must notify the village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application. 
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. 
e.  Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement, provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement. 
(3)  Completeness of application. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the village. 
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information. 
(4)  Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by: 
a.  An express written agreement by both the applicant and the village; or 
b.  A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay. 
(5)  Consolidated applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. 
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application. 
(6)  Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this article. 
If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable village Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal. 
(7)  Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the village by personal delivery at the village's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-74. - Collocation requirements and conditions. 
(a)  Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. 
(b)  Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations. 
(c)  No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications. 
    A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment. 
    Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. 
    If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. 
    The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(d)  [Collocation limitations.] The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. 
    However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. 
    For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
(e)  [Compliance with applicable codes.] The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. 
(f)  [Compliance with design standards.] The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a village ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district. 
(g)  Alternate placements. Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. 
    If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph. 
(h)  Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. 
    New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of: 
(1)  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or 
(2)  Forty-five feet above ground level. 
(i)  Height exceptions or variances via administrative waiver. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for an administrative waiver in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in chapter 28, [article II], division 4 (variations) of the Crete Zoning Code, except that the hearing shall be conducted by the zoning administrator instead of the zoning board of appeals. Decisions of the zoning administrator concerning administrative waivers shall be appealable to the board of trustees who shall utilize procedures, terms and conditions as generally described in chapter 28, [article II], division 9 (appeals) of the Crete Zoning Code. 
(j)  Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. 
(k)  Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances. 
(l)  Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles. 
(m)  Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in writing to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-75. - Application fees. 
    Application fees are imposed as follows: 
(1)  Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650.00 for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures. 
(2)  Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable. 
(4)  The village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for: 
a.  Routine maintenance; 
b.  The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with subsection 19-73(b)(1)d. under the section titled application requirements; or 
c.  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes. 
(5)  Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-76. - Exceptions to applicability. 
    Nothing in this article authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on: 
(1)  Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner; 
(2)  Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or 
(3)  Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this article do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: 
a.  To obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service; or 
b.  To obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-77. - Pre-existing agreements. 
    Existing agreements between the village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article. 
    A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the village makes available under this article for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-78. - Annual recurring rate. 
    A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 
(1)  Two hundred dollars per year; or 
(2)  The actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the village utility pole. 
    If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200.00 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-79. - Abandonment. 
    A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment. 
    The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. 
    A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-80. - Dispute resolution. 
    The Circuit Court of the Twelfth Judicial District, Will County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200.00 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-81. - Indemnification. 
    A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Sec. 19-82. - Insurance. 
    The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance: 
(1)  Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks; 
(2)  Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or 
(3)  Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. 
    The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. 
    A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 7-9-18) 
Secs. 19-83-19-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES V-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 19-101-19-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 19-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2007-38, § 2, 11-26-07) 
Chapter 20 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees generally, § 2-86 et seq.; residency requirements for policemen, § 2-88; board of fire and police commissioners, § 2-261 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Creation; composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created a police department, an executive department of the village. 
(b)  The police department shall consist of one chief of police, one deputy chief, if submitted for approval by the chief of police and approved, four sergeants, and 13 patrol officers; provided further, up to two additional patrol officers are authorized contingent upon the staffing requirements pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with School District 201-U for school resource officers. 
(Code 1965, § 1.16.1; Ord. No. 788, § 1, 11-13-78; Res. No. 120, 10-24-83; Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 5-8-89; Ord. No. 90-13, § 1, 4-9-90; Ord. No. 91-4, § 1, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 91-15, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 92-14, § 2, 7-27-92; Ord. No. 96-08, § 2, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 96-15, § 2, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 2000-33, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2000-49, § 2, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 2001-08, § 2, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 2001-40, § 2, 10-22-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 2, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 2003-26, § 2, 8-11-03; Ord. No. 2004-09, § 2, 2-23-04; Ord. No. 2006-33, § 2, 8-28-06; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2, 2-26-07; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 2, 3-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-27, § 2, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 2008-44, § 2, 12-22-08; Ord. No. 2009-16, § 2, 3-9-09; Ord. No. 2009-54, § 2, 8-10-09; Ord. No. 2009-76, § 2, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 2-22-10; Ord. No. 2010-23, § 2, 6-14-10; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 2, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2018-24, § 2, 11-12-18; Ord. No. 2018-33, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-2. - Classified service. 
    All full-time paid members of the police department, with the exception of the chief of police and deputy chief, shall be considered to be members of the classified service and shall be appointed, promoted and removed by the board of fire and police commissioners, or as otherwise bargained in accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code and Illinois Public Labor Relations Act. 
(Code 1965, § 1.16.2; Ord. No. 2000-33, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2003-26, § 2, 8-11-03; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-14-12; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 3, 6-10-13) 
Sec. 20-3. - Functions. 
    It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to enforce all ordinances of the village, all statutes effective in the village, preserve order and prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof. Every member of the police department is hereby declared to be a conservator of the peace after receiving a certificate attesting to the successful completion of a training course administered by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board. 
(Code 1965, § 1.16.3; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 20-3.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-26, § 2, adopted Aug. 11, 2003 deleted § 20-3.1, which pertained to the director of police and was derived from Ord. No. 2000-33, § 2, adopted Aug. 28, 2000. 
Sec. 20-4. - Chief of police. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of chief of police. The chief shall be ex officio village marshal. The chief shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees and not by the board of police and fire commissioners. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be keeper of the village jail, and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or ordinance. The chief of police shall be responsible for the performance of the police department, of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. 
(c)  The chief of police shall be custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen property in the village. 
(d)  The chief of police shall be authorized to serve writs, summons, and other processes, but no patrolman shall serve any such summons or process except on the order of the chief of police. 
(Code 1965, §§ 1.16.4-1.16.7; Ord. No. 2000-33, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2003-26, § 2, 8-11-03) 
State Law reference- Appointment of chief of police, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4. 
Sec. 20-5. - Deputy chief. 
(a)  There is hereby created one position of deputy chief. The deputy chief shall be an exempt rank immediately below the chief of police. The deputy chief shall be appointed by the chief of police and approved by the board of trustees. The deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full-time officers of the police department; provided further, that any deputy chief shall have a minimum of five years of full-time service in the Crete Police Department. 
(b)  The deputy chief shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police, and if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank previously held to deputy chief without regard to whether a vacancy exists in that rank. Removal, being at the discretion of the chief of police, shall be made without cause or hearing. 
(c)  A deputy chief shall be permitted, regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be promoted to a higher classified rank than the deputy chief had currently held without having to resign as deputy chief. 
(d)  The deputy chief will perform duties and shall have responsibilities as designated from time to time by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2013-11, § 4, 6-10-13; Ord. No. 2018-33, § 2, 12-10-18) 
Sec. 20-6. - Conduct of members. 
    It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner, and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. 
(Code 1965, § 1.16.8) 
Sec. 20-7. - Witness fees. 
    Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a village ordinance or a state or federal law. But no such member shall receive any witness fee for such services in any action or suit to which the village is a party; all fees due for such services, shall, if paid, be turned over to the village treasurer. 
(Code 1965, § 1.16.9) 
Sec. 20-8. - Rules and regulations. 
    The chief of police may make or describe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the police department as he shall see fit; such rules, when approved by the president and board of trustees, shall be binding on such members. 
(Code 1965, § 1.16.10; Ord. No. 2000-33, § 2, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 2003-26, § 2, 8-11-03) 
Sec. 20-9. - Pension fund. 
    There is hereby established police pension fund in accordance with article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.), which article is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code. Three copies of such article are on file in the office of the village clerk for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 769, 10-24-77) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 20-10. - Jail. 
    The place in the village currently established and used as the jail, or any other place which may hereafter be established by the board of trustees for that purpose, is hereby declared to be the jail. The jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons arrested for violating any laws of the State of Illinois, the United States, or for violating any village ordinance, until such person shall be brought to trial before a magistrate for a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration. 
(Code 1965, §§ 1.19.1, 1.19.3) 
Cross reference- Escape from jail, § 13-18. 
Secs. 20-11-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE 

Sec. 20-21. - Generally. 
(a)  The village president is hereby authorized to appoint 25 auxiliary policemen as employees, subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees. Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary policemen shall be fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau of Identification, Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record. No person shall be appointed as an auxiliary policeman if he has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. The appointment of any or all auxiliary policemen may be terminated by the village president subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees. 
(b)  Auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular police department of the village. Auxiliary policemen need not be residents of the village. Identification symbols worn by such auxiliary policemen shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular police department and shall be selected and chosen by the chief of police. Auxiliary policemen shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 638, §§ 1, 2, 5-26-69) 
Sec. 20-22. - Salary. 
    Auxiliary policemen shall be paid at an hourly rate as the president and board of trustees shall from time to time determine, provided such service is performed at the direction of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 6, 5-26-69) 
Sec. 20-23. - Functions. 
    Auxiliary policemen shall, when properly assigned and on duty: 
(1)  Direct traffic in the village; 
(2)  Aid in control of natural or manmade disasters; 
(3)  Aid in case of civil disorder; 
(4)  Perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the chief of police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular police department to perform normal and regular police duties; 
(5)  Arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace, or are found violating any village ordinance or any criminal law of the state; 
(6)  Commit arrested persons for examination; 
(7)  If necessary, detain arrested persons in custody overnight or Sunday in any safe place, or until they can be brought before the proper magistrate; 
(8)  Exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the president and board of trustees may prescribe; 
(9)  Serve and execute all warrants for the violation of village ordinances, or the state criminal law, within the village, and for this purpose to have all the common law and statutory power of sheriffs. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 3, 5-26-69) 
Sec. 20-24. - Firearms. 
    Auxiliary policemen shall not carry firearms except with the permission of the chief of police and then only when in uniform and in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 4, 5-26-69) 
Sec. 20-25. - Training. 
    Auxiliary policemen, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures by the chief of police. Such course of training shall not be less than 30 hours in duration. Upon completion of this minimum course of training, the chief of police shall file a certificate attesting to the auxiliary policemen's completion of the course, with the village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 5, 5-26-69) 
Secs. 20-26-20-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS 

Sec. 20-30. - Employment authorized. 
(a)  The Village of Crete may employ part-time police officers from time to time as is deemed necessary by the corporate authorities. 
(b)  Part-time police officers shall be paid in accordance with the compensation as shall be determined by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 20-31. - Duties. 
    A part-time police officer shall have all the responsibilities and authority of a full-time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general orders of the Crete Police Department, but the number of hours a part-time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part-time officers shall not be a part of the pension fund. Part-time police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full-time police officers. Part-time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the Illinois Police Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.) and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB. Part-time police officers shall perform their duties at the direction of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 20-32. - Hiring standards. 
    Any person employed as a part-time police officer must meet the following standards: 
(1)  Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties. 
(2)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(3)  Pass a medical examination. 
(4)  Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate. 
(5)  Possess a valid State of Illinois driver's license. 
(6)  Possess no prior felony convictions. 
(7)  Any individual who has served in the U.S. Military must have been honorably discharged. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-14-12) 
Sec. 20-33. - Discipline. 
    Part-time officers shall be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part-time officers serve at the discretion of the village authorities, shall not have any property rights in said employment, and may be removed by the village authorities at any time. Part-time police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders issued by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-14-12) 
Secs. 20-34-20-60. - Reserved. 
Chapter 21 - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12; signs generally, § 28-346 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1-21-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING 

Sec. 21-16. - Definition. 
    The term "outdoor advertiser" as used in this article shall mean and is hereby defined to mean any person engaged in the business of placing, posting or painting any sign, advertisement, notice of display in or on any place for purpose of outdoor advertising so that the resultant display is visible from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.33.1) 
Sec. 21-17. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to apply to the posting of signs or notices by order of any court or by any public officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.33.12) 
Sec. 21-18. - Licensing of outdoor advertisers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to do business in the village without having first secured a license therefor. No such license shall be construed to permit the use for advertising purposes of any structures, natural or artificial, which are located in any public street, alley or other public place. 
(b)  Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall be accompanied by a list of all places, including billboards or natural structures, on which it is intended to place signs or advertisements. This list shall be added to from time to time by the licensee as a right to post or place advertisements or signs on additional places as required. 
(c)  The annual fee for such license shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 21-18. Any square footage shall be measured across the actual advertising space. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.33.2-2.2.33.4; Ord. No. 820, § 1, 4-28-80; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 21-19. - Litter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in outdoor advertising to permit any refuse resulting from this work to accumulate anywhere in the village except by placing it in properly established refuse receptacles. It shall be unlawful to permit any loose or flapping or combustible materials to hang from or be attached to any billboard or signboard or other place used for display or advertising purposes. All refuse resulting from the operation of this business must be disposed of properly. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.33.7) 
Sec. 21-20. - Weeds and materials at base of billboards. 
    It shall be the duty of every outdoor advertiser to keep all grass and weeds, and other growths, except trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut down so that the same shall not grow to a height greater than ten inches within six feet of any billboard or signboard used by him; provided that this obligation shall extend only to property controlled by the advertiser. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.33.8) 
Sec. 21-21. - Prohibited advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display any advertisement tending to promote or cause a riot, or breach of the peace, or any advertisement of any unlawful gathering, or advertisements of unlawful sales. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.33.9) 
Sec. 21-22. - Disfiguring signs. 
    It shall be unlawful to mutilate or disfigure in any way any lawful sign or advertisements in the village. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.33.10) 
Sec. 21-23. - Display of name of licensee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to carry on his business unless the name of such advertiser is attached, displayed or printed on all billboards or signboards used by him, or on any notice, placard, or advertisement posted by him, in such lettering as to be visible from a distance of at least five feet from the notice or advertisement. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.33.11) 
Secs. 21-24-21-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGNS, AWNINGS, ETC., OVERHANGING STREETS, ALLEYS, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 22. 

Sec. 21-36. - Inspections and correction of unsafe conditions. 
    The building inspector is authorized to inspect, or cause to be inspected, every sign, canopy or awning which extends over any sidewalk, street, alley or other public way. If any such sign, awning or canopy is found to be insecurely fastened he shall report this fact to the owner of same or to the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is fastened. If the sign, awning or canopy is not made secure within ten days after such notice it may be torn down by the fire department on order of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 3.3.7) 
Sec. 21-37. - Bond or insurance. 
    Each person maintaining a sign, canopy or awning which extends over any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way shall file with the village clerk a bond or indemnity policy in the sum of $5,000.00, conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss or damage or liability that may result from the construction or maintenance of such sign or canopy. Such bond or policy shall have such sureties as may be approved by the board of trustees. If a blanket indemnity insurance policy against any loss or liability due to such signs and canopies is secured by the village, no such bond shall be required. 
(Code 1965, § 3.3.2) 
Sec. 21-38. - Construction. 
    All signs, awnings and canopies extending over any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public place must be securely fastened and constructed so that there will be no danger of the same being dislodged by ordinary winds or falling from any other cause. 
(Code 1965, § 3.3.4) 
Sec. 21-39. - Height above walk. 
    The lowest part of any such sign, canopy, or of any nonrigid awning, or any support thereof which extends over any public way shall be at least eight feet above the level of the walk or public way over which it extends; no such sign shall be maintained over any public way used by vehicles if any part of its support or of the sign is less than 15 feet above the level of such public way. 
(Code 1965, § 3.3.6) 
Secs. 21-40-21-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES IV-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 21-61-21-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 21-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 14, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Village datum, § 2-3; gasoline pumps on streets, etc., § 9-7; spitting on sidewalks, § 11-1; signs, awnings, etc., overhanging streets, alleys, etc, § 21-36 et seq.; streets in subdivisions, §§ 23-62, 23-106, 23-132; traffic, ch. 25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Obstruction. 
(a)  Any person who obstructs or encroaches upon public highways, streets or alleys of this village, or who by his acts and/or activities impedes, or causes to be impeded, vehicular or other traffic upon public highways, streets and alleys of this village, without first having secured legal authority to do so for public purposes which are not of such a nature as to be injurious or detrimental or potentially injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare and morals of this village shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Any person who obstructs or encroaches upon public sidewalks of this village or who by his acts and/or activities impedes, or causes to be impeded, pedestrian and related traffic upon public sidewalks of this village, by idly standing about or lingering in such a fashion as to affect the reasonable flow of such pedestrian or related traffic in this village, or which may unreasonably affect the peace and enjoyment of one's residence or place of business in this village, or cause fear or apprehension with respect to the same, or be injurious or detrimental or potentially injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare and morals of this village, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 10.4.1(a), (b); Ord. No. 628, § 1, 10-7-68) 
Sec. 22-2. - Private use. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, right-of-way or sidewalk or other public space as space for the display or sale of goods or merchandise or any other form of private usage except as specifically approved by the village board of trustees as provided for herein or as a temporary use in accordance with the procedure and regulations as provided therefor in section 28-257 of the Municipal Code. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to erect or place any permanent object or structure within the right-of-way of any street or alley or on any sidewalk that will impede, hinder or interfere with the use of such public way by the village or any other public utility or franchise. Exceptions to this section can only be granted by official action of the board of trustees or as specifically provided for in other parts of the Municipal Code. Standardized mail boxes and posts for such that meet the standards of the post office will be permitted, and further the use of masonry supports and masonry enclosures of the mail box will require a building permit and will be permitted only on secondary streets having a speed limit of 30 miles per hour or less and only where no interference with water lines, sewer lines or utilities access will result. 
(Code 1965, § 3.1.11; Ord. No. 93-8, § 1, 3-8-93) 
Sec. 22-3. - Barricades. 
(a)  Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place, or making an excavation in any such place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work; such barricades shall be protected by a red light at night. Any defects in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any such injury, and any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or excavation while the same remains open by proper barricades and lights. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Code 1965, §§ 3.1.9, 3.1.10) 
Sec. 22-4. - Injury to pavement. 
    It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley pavement. 
(Code 1965, § 3.1.13) 
Sec. 22-5. - Obstructing drains. 
    It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley. 
(Code 1965, § 3.1.16) 
Sec. 22-6. - Permit, etc., for construction of street, sidewalk, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be make to the village clerk, and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof and the person who is to do the actual construction work. No such permit shall be issued except on order of the board of trustees. Before each applicant for a permit shall file a bond, with surety to be approved by the board of trustees, conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same. The contractor shall also deposit with the village treasurer a performance bond on a sum equal to 100 percent of the cost of construction. 
(b)  Before commencing work pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this section a person must submit satisfactory evidence to the village attorney that he has obtained the following insurance: 
(1)  Worker's compensation insurance; 
(2)  Liability insurance in the following amounts: 
a.  For death or injury to any one person, $100,000.00; 
b.  For personal injuries or death, per occurrence, $500,000.00; 
c.  For damage to property, $50,000.00. 
(c)  The person doing work pursuant to such a permit shall restore all public ways and other public property disturbed, to its previous condition, under supervision of and to the satisfaction of the village engineer and the board of trustees. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal of said contractor so to do, the village may do the work and charge the cost thereof to such person. 
(d)  All streets and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with the specifications approved by the board of trustees and on file in the office of the village clerk. 
(Code 1965, §§ 3.1.2-3.1.4) 
Cross reference- Surety bonds, § 2-4. 
Sec. 22-7. - Excavations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig in, tunnel under, or make any excavation in or under any street, alley or other public way in the village without a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the village clerk, but no such permit shall be issued, except in case of emergencies, except on order of the board of trustees. No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant has filed with the village clerk a bond in the sum of $10,000.00 to indemnify the village and protect it against any loss or liability resulting from such excavation, or any barricades in connection therewith, or from defective refilling or resurfacing. 
(b)  Each such excavation or tunnel shall be promptly and properly refilled, and the surface restored to its original condition, under the supervision of the board of trustees or its designee. 
(Code 1965, § 3.1.19) 
Sec. 22-8. - Permission required to erect poles or wires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over any public street, alley or other public way without having first secured permission from the board of trustees. 
(Code 1965, § 3.1.17) 
Sec. 22-9. - Snow removal into street or alley. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner deposit, push, shovel, snowblow, transfer or otherwise direct or place any snow removed from any other areas into any public street or alley of the village. 
(b)  A violation of this provision shall constitute an offense and shall subject any person violating this provision to punishment as provided in section 25-4 of the Crete Municipal Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 93-10, § 3, 3-22-93) 
Sec. 22-10. - Snow/obstruction removal on abutting sidewalk. 
    Owners, occupants or persons in control of improved property fronting or abutting on paved sidewalks shall remove ice, snow or other obstructions within 48 hours of any ice accumulation or snowfall in excess of two inches. This requirement is limited to public sidewalks. It is a defense to a violation charged under this section if any person has provided prior notification to the village superintendent of public works as to a condition involving the sidewalk which prevents completion of any removal and the superintendent of public works or his designee identifies the condition as such; or, if the sidewalk is located in an area not accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, § 2, 8-8-11) 
Sec. 22-11. - Parkway/right-of-way maintenance required. 
(a)  Owners, occupants or persons in control of real property within the village shall maintain the right-of-way vegetation abutting their property. Maintenance shall include cutting and mowing grass in accordance with section 16-23 of this Code, cutting vines or shrubbery so as to maintain safe sight distances for vehicles using the roadway, preventing overgrown vegetation on the public sidewalk, and the removal of all refuse or other debris within a reasonable period of time. Such maintenance is not inclusive of cutting or trimming trees or repairing sidewalks. 
(b)  No person shall plant or remove any tree or shrubbery in any right-of-way unless permission is requested in writing and received by the superintendent of public works or his designee. Responses to any such requests shall be returned within five working days. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "right-of-way" is defined as that space between the private property line of the property owned and the paved or graded portion of the public street or alley adjacent thereto, including the area between a sidewalk and a street. 
(Ord. No. 2011-24, § 2, 8-8-11) 
Secs. 22-12-22-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 22-15. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights-of-way and the village as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this article, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; 
(5)  Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
(6)  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
(7)  Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods; 
(8)  Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
(9)  Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
(c)  Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. 
(d)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article. 
(e)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements: 
(1)  Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(2)  Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(f)  Conflicts with other articles. This article supersedes all articles or parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(g)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(h)  Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-201), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-16. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
    ANSI. American National Standards Institute. 
    Applicant. A person applying for a permit under this article. 
    ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials. 
    Backfill. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
    Bore or boring. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
    Cable operator. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). 
    Cable service. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
    Cable system. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7). 
    Carrier pipe. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
    Casing. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
    Clear zone. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
    Coating. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
    Code. The Municipal Code of the Village of Crete. 
    Conductor. Wire carrying electrical current. 
    Conduit. A casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
    Construction or construct. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
    Cover. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
    Crossing facility. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
    Director of public works. The village director of public works or his or her designee. 
    Disrupt the right-of-way. For the purposes of this article, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
    Emergency. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
    Encasement. Provision of a protective casing. 
    Engineer. The village engineer or his or her designee. 
    Equipment. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
    Excavation. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
    Extra-heavy pipe. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
    Facility. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article. For purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the village. 
    Freestanding facility. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
    Frontage road. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway. 
    Hazardous materials. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the village engineer [director of public works] to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
    Highway code. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
    Highway. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
    Holder. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
    IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation. 
    ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission. 
    Jacking. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
    Jetting. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
    Joint use. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities. 
    J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program. 
    Major intersection. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways. 
    Occupancy. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
    Parallel facility. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
    Parkway. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
    Pavement cut. The removal of an area of pavement for access to [a] facility or for the construction of a facility. 
    Permittee. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 22-18 and 22-19 of this article. 
    Practicable. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
    Pressure. The internal force acting radically against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
    Petroleum products pipelines. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
    Prompt. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days. 
    Public entity. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level. 
    Restoration. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
    Right-of-way or rights-of-way. Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the village. "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
    Roadway. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
    Sale of telecommunications at retail. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
    Security fund. That amount of security required pursuant to section 22-24. 
    Shoulder. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
    Sound engineering judgment. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
    Telecommunications. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide-area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value-added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village [city] through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended. 
    Telecommunications provider. Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
    Telecommunications retailer. Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
    Trench. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
    Utility. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this article. 
    Vent. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
    Video service. That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v). 
    Village. The Village of Crete. 
    Water lines. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
    Wet boring. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-202), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-17. - Annual registration required. 
    Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the village administrator, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 22-22 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. The village administrator shall forward this information to all department heads. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-203), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-18. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right-of-way which: 
(1)  Changes the location of the facility; 
(2)  Adds a new facility; 
(3)  Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article); or 
(4)  Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the village administrator and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village: 
a.  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
b.  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
(7)  Evidence of insurance as required in section 22-22 of this article; 
(8)  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 22-24 of this article; 
(9)  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see section 22-35); and 
(10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village. 
(d)  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
(1)  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
(2)  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
(3)  In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied; 
(4)  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the village have been satisfied; or 
(5)  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
(e)  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(f)  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $50.00. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-204), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-19. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the village engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village engineer shall recommend the issuance of a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Additional village review of applications of telecommunications retailers. 
(1)  Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The village engineer shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
(2)  In the event that the village engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: 
a.  Ten days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or 
b.  Twenty-five days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article. 
(3)  Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 22-18 of this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Additional village review of applications of holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-205), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-20. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Preconstruction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-206), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-21. - Revised permit drawings. 
    In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 22-35 of this article. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-207), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-22. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in paragraphs (1) and (2) below: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
c.  Five million dollars for all other types of liability; 
(2)  Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(3)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per employee and per accident. 
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten days following receipt of a written request therefor from the village. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the village president and village administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a), or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. [All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.] 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-208), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-23. - Indemnification. 
    By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged or arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-209), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-24. - Security. 
(a)  Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for: 
(1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this article; and 
(3)  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law. 
(b)  Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee; 
(2)  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and 
(3)  Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn. 
(c)  Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the village engineer, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection (c) for any single phase. 
(d)  Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
(1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
(2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
(3)  Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund. 
(e)  Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(h)  Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-210), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-25. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Noncompliance with this article; 
(3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
(b)  Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section 22-25. 
(c)  Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the village: 
(1)  Correct the deficiencies; 
(2)  Upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 
(3)  After not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. 
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-211), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-26. - Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status. 
(a)  Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right-of-way. 
(c)  Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-212), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-27. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(2)  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
(3)  Highway Design Manual; 
(4)  Highway Standards Manual; 
(5)  Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items; 
(6)  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545); 
(7)  Flagger's Handbook; and 
(8)  Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations. 
(b)  Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this article, the village engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the village engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-213), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-28. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(b)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 22-34 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the village. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-214), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-29. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. 
(1)  No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village engineer determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with, the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
(b)  Parallel facilities located within highways. 
(1)  Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
b.  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
c.  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
d.  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
e.  Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
b.  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
c.  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any aboveground appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
(c)  Facilities crossing highways. 
(1)  No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
(2)  Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
(3)  Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
(4)  Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); 
b.  Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
c.  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
(5)  Underground power or communication facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
b.  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
(6)  Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in Current Federal Regulations. (49 C.F.R. §192.707 (1989)). 
(d)  Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(e)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
(2)  The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
(f)  Facilities installed above ground. Above-ground facilities may be installed only if: 
(1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
(2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
(3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. 
(g)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures. 
(1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
(2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
a.  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
b.  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
c.  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
d.  The proposed method of attachment; 
e.  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
f.  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
g.  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
h.  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(h)  Appearance standards. 
(1)  The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
(2)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-215), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-30. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods. 
(1)  Boring or jacking. 
a.  Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
b.  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
c.  Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm). 
d.  Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
e.  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system. 
(2)  Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
a.  Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the village engineer. 
b.  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
c.  Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved. 
(3)  Backfilling. 
a.  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
b.  For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the engineer or director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the engineer or director of public works. 
(4)  Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph (4) is permitted under section 22-35, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-7 gradation, as designated by the engineer or director of public works. 
b.  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village. 
c.  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
d.  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
(5)  Encasement. 
a.  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village. 
b.  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
c.  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village-approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell-and-spigot-type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
d.  In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
e.  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: 
1.  Extra-heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair; and 
2.  Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided. 
f.  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
(6)  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
TYPE OF FACILITY MINIMUM COVER Electric lines 30 Inches (0.8 m) Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by village [city]) Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m) Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection  
(b)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities. 
(1)  Electric power or communication lines. 
a.  Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
b.  Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single-pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
c.  Underground facilities. 
1.  Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. 
2.  If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: 
(i)  The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation; or 
(ii)  The installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. 
3.  Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
d.  Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after placement. 
(2)  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
a.  The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
b.  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
c.  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
d.  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
(3)  Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village-approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 C.F.R. § 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
(5)  Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois." 
(6)  Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy-duty plastic or similar material approved by the engineer. With the approval of the engineer or director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the village engineer. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the village. 
(3)  Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(d)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the engineer when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are those set forth in chapter 6, subsection 6-28(b) of this Code. 
(e)  Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-216), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-31. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities-Compliance with state laws and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village [city] as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities-Tree-trimming permit required. Tree-trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article. 
(1)  Application for tree-trimming permit. Applications for tree-trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree-trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree-trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side-arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Chemical use. 
(1)  Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
(2)  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-217), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-32. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(a)  Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article [chapter]; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village engineer determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-217), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-33. - Cleanup and restoration. 
    The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the village engineer for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-218), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-34. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the village director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-219), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-35. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the village engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The village engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The village engineer may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the village engineer may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The village board shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-221, 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-36. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this chapter. There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third-party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit-related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-222), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-37. - Enforcement. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-223), 12-10-07) 
Sec. 22-38. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-46, § 2(22-224), 12-10-07) 
Secs. 22-39-22-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 22-41. - Required. 
    All lots, buildings, and structures in the village shall be numbered in accordance with the following plan: 
(1)  Fifth Street shall be the base line for streets running north and south, and East Street for streets running east and west. 
(2)  On north and south streets, numbering shall begin at 1,200 at the north and south base line, increasing two numbers for each 25 feet south of Fifth Street, and decreasing two numbers for each 25 feet north of Fifth Street. 
(3)  On east and west streets, numbering shall begin at 325 at the east-west base line increasing two numbers for each 25 feet west of East Street and decreasing two numbers for each 25 feet east of East Street. 
(4)  The odd numbers shall be on the east and north sides of the street. 
Sec. 22-42. - Chart. 
    The village clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot in the village which chart shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1965, § 3.4.2) 
Sec. 22-43. - Numbers on houses. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every house in the village to have placed thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least two and one-half inches high, showing the number of the house. Any person failing to so number any house owned or occupied by him after receiving notice to do so from the village clerk shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 3.4.3) 
Secs. 22-44-22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES IV-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 22-71-2-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 22-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 15, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 23 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; drainage and flood control, ch. 8; planning and development, ch. 19; zoning, ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Plats generally 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.; subdivision regulations generally, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Crete Subdivision Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 1, § A, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-2. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare; 
(2)  To conserve, protect, and enhance property and property values; 
(3)  To secure the most appropriate use of land; and to facilitate the adequate but economical provision of public improvements; 
(4)  To provide for orderly growth and development; to afford adequate facilities for the safe, convenient, and efficient means for the traffic circulation of its population; and to safeguard the public against flood damage; 
(5)  To prescribe reasonable rules and regulations governing the subdivision and platting of land; the preparation of plats; the location, width, and course of streets and highways; the installation of utilities, street pavements, and other essential improvements; and the necessary public grounds for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public open spaces; 
(6)  To establish procedures for the submission, approval, and recording of plats; and to provide the means for enforcement and to provide penalties for violations. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 1, § B, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley: A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties abutting upon and having access to a street. 
    Collector street: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to an arterial street, including the principal entrance streets of residential developments, and the principal streets for circulation within such a development. 
    Cul-de-sac: A short minor street ending in a turn-around designed and intended as a permanent terminus. 
    Dead-end street: Any street, other than a cul-de-sac, which has only one outlet. 
    Development: The act of building structures or installing site improvements. 
    Easement: A grant or reservation of specific rights in land conveyed by the land owner to the public or to person for a particular purpose or purposes. 
    Engineer: A professional engineer registered as such in the state. 
    Expressway: A street or highway to which access is limited or controlled, designed to move vehicular traffic between communities or other large areas. Included in this definition are the terms "tollway," "freeway, " and "turnpike." 
    Half-street: When a proposed street has as its center line, or within its right-of-way, the boundaries of one or more tracts, that portion of the street on either side of such tract boundary shall be known as a "half-street." 
    Local street: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
    Major street plan: The so designated portion of the official plan as adopted and amended by the village. 
    Marginal access street: A minor street which is approximately parallel and adjacent to an arterial street or expressway, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
    Official map: The official map, or any part thereof, as adopted by the board of trustees. 
    Official plan: The official comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, as adopted by the board of trustees. 
    Owner: Any person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
    Pedestrian way: A right-of-way, however designated, across or within a block for use by pedestrian traffic. Included in this term are sidewalks and crosswalks. 
    Right-of-way: A strip of land conveyed or dedicated for street use; or, where appropriate, for other special uses such as a crosswalk, railroad, pipeline, utility main or electric transmission line. 
    Resubdivision: The relocation of property boundaries, or the reallocation of property in a plat of record; however, the dissolution of property lines, not accompanied by the creation of new property lines, shall not constitute resubdivision. 
    Street: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, freeway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place, or however otherwise indicated. 
    Street width: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
    Subdivider: Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another. 
    Subdivision: The division of land into two or more lots, parcels or areas. The term shall include resubdivision and shall, when appropriate to the context, relate the procession of subdividing or to the land being subdivided. 
    Surveyor: A land surveyor registered as such in the state. 
    Zoning ordinance: The zoning ordinance of the village and all maps pertaining thereto for subdivisions located within the corporate limits. The term shall mean the zoning ordinance of the appropriate county having jurisdiction for subdivisions located in unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles of the village. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 2, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-4. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and effectuation of the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way interfere with, any provisions of law, or any rules or regulations other than subdivision regulations adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the subdivision or development of land. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or requirements than are imposed or required by other provisions of law, regulations, rules, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control, but nothing herein shall interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements between parties which impose restrictions greater than those imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 1, § C, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-5. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Divisions of land which may be ordered or approved by a court or effected by testamentary or intestate procedures or provisions; 
(2)  A division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving any new streets or easements of access; 
(3)  Conveyances of land for use as right-of-way for highway, railroad, or other public utilities not involving any new streets or easements or access; 
(4)  Such other subdivision as may be specifically exempted herefrom by state law. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 2, § 5, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-6. - Amendments. 
    The plan commission shall from time to time prepare and recommend in writing to the board of trustees such changes or additions to the provisions and regulations herein contained for subdivision control, as the plan commission may deem necessary or advisable. Such changes or additions shall become effective after their adoption by the board of trustees. Any previously approved preliminary plat shall remain effective for a period of one year following its approval, the fact of any intervening amendment(s), notwithstanding. Thereafter, any preliminary plat or portion of any subdivision proposal (not under construction and/or appropriately bonded) must be resubmitted to the village's plan commission for reapproval and compliance with all the then current provisions and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 1, § I, 5-24-65; Ord. No. 91-17, § 1, 6-10-91) 
Sec. 23-7. - Modifications. 
(a)  When the plan commission, in interpreting this chapter, finds that extraordinary hardship or injustice will result from strict compliance with this chapter, the terms thereof may be varied to the extent deemed necessary and proper to grant relief, provided that the modification: 
(1)  Is due to physical features of the site, 
(2)  Is the least deviation from this chapter which will mitigate the hardship, and 
(3)  Is not detrimental to the public interest, and is in keeping with the general spirit and intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Application for any such modification shall be made in writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed for consideration, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans, or other additional data which may aid the plan commission in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. Once the terms of any modification have been agreed upon, the review of the subdivision shall proceed as prescribed in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 9, §§ A, B, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-8. - Scope and required compliance. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions made within the corporate limits of the village and to all unincorporated areas located within the jurisdiction of the plan commission. All subdivisions shall comply with the applicable requirements set forth in this chapter and on the official map. 
(b)  Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, or lease for any time exceeding five years, any lot or block in any subdivision before complying with all the requirements of this chapter and the state statutes governing plats, shall be guilty of an offense for each lot or block or part thereof, so disposed of, offered for sale, or leased. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 1, §§ D, E, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-9. - Platting required. 
    No lot or tract of land located within the village or within the area of jurisdiction of the plan commission which contains an area of more than one-half acre, shall be divided or re-divided in any manner into two or more lesser tracts for building site purposes, without subdividing or resubdividing and platting such tract in the manner provided by the law. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 1, § J, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-10. - Buildings within proposed major street extensions. 
    No permanent building or structure shall be erected within the extended street lines of proposed extensions of major streets shown on the major street plan adopted as part of the official plan of the village. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 1, § K, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-11. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
    Within the corporate limits: 
(1)  Building permits shall not be issued until the building inspector and board of trustees have been notified that the final plat has been approved. 
(2)  Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued until the building inspector has been notified by the plan commission that the required improvements have been completed and operational approval has been granted by the village engineer. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 4, § F, 5-24-65) 
Secs. 23-12-23-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLAT REVIEW PROCEDURES 

Sec. 23-36. - Duties of subdividers and of the plan commission. 
    The prospective subdivider is urged to consult informally with the plan commission and, where pertinent, county officials, state agencies, and public utility people, on the availability of services and public facilities in the area to be subdivided. He is also encouraged to study the pertinent rules and regulations including the zoning ordinance, and especially this chapter. The plan commission is responsible for discouraging not only premature development, but also development in unsuitable areas that are inaccessible or hazardous or lack services. The plan commission is also charged with encouraging replatting of inadequate subdivisions and coordinating the platting of small parcels of adjacent land. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 3, § A, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-37. - Classes of subdivisions. 
    Subdivisions are, for the purposes of this article, divided into the following classes: 
(1)  Class 1 subdivision: Any subdivision containing not more than ten lots, fronting on an existing, improved, public, minor street, not involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities, not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with the official plan, zoning ordinance, or this chapter. 
(2)  Class 2 subdivision: Any subdivision which does not meet the specifications for a class 1 subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 3, § B, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-38. - Stages of approval generally. 
    All subdivision plats shall be processed in four stages leading to approval for recording, except that in specified instances as specified by this chapter, certain stages may be waived or combined. The four stages are: 
(1)  The sketch plan; 
(2)  The preliminary plat; 
(3)  Engineering plans; and 
(4)  The final plat. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 3, § C, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-39. - Development in stages. 
(a)  The applicant for plat approval may elect to have final approval on a geographic part or parts of the plat that received preliminary approval, and may delay application for approval of other parts until a later date or dates beyond one year with the approval of the board of trustees; provided, all facilities required to serve the part or parts for which final approval is sought have been provided. In such case only such part or parts of the plat as have received final approval shall be recorded. 
(b)  In no case, except for the final section, shall any section filed for approval under this provision contain less than 50 residential lots. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 4, § C(5), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-40. - Fee. 
(a)  At the time of application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall pay processing fee to the village of an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 23-40. 
(b)  At the time of application for approval of the engineering plans, the subdivider shall pay a fee sufficient to compensate the village engineer for an examination of the engineering plans and the estimated construction cost of improvements. 
(c)  After the engineering plans and the construction cost estimate of improvements have been approved by the village engineer and the plan commission, the applicant shall deposit money in escrow payable to the village in accordance with the schedule then in effect between the village and the village engineer to cover the costs of engineering supervision and inspection. 
(d)  At the time of receiving approval of a final plat the subdivider shall pay a fee sufficient to cover the cost of recording. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 4, § C, 5-24-65; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 23-41. - Sketch plan stage. 
(a)  The sketch plan is a sketch proposal, complying with the provisions of subsection (b), submitted informally by the developer to the plan commission. The purposes of same conference are: 
(1)  To develop cooperation and confidence; 
(2)  To familiarize the developer with requirements; 
(3)  To do away with major revisions of the Preliminary Plats; 
(4)  To save the developer time and money; 
(5)  To provide assistance to small scale subdividers; 
(6)  To classify the subdivision as Class 1, or Class 2; sketch plans of subdivisions classified by the plan commission at this stage as Class 1 subdivisions may proceed directly to the fourth or final plat stage. Sketch plans of subdivisions classified as Class 2 subdivisions shall proceed to the preliminary plat stage. 
(b)  The subdivider shall meet with the plan commission in a preliminary conference which shall be scheduled by appointment. Prior to the conference he shall submit to the plan commission the following: 
(1)  A rough site sketch showing: 
a.  The boundaries and dimensions of the property to be subdivided; 
b.  Land characteristics such as natural drainage, swamp areas, wooded areas, and ridges, on and adjacent to the tract; 
c.  Existing easements and their location, width and purpose; 
d.  Streets on and adjacent to the tract; their name and right-of-way width and location, their type, width and approximate elevation of surfacing; 
e.  Existing utilities on and adjacent to the tract, location and size of water mains, fire hydrants, gas mains, street lights, storm and sanitary sewers, including invert elevations of sewers to which connections are to be made; 
f.  Other conditions on the tract and adjacent land, including approximate directions and gradient of ground slope, any embankments or retaining walls; character and locations of buildings and other structures, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby non-residential land uses of adverse influence; owners of adjacent unplatted land; 
g.  Zoning on and adjacent to the tract; 
h.  Proposed public improvements; highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract; 
i.  The proposed layout of streets, blocks and lots; 
j.  The proposed location of business, park, and other nonresidential areas; 
k.  Existing covenants affecting the property. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 3, § C(1), Art. 4, § A, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-42. - Preliminary plat stage. 
(a)  The preliminary plat is a drawing which shall be prepared subsequent to and in accordance with the agreements reached in the sketch plan conference. It shall be prepared in accordance with subsection (e) and all other applicable ordinances and four copies shall be filed with the village clerk, together with an application form in duplicate. 
(b)  The plan commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary approval within 90 days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. If such plat is disapproved, then within said 90 days the plan commission shall furnish to applicant in writing a statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the ordinances, including the official map. If such plat is approved, the board of trustees shall accept or reject said plat within 30 days after its next regular stated meeting following the action of the plan commission. Preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording. 
(c)  If the plat is approved, the village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy of the plat. If the proposed plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the official map. A copy of the order or resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. 
(d)  In the case of a class 2 subdivision approval of the preliminary plat as returned to the subdivider shall be construed to be an expression of approval of the general layout, and shall authorize the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. 
(e)  The preliminary plat shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor and shall be drawn or printed on paper at a scale of 100 feet to one inch, unless a different scale was approved at the sketch plan conference. This plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  Name under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, location and position by quarter-quarter section, section, township, range, meridian, county, and state; names and addresses of subdividers; notation stating scale, north arrow; and the following certificate: 
    "State of Illinois, County of Will, Village of Crete. Approved by _____ , Crete Plan Commission. This _____ day of _______, 19___ A.D." 
(2)  The following description of existing conditions: 
a.  Complete survey data such as angles, bearings, dimensions, curve data, etc., shall be shown for the exterior lines of the subdivision. The error of linear closure of said boundary survey shall not be greater than one in 5,000. 
b.  Location, width, and purpose of easements and other existing restrictions, reservations, or covenants. 
c.  Name, location, right-of-way width of streets, also all curbs, gutters, culverts, sidewalks, and building setbacks. 
d.  Location and size of sanitary and storm sewers; fire hydrants, and location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, electric and telephone lines. If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, the distance and direction to, and the size of, the nearest ones. 
e.  Watercourses, marshes and bogs, areas subject to inundation; wooded areas; and isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter. 
f.  All houses, barns and other structures, and other constructed features. 
g.  All of the requirements of plat preparation shall apply equally to the site being subdivided and to all land within 200 feet of its boundaries, waiving accuracy requirements as to scale of features, but not as to boundary lines. 
h.  Highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract, according to the information received from the plan commission at the sketch plan conference. 
i.  Depth of groundwater unless test pits are dry at a depth of eight feet, and the location and results of any tests made to ascertain subsurface soil and rock conditions. 
j.  Percolation test data shall be submitted for all subdivisions of three or more lots to be served by individual sewage disposal systems. 
(3)  All proposals of the subdivider, including: 
a.  The name of the subdivision, which must be original and not duplicate or be substantially similar to any existing subdivision located in the Townships of Crete and Monee in the county. 
b.  Streets which must have unduplicated names; right-of-way and roadway widths; radius of curvatures; length of curve and tangent sections; and similar data for alleys, if any. 
c.  Easement rights-of-way, their location, width, and purpose. 
d.  Lot lines and approximate dimensions. 
e.  Sites, if any, to be used for the following: industrial, commercial, public or semi-public, multi-family or other than single-family residential. 
f.  Sites to be reserved or dedicated for any public or semi-public use. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines. 
h.  A tabulation of gross area, street area, other dedicated area, not subdivided area, number of lots, average lot size, typical lot dimensions, and lineal feet of street. 
i.  Proposed contours of the finished subdivision. 
(f)  Before a preliminary plat may be considered for approval by the plan commission it shall be accompanied by a written statement bearing the signature of an authorized employee of the utility company attesting to the suitability of the easements for the purpose shown if the plat contains utility easements. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 3, § C(2), Art. 4, §§ B, D, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-43. - Final plat stage. 
(a)  The final plat is a record of the subdivision as surveyed in the field. It shows property lines and other dimensions important to the subdivider in selling lots, and to the public in keeping records of street lines, easements, and utility locations. Application for approval of a final plat shall be made not later than one year after approval of a preliminary plat has been granted. This application must be supported by such drawings, specifications and bond as may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with this section and all other applicable ordinances and the original and three copies shall be filed with the village clerk, together with four copies of all required supporting materials and an application form in duplicate. 
(c)  It is intended that approval be automatic if the final plat conforms closely to the approved preliminary plat and approved engineering plans. Disapproval is warranted, however, if: 
(1)  There are more than minor deviations from the preliminary plat; 
(2)  More than one year has elapsed since the approval of engineering plans; 
(3)  A new highway, pipeline or other major feature has been constructed or has directly affected the site by virtue of such improvement being included in the official map. 
(d)  When a person submitting a plat of subdivision or resubdivision for final approval has supplied all drawings, maps and other documents required by this chapter to be furnished in support thereof, and if all such material meets all requirements, the board of trustees shall approve the proposed plat within 60 days from the date of filing the last required document or other paper or within 60 days from the date of filing application for final approval of the plat, whichever date is later. The applicant and the board of trustees may mutually agree to extend the 60-day period. 
(e)  If the plat is approved, the village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy of the plat. If the proposed plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the official map. A copy of the order or resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. 
(f)  Final plats shall comply with the following specifications: 
(1)  The final plat shall be drawn in waterproof black (India) ink on tracing cloth, or their equivalents. The scale shall be 100 feet to one inch or larger. Variation in scale may be allowed when determined by the plan commission to be necessary for a proper exhibit of the subdivision. When more than one sheet is used for any plat, they shall be numbered consecutively and each sheet shall contain a notation showing the whole number of sheets in the plat, and its relation to the other sheets ( e.g., sheet 1 of 3 sheets). Linear dimensions shall be given in feet and decimals of a foot. The final plat shall show on the face thereof: 
a.  The name of plat. 
b.  The location and position of the subdivision indicated in each of the following ways: 
1.  By quarter-quarter section, section, township, range, meridian, county and state. 
2.  By distances and bearings from true north or angles with reference to a corner or corners established in the United States public land survey. 
3.  By a written legal description of the exterior boundaries of the land as surveyed and divided. 
c.  The top of the plat shall be oriented north and the plat shall contain a north arrow. 
d.  A graphic scale. 
e.  The date of preparation. 
f.  The description and location of all survey monuments. 
g.  Survey data sufficient to reproduce any line or re-establish any monument in the subdivision. 
h.  A graphic presentation of all streets, alleys, blocks, parcels, and public grounds into which the land is divided and of all easements and rights-of-way. 
i.  The length of boundary lines of all streets, alleys, blocks, lots, parcels, public grounds, easements, and rights-of-way, or enough information so that the length of these lines can be derived by simple calculation. Where a boundary line is an arc of a circle, the length of the chord shall be shown. 
j.  The widths of all streets, alleys, easements and right-of-way. 
k.  A graphic presentation of the minimum building setback lines on all lots and parcels, and a notation of the distance between such lines and the street right-of-way line. In no case shall the setback line be less than that required by the zoning ordinance or major street plan, and official map. 
l.  The area of each lot or parcel containing an area of one acre or more. 
m.  Consecutive letters or numbers on all blocks and consecutive numbers on all lots throughout the plat. 
n.  The name of each street, printed on the graphic representation of each street, and an appropriate label designating all other easements, rights-of-way, setback lines, dedications and reservations ( e.g., "Dedicated for Park Purposes" or "Reserved for Public School site"). 
o.  Abutting street lines and adjoining lakes or streams at the date of survey and a graphic presentation, as well as a notation of, the high water marks of such lakes or streams. If any portion of the land within a subdivision shown on any final map is subject to inundation or flood hazard by storm waters, such fact and portion shall be clearly shown on the final plat by a prominent note on each sheet or such plat whereon any such portion shall be shown. 
(2)  The final plat shall include the following final plat certificates, in black (India) ink, or other reproducible ink. 
State of Illinois, Will County, Village of Crete 
Approved _____ Crete Plan Commission 
This _____ day of _______, 19___ A.D. 
Approved by _____
President, Village of Crete 
This _____ day of _______, 19___ A.D. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 3, § C(3), Art. 4, § D, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-44. - Engineering plans. 
(a)  Engineering plans are drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates for all new construction of facilities in the development, and shall comply with the provisions of this section. Such engineering plans may be submitted at the same time as the preliminary plat or at any time up to and including the date of filing the final plat for village approval. 
(b)  Whenever new construction is required in the development of a subdivision, an engineer shall prepare all plans, specifications and construction cost estimates. Such engineer shall be approved by the board of trustees. If he so elects, and when so allowed by the board of trustees, the subdivider may contract with the village for the preparation of the engineering plans, specifications and cost estimates. These services will then be performed by the village engineer as directed by the board of trustees, provided that a deposit is placed in escrow payable to the village in accordance with the schedule then in effect between the village and the village engineer to cover the cost of engineering design services. All engineering plans are subject to the approval of the plan commission and the board of trustees. 
(c)  The engineer shall submit to the plan commission triplicate copies of the following plans, specifications, and cost estimates bearing his signature and the imprint of his seal: 
(1)  Plans and specifications for street construction, including centerline profile and grade line of each street with a typical cross section of the roadway. The street plan shall show the location of drainage structures and their sizes. The profile at grade lines shall be shown to a scale of one inch to 100 feet horizontal and one inch to ten feet vertical. Standard federal aid sheets are preferred. 
(2)  Plans, details, and specifications of proposed storm drainage improvements. 
(3)  Plans, details, and specifications of proposed community water distribution systems and of proposed community water supply facilities. 
(4)  Plans, details, and specifications of community sewerage systems and of community sewage treatment plants. 
(5)  Plans, details, and specifications of proposed street lighting systems, street signs and sidewalks. 
(d)  When unusual site conditions exists, the plan commission may require such additional plans, specifications, and drawings as are found necessary for an adequate review of the plat. The plan commission shall request this additional material from the subdivider by letter, stating therein the information requested and the particular or unusual site conditions which make this information necessary. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 3, § C, Art. 4, § C, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-45. - Recording. 
    Within seven days of receiving the approved final plat from the president and the recording fee from the subdivider, the village clerk shall submit the plat to the county recorder for recording and the final plat shall become the property of the county. Recording of the final plat authorizes the issuance of building permits, but does not constitute acceptance of proffered or required dedications. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 4, § E, 5-24-65) 
Secs. 23-46-23-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 23-61. - Generally. 
(a)  All subdivisions shall conform to the official plan, to the zoning ordinance and to this chapter, and to all other pertinent ordinances, resolutions, and plans. 
(b)  In order to promote the best possible development and use of land, the plan commission shall interpret the standards, provisions, and specifications contained in this chapter liberally and in favor of the community interest. Exceptions from these standards, provisions, and specifications may be granted when shown conclusively and to the satisfaction of the plan commission that such exceptions will bring about a more logical and desirable results than would be obtained by strict compliance. 
(c)  Each subdivision shall be appropriate to the topography, the drainage, and other natural features of the site. Developments shall be so laid out that they will tend to preserve, enhance, and promote the public benefit from natural scenic beauty. 
(d)  Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the reviewing authorities to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation, shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions, and shall not reduce the ability of the floodplain to retain floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 5, § A, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-62. - Streets. 
(a)  The layout of streets in a subdivision plan shall conform to existing regulations and policies and shall be based on thorough consideration of: 
(1)  Topographic considerations and drainage. 
(2)  Public convenience and safety. 
(3)  The existing street pattern. 
(4)  The future circulation needs of nearby lands. 
(5)  The proposed uses of land to be served. 
(b)  Street rights-of-way in subdivisions shall be as designated on the official map, in all other instances, the following table shall apply: 
Width
(feet)
Major arterials (width as necessary) ..... 80 to 100 
Collector streets and minor arterials ..... 70 
Local streets ..... 66 
Marginal access street ..... 50 
Alleys: 
Residential ..... 20 
Business ..... 24 
Residential street widths shall be no less than 30 feet. Commercially zoned business street widths shall be no less than 54 feet. Greater right-of-way widths may be required where indicated by physical features and/or sound principles of highway design. Alleys shall be provided at the rear of all lots or tracts intended for business, commercial or industrial use, and multiple-family building use, but shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the plan commission of the need for alleys. 
(c)  Local streets in subdivisions shall be so designed as to discourage high-speed or through traffic. 
(d)  Streets shall not be laid out on the boundary of a subdivision. Exceptions may be permitted where streets are desirable for further expansion or where streets shall conform to the existing street system. 
(e)  Subdivision street intersections with major arterials shall be limited to not more than one per quarter mile unless topographic and physical conditions require a lesser distance. Street intersections shall be at right angles. Where unusual conditions exist, the plan commission may permit intersections of less than 90 degrees but not less than 60 degrees. In all cases street intersections and junctions shall be laid out so as to facilitate the safe flow of traffic. In no case shall two junctions be offset less than 125 feet. 
(f)  A cul-de-sac in a subdivision shall be not more than 500 feet in length measured along the centerline from the centerline of the street of origin to the center of the turn-around, and each shall have a terminus generally circular in shape, with a diameter of 120 feet and a center on, or within 30 feet of the cul-de-sac centerline. 
(g)  Whenever a subdivision borders on or contains the right-of-way of a limited access street, a railroad or a utility, a street may be required approximately parallel to and on either side of such uses as front thereon. 
(h)  Half-streets in subdivisions shall not be permitted except to complete an existing half-street which is dedicated and accepted, or to conform to the major street plan. 
(i)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall not be permitted. Streets roughly parallelling the subdivision boundary shall be located not less than one lot depth from the boundary. All streets intended to provide the subdivision with future means of ingress and egress shall extend to the subdivision boundary. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 5, § B, 5-24-65; Ord. No. 582, 1-10-66) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 22. 
Sec. 23-63. - Blocks. 
(a)  The length, width and shape of blocks in subdivisions shall be determined with due regard for the following: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the types of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimension. 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet nor more than 800 feet in length, except as the plan commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of the street pattern. 
(c)  Where blocks exceed 600 feet in length or where orientation or pedestrian circulation requirements indicate, crosswalks may be required. Such crosswalks shall consist of public right-of-way or easement not less than ten feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 5, § C, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-64. - Lots. 
(a)  Residential lots served by a public sewerage system and public water supply system, shall not be less than 75 feet in width at the building setback line, nor less than 9,000 square feet in area; and in no case shall contain less area than the requirements of the zoning ordinance. In subdivisions not providing full community sewer and water facilities, increased area will be required as specified in sections 23-115 and 23-134 of this Code. 
(b)  All lots in subdivisions shall front directly on an improved public street. Lots adjoining state highways shall be provided with marginal access streets or shall front on an interior street. The same requirements shall apply with respect to major arterials. 
(c)  Side lot lines in subdivisions shall be at right angles or radial to the street line or substantially so, and along curvilinear street lines side lot lines so formed shall form a lot having a minimum frontage at the street right-of-way line and at the rear property line equal to the combined width of the two side yards required in the zone in which the lot is located or 25 feet which ever is the greater. 
(d)  Lots in subdivisions abutting an expressway or major arterial, a railroad right-of-way or other inharmonious use shall have a depth of 20 feet in excess of the typical interior lot in the same subdivision. A planting screen easement, across which there shall be no right or access, shall be required on such lots. 
(e)  Corner lots for residential use in subdivisions shall have sufficient extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets but in no case shall be under 15 feet. A minimum side yard restriction of ten feet shall be shown on all lots adjoining a pedestrian crosswalk. 
(f)  Every lot in a subdivision shall contain a suitable building site. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 5, § D, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-65. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements in subdivisions shall be provided for any overhead or underground utility service. They shall have a minimum width of ten feet. Where it is intended that both overhead and underground utilities shall share the same easement, additional width sufficient to avoid conflict shall be provided. Easements shall be established along rear lot lines and such other lot lines as are required to provide continuity of alignment throughout the area to be served. 
(b)  When a subdivision is traversed by a water course, established drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water courses, and such further width or construction or both, as will be adequate, for proper drainage. It shall include additional area at least 15 feet in width adjoining each edge of the established water course as certified by the subdivider or his engineer. Where a ditch drainage is used in conjunction with storm sewers the easement shall be of sufficient width to allow future construction of a storm sewer main adequate to carry the ultimate run-off of the watershed. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 5, § E, 5-24-65) 
Secs. 23-66-23-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-81. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to subdivision improvements. 
Sec. 23-82. - Purpose. 
    It is deemed necessary and essential to require and control the provision and installation of improvements when property is subdivided and developed, in order to: 
(1)  Ensure conformity to the statutes governing the subdivision of land in the state; 
(2)  Cause the installation of the utilities and public service facilities necessary to serve the property developed; 
(3)  Provide for the current financing of said facilities; 
(4)  Spread the cost of required improvements upon the property benefitted; 
(5)  Prevent the dissipation or the improper use of public funds in providing these improvements or maintaining faulty installation; and 
(6)  Protect the living standards, public safety, and the common welfare of residents within and without the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § A(1), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-83. - Qualification of contractors. 
    The developer shall file with the plan commission a list of all contractors and subcontractors who are to participate in the construction of public improvements. Such contractors and subcontractors shall be subject to disqualification by reason of faulty performance of prior construction work done in the county. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § (A)(2), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-84. - Time of construction. 
    All improvements required herein shall be completely installed before submittal of the final plat, the subdivider shall post surety bond guaranteeing the installation of these improvements within the time limits established by this chapter. The installation or bonding of required improvements shall be necessary prerequisites to final plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § (A)(3), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-85. - Sequence of construction. 
    All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers installed in streets, alleys, service roads, or highways, shall be constructed or installed prior to the surfacing of such streets. Service connections to such underground utilities and sewers shall be extended to the property line of each lot so as to obviate disturbing the surface improvements in such public ways when service connections are later made. Where underground utilities are located in the parkway adjacent to the paved roadway service connections to properties across such roadway shall only be made by drilling under the pavement in such a way that surfacing is not disturbed or weakened. 
    The final surface coating for streets and all storm water drainage and detention facilities will be required to be completed by a date certain determined at the time of preliminary plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § (A)(4), 5-24-65; Ord. No. 2000-34, § 2, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 23-86. - Debris removal. 
    The subdivider shall clean and maintain all public ways, sewers, and drains free from debris and trash or other extraneous material prior to acceptance and at such other times during construction as may be deemed necessary to prevent the creation of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § (A)(5), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-87. - Modification of design during construction. 
    After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider shall make or cause to be made, a map showing the actual location of all valves, manholes, stubs, sewer and water mains, and other improvements. This plan shall be in black (India) ink on tracing cloth, or materials of equal permanence and durability, and shall bear the seal and signature of the engineer. The presentation of this plan shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their completion. This plan or a reproduced (intermediate) copy, shall become the property of the village. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § B, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-88. - Oversize improvements. 
    Whenever necessary, to conform to an overall plan or otherwise to protect or promote the public interest, oversize improvements may be required of the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § C, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-89. - Monuments. 
(a)  All U.S., state, county or other official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the subdivision shall be preserved. When a proposed improvement in a subdivision makes necessary the moving of bench marks, monuments, or stations, the authority having jurisdiction shall be notified and given sufficient time to take appropriate action. 
(b)  Permanent monuments shall be erected at all street corners and all points where street lines intersect the exterior lines of the subdivision and at all lot corners, block corners, angles in the streets or lot lines, and points of beginning or ends or curves. 
(c)  Permanent monuments shall be of either galvanized iron pipe not less than three-quarter inch in diameter and not less than 24 inches in length; or of stone or concrete not less than four inches in diameter and not less than 24 inches in length. In no case shall thin-wall pipe or electrical conduit be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § D, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-90. - Grading. 
    Where it is proposed to alter ground elevations more than two feet, proposed as well as existing contours shall be shown on the contour map. Top soil removed during the course of grading or construction shall be redistributed evenly to a depth of at least four inches. All exposed areas shall be reseeded or sodded to prevent erosion. Seeding and sodding shall conform to the specifications set forth in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § E, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-91. - Inspection. 
(a)  All required land improvements to be installed under provisions of this chapter shall be inspected at the subdivider's expense. The engineer, as agent for the subdivider, shall provide an inspector on the job during the process of construction. When the work has been completed, the engineer shall certify that the improvements comply in all respects with the approved plans and specifications, and with the requirements of this chapter. All work shall also be at all times subject to inspection by the village engineer, where applicable by the superintendent of highways, the county health officer, the township highway commissioner and other public officials and their representatives. 
(b)  Before starting the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall ascertain, from the village engineer, where applicable from the superintendent of highways county health officer, or township highway commissioner, what inspections are required and the amount of notification desired in each case, and shall comply with all their rules, regulations, and instructions, pertaining to such required inspections. 
(c)  Any inspection which requires that the superintendent of highways, the village engineer, or township highway commissioner be present shall be made by the official or his agent and reported in written form, and one copy shall be furnished to the engineer or other agent of the subdivider. 
(d)  Regardless of contract agreements, or inspections performed, final responsibility for the installation of all improvements, in accordance with the applicable standards, rests with the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § H(1)-(4), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-92. - Approval and acceptance. 
(a)  When street and drainage improvements in subdivisions and all appurtenances thereto, based on approval plans, have been constructed or installed and passed all inspections, the village engineer, or for areas outside the village the appropriate county or township officials, shall provide the developers with a letter of approval, completion, and acceptance by the public. 
(b)  When health and sanitary facilities, based on approval plans have been constructed or installed and have passed all inspections, the village engineer shall provide the developers with a letter of approval and completion. Such letter shall not constitute acceptance by the public; it shall be the responsibility of the agency intending to maintain and operate the facility to provide the developer with a letter of acceptance. 
(c)  When any required sewer or water improvement is not intended for public ownership, the appropriate inspecting agency shall provide the developer with a letter of approval and completion. Such letter shall not constitute acceptance by the public but shall permit the owner to operate and maintain the facility. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. § H(5), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-93. - Guarantees of performance. 
    Final plat approval shall not be considered by the village unless and until the subdivider has guaranteed the completion of all required improvements in accordance with the standards and specifications required by ordinance. This guarantee shall consist of such sureties, either performance bond or cash, as shall be satisfactory to the village. The amount of the bond shall be equal to the village engineer's estimate of the cost of such public improvements and as certified by the village attorney. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § G, 5-24-65) 
Secs. 23-94-23-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED 

Sec. 23-106. - Streets. 
    All subdivisions shall have streets which shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified, the type, design and construction of streets shall be in accordance with the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(2)  Where the proposed subdivision fronts lots on only one side of a public street the subdivider shall be responsible for half of such street to be improved as described above. Whenever land adjacent to an existing public street is subdivided with lots facing thereon, and said street is not improved to a standard as high as that required for an interior street of similar character, the subdivider may be required to improve said public street but in no case shall the required expenditure for such improvement exceed that required for a similar interior street. Any improvement of an existing public street shall be subject to the approval of the public authority having jurisdiction. 
(3)  Street profile plans and cross sections for all subdivision streets shall be prepared by an engineer in accordance with the requirements of article V of this chapter, and the engineer, as agent for the subdivider, or his contractor, shall be responsible for establishing the proper lines and grades for all earthwork and drainage. 
(4)  Not less than one street of full width shall be provided to furnish the subdivision with access to an existing improved public street. The access street shall be improved by the subdivider in accordance with the standards appropriate to its function, whether or not it lies partly or entirely outside the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(1), 5-24-65) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 22. 
Sec. 23-107. - Storm drainage. 
    All subdivisions shall have storm drainage which shall comply with following: 
(1)  The storm drainage improvements shall conform to the system designed and established by the engineer and approved by the plan commission. Computations may be required for the entire watershed or drainage basin of which the subdivision is a part. The design and construction of such structures shall be in accordance with the specifications of article V of this chapter. 
(2)  In all residential subdivisions, and in all business and industrial subdivisions, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed where required and installation shall be completed prior to the placement of any surfacing material. 
(3)  Special consideration shall be given to the avoidance of problems which may arise from concentration of stormwater runoff onto adjacent properties. All storm drainage shall be conducted and/or connected to an approved outfall. 
(4)  Adequate drainage structures shall be provided. The design installation, and construction of drainage structures shall comply with specification of article V of this chapter. 
(5)  In all subdivisions, storm drainage improvement plans shall include storm sewers having a sufficient number of inlets to effectively handle storm drainage. A sufficient number of inlets shall be provided (as mentioned) so as to allow the future connection of points of discharge of sump pumps and/or other water discharge flowing from individual buildings or natural drainage courses. All subdivision plats must include a statement to the effect that all future building within said subdivision shall be required to make appropriate connections to the village's storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(2), (3), 5-24-65; Ord. No. 91-13, § 1, 4-22-91) 
Sec. 23-108. - Curb and gutter. 
    Curbs and gutters shall be provided in all subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(4), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-109. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets in subdivisions containing a majority of lots of less than 10,000 square feet in size. 
(b)  In subdivisions containing a majority of lots with 10,000 square feet or more, sidewalks may be required in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  To provide a reasonable extension of an existing sidewalk system. 
(2)  To provide continuity between existing systems of sidewalks. 
(3)  To provide adequate pedestrian circulation in the vicinity of schools, shopping centers or other community facilities. 
(c)  In subdivisions where sidewalks are required, pedestrian ways bisecting blocks shall also be improved with sidewalks constructed to the same standards. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(5), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-12, § 2, adopted March 27, 2006, deleted § 23-110, which pertained to street trees and was derived from Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(6), adopted May 24, 1965. 
Sec. 23-111. - Street signs and names. 
(a)  Signs giving names of streets in subdivisions shall be created at all street intersections. Signs shall meet the minimum requirements for similar signs and posts as shall be specified by the village. 
(b)  Proposed streets in subdivisions which are obviously in alignment or continuation of existing streets already named shall bear the name of such existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive, place or court or an abbreviation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(7), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-112. - Street lights. 
(a)  In residential subdivisions, street lighting shall be provided at all street intersections within or abutting the subdivision and at midblock intervals not exceeding 300 feet in length. 
(b)  Business area street lighting shall be of the high-level high-intensity type, and standards shall be placed every 150 feet on alternate sides of the street. 
(c)  The height, type, and degree of light shall be in accordance with the American Standard Practice for Street and Highway Lighting as approved by the American Standards Association on February 27, 1953, and as amended. In no event shall any light source be of less than 4,000 lumens in intensity. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(8), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-113. - Water supply facilities. 
(a)  Central water supply, treatment and distribution systems shall be required in all subdivisions in which individual private water supply systems would in the opinion of the health officer or the village engineer, tend to create health problems. 
(b)  A water supply system shall be installed in all residential subdivisions with an average lot size of less than one-half acre located within the present or proposed service area of the village. 
(c)  All community water distribution systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards set forth by the state and the village. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(a), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-114. - Fire hydrants. 
    Every water supply system in a subdivision shall have adequate pipe sizes, water pressure, and supply, and sufficient fire hydrants to provide fire protection to meet local neighborhood needs in accordance with standards of the village. Fire hydrants shall be installed such that no interval between hydrants exceeds 300 feet. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(10), 5-24-65; Ord. No. 2003-56, § 2, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 23-115. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
(a)  Residential lots located in a subdivision which are not served by a public sewerage system shall not be less than 75 feet wide at the building setback line, nor less than one-half acre in area; provided, a greater area may be required for such lots if, in the opinion of the county health department there are factors of drainage, soil condition or other conditions which cause potential health problems. The plan commission may require that data from percolation and other tests be submitted as a basis for passing upon proposed subdivisions dependent upon septic tanks as a means of sewage disposal. 
(b)  All central sanitary sewage facilities shall meet the design and performance specification set forth in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(11), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-116. - Planting screens, etc. 
    The subdivider shall plant, install, construct or otherwise provide all required fences, planting strips, or other required buffers along lot lines of houses within any development backing up to or adjoining any existing or future: 
(1)  Expressway; 
(2)  Railroad; 
(3)  Commercial area; 
The subdivision shall enclose any hazard which in the opinion of the plat-approving authorities might create a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 6, § F(12), 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-117. - Landscaping and screening requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. Landscaping and screening requirements are designed to minimize the adverse impacts of adjoining land uses by visually separating adjoining uses from one another. The phraseology "adverse impacts" refers to such things as dust, dirt, litter, glare of lights, signs, unsightly advertisements and/or buildings and structures, parking areas or other impacts created in the form of vibration, erosion, odor, air pollution and water pollution. 
(b)  Requirements. Unless otherwise provided in the Crete Municipal Code, all yards shall be landscaped and continually maintained with green grass. And except for single-family or two-family structures, every permitted use requiring a parking lot, waste material storage, outdoor storage and the like shall be designed to include a planting screen for such parking areas, waste material storage facilities or outdoor storage areas. The planting screen shall be of sufficient length and width to achieve a visual separation of the adjoining uses and thereby mitigate the adverse impacts of each adjoining use. Subject to review and approval pursuant to the provisions of section 28-254 (of the zoning ordinance), alternative plans and requirements may be allowed. 
(c)  Planting screens. All planting screens shall consist of a combination of plant materials of which 50 percent shall be low-growing plants maturing to a height of not more than five feet, 25 percent of which mature to a height of not more than 15 feet, and the remaining 25 percent of which shall mature to a height of at least 25 feet. At least 30 percent of each height category (listed above) shall consist of evergreen plantings. Earthen berms, masonry walls, fences or a combination of such may be used in part as a partial substitute for the planting screens required above, provided, however, that any substitute must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of section 28-254 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
(d)  Placement of materials. The plant material used to satisfy the requirements of screening shall be so spaced that at maturity, each specimen will (when viewed in combination with surrounding specimens) form a tangential line. This requirement shall not govern those plant materials that mature to a height of at least 25 feet. Where berms, walls or fences are not used, the plant materials maturing to a height of less than five feet shall be planted at a density equivalent to three rows deep. If a berm, wall or fence is used, the required density of plant material may be reduced by 60 percent. 
(e)  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Commercial districts: In every commercial district, the required front, side and rear yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the following: 
a.  Front yards: For every 100 lineal feet of front yard there shall be provided one canopy tree; two understory trees; three shrubs. 
b.  Side yards: For every 100 lineal feet of side yard there shall be provided two canopy trees, four understory trees and six shrubs. 
c.  Rear yards: For every 100 lineal feet of rear yard there shall be provided three canopy trees, six understory trees, nine shrubs. 
d.  The requirements as set forth in subsections (1)a-c hereinabove may be reduced by 50 percent when used in combination with any installation of any fence, wall, berm or any combination thereof. 
(2)  Residential districts: In every residential district, the required front, side and rear yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the following and parkway trees shall be required as follows: 
a.  Canopy trees shall be planted in the right-of-way at locations identified by village staff at maximum distances of 50 feet from one another. If applicable, subdivision covenants requiring trees be located on private property may affect the placement of right-of-way trees if said private property trees are planted at time of construction. Right-of-way canopy trees must be maintained for a minimum of one growing season to ensure healthy development. 
b.  To ensure all yards are landscaped with grass as required by subsection (b) above, an acceptable performance bond or cash in the amount set annually by the village board is required to be posted with the village prior to the issuance of a provisional occupancy permit by the village in all instances where no grass seed or sod has been installed due to weather related delays. In all instances where a performance bond or cash has been posted, grass seed or sod will be installed within 180 days of issuance of the provisional occupancy permit. A permanent occupancy permit and bond or cash release will be issued upon establishment of healthy, growing grass. Bond or cash will be used for installation of sod upon 21-day notice to the homeowners in accordance with appropriate weather pattern. For the purpose of this section, appropriate weather pattern under normal circumstances will refer to April, May, September, October and November. Owners of record are still subject to property maintenance requirements concerning their property including weed control until grass seed or sod is installed. 
(f)  Plant types defined. For the purpose of this section, plants maturing to a height of not more than five feet shall be construed as low-growing plants, and shall include such plants as shrubs and shrubberies, but shall not include grasses or other forms of ground cover. Plants maturing to a minimum height of 15 feet shall be construed as understory trees. Plants maturing to heights exceeding 25 feet shall be construed as canopy trees. 
(g)  Landscaping of large parking lots. Where off-street parking for 50 or more vehicles is required, in addition to the required planting screen, a minimum of 25 square feet (for each parking space) shall be dedicated to open space within the perimeter of the whole of the parking area. Such area shall be landscaped. Each such landscaped area, in addition to satisfying the 25-square-foot requirement aforementioned, shall not be less than 100 square feet in area, nor less than ten feet wide, and shall be located so that no parking space shall be more than eight parking spaces in distance therefrom. The landscaping of such areas shall include a minimum of three canopy trees, two understory trees, and six shrubs for every 500 square feet of required landscaping area. All required plant material shall be maintained (pruned) so as to maximum public safety visibility. 
(h)  Minimum plant size. Unless as otherwise provided to the contrary (in the village's Municipal Code), all plant materials shall meet the following minimum size standards at the time of their planting: 
Plant Material Type Minimum Size Canopy tree 2-inch caliper Understory tree 11/2-inch caliper Evergreen tree 5 feet height Shrub Deciduous 24 inches (height) Evergreen 18 inches (height)  
(i)  Planting prohibitions. The trees listed below may not be used in satisfying the various requirements of these regulations: 
Prohibited Trees 
Botanical Names Common Names Acer negundo Box Elder Acer saccharinum Silver Maple Ailanthus altissima Tree-of-Heaven Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura Elaeagnus angustifolia Russian Olive Fraxinus spp. Ash spp. Ginkgo biloba (female) Female Ginkgo Lonicera spp. Honeysuckle spp. Machura pomifera Osage-orange Malus spp. Apple, Crabapples Populus spp. Populars, Cottonwoods, Aspens Prunus spp. Cherries, Plums Salix spp. Willows Ulmus spp. Elms (other than newer hybrids) Seed bearing locusts  
(j)  Planting recommendations. The trees listed below are recommended to be incorporated in planting landscaping requirements: 
Recommended Plant Materials for 
Understory Trees 
Botanical Names Common Names Amelanchier aroborea Downy Serviceberry Amelanchier canadensis Serviceberry Amelanchier interior Juneberry Amelanchier laevis Alleghany Serviceberry Asimina triloba Paw Paw Betula nigra (including var.) River Birch Carpinus caroliniana Hop hornbeam Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud Corylus Americana American Hazel Corylus cornuta Hazelnut Crategus crus-galli inermis Thornless Cockspur 

Hawthorn Crategus viridis Winter King Hawthorn Diospyros virginiana Common Persimmon Hamamelis virginiana Witch Hazel Larix decidua European Larch Magnolia soulangeana Saucer Magnolia Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia Staphylea trifolia Bladdernut  
Recommended Plant Materials for 
Overstory Trees 
Botanical Names Common Names Acer platanoides (including var.) Norway Maple Acer nigrum (including var.) Black Maple Acer rubrum (including var.) Red Maple Acer saccharum (including var.) Sugar Maple Aesculus glabra Ohio Buckeye Carya cordiformis Bitternut Hickory Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory Carya tomentosa Mockernut Hickory Celtis occidentalis Hackberry Corylus colurna Turkish Filbert Fagus grandiflora American Beech Ginkgo biloba (male only) Maidenhair Tree Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffeetree Juglans cinerea Butternut Juglans sigra Black Walnut Liridenron tulipera Tuliptree Nyssa salvatica Sour Gum Ostrya virginiana Ironwood Picea abies Norway Spruce Picea pungens Colorado Spruce Pinus banksiana Jack Pine Pinus ponderosa Ponderosa Pine Pinus strobes White Pine Platanus occidentalis Sycamore Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas Fir Quercus alba White Oak Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak Quercus ellipsoidalis Hill's Oak Quercus imbricaria Shingle Oak Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin Oak Quercus palustris Pin Oak Quercus rubra Red Oak Quercus veluntina Black Oak Sassafras albidum Sassafras Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress Tilia Americana American Linden Tilia cordate (including var.) Littleleaf Linden  
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 3, 3-27-06) 
Secs. 23-118-23-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 23-131. - Generally. 
    The construction of improvements required in subdivisions by this chapter shall be in accordance with and to the requirements of this article. Unforeseen construction or improvements as may be required by unusual topographic, soil or other conditions shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer, and in such special cases, prior to actual construction, drawings, reports, data and work sheets may be requested. Unless otherwise specified, all street and storm drainage construction work shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction adopted January 2, 1958, by the Department of Public Works and Buildings, Division of Highways of the State of Illinois. Specifications and plans for all construction shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 7, § A, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-132. - Streets. 
    The following specifications for the design, grading and surfacing of new and existing streets shall be adhered to: 
(1)  Design: 
a.  The maximum grades for collector and larger streets shall not exceed six percent. The maximum grades for other streets shall not exceed eight percent. In no case shall the grade of any street be less than three-tenths percent. 
b.  Vertical curves shall be provided at all changes in street grade. Length of vertical curves shall be determined by a good engineering judgement and in no case shall be less than 150 feet in length except at intersections with streets. In no case shall the vertical curve at a street intersection be less than 50 feet. 
c.  The minimum radius of center line horizontal curvature shall be as follows: 
Feet 
Arterial streets ..... 500 
Collector streets ..... 300 
Other streets ..... 100 
Angles on the center line of a street are not permitted. 
d.  Stopping sight distance shall be based on a line of sight, one end of which is four and one-half feet above the pavement and the other end four inches above the pavement. In flat topography sight distance of not less than 400 feet is desirable. In rolling topography sight distance shall be not less than 200 feet. 
(2)  Grading. All excavations, embankment and sub-grading work shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. In general, back slopes of all ditches on street right-of-way shall be as flat as topography will permit. In no instance shall the back slopes of cut sections or ditches be less than two to one (two horizontal to one vertical). 
(3)  Surfacing. All streets within the subdivision shall be improved with a durable hard surface roadway. The pavement shall be equal to or superior to a pavement designed in accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and the Design Manual. As a minimum, the road pavement shall consist of a base course of crushed stone or gravel with a prime coat for a total thickness of not less than ten inches when thoroughly compacted. The pavement shall have a bituminous binder course of a total thickness of not less then two inches when thoroughly compacted and a bituminous surface course of a total thickness of one inch when thoroughly compacted. The binder course shall be flush after compaction with the gutter flag and be installed prior to the issuance of any building permits for property fronting on the road. The surface course must be installed within a two-year period following the installation of the binder course. The pavement shall be designed to withstand the traffic [to which] the roadways will presumably be subjected and also be designed in accordance with local soil conditions and other factors which may affect the performance of the pavement. Other pavement construction may be used subject to the approval of the village engineer that meets or exceeds a minimum structural number of D(t) equals two point five as defined in the Design Manual of the Illinois Department of Transportation. The paved width of all streets shall not be less than 30 feet from face to face of curb. 
All alleys shall be improved with a roadway consisting of not less than five inches of crushed stone or gravel when thoroughly compacted and not less than 12 feet wide through residential blocks and 16 feet wide through business areas. 
(4)  Curbs and gutters. Concrete curb and gutter will be required for all streets in all subdivisions; the combination mountable type M-612 as specified in the state of Illinois Book of Standards No. 2130 or at least an equivalent curb and gutter as determined by the village engineer. 
(5)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be located one foot inside the right-of-way line and shall be not less than four feet in width and five inches in thickness of the same width, if wider, of a connecting sidewalk. Construction shall be in accordance with section 89 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction entitled, "Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks." 
(6)  Erosion control. All road way ditches and slopes and all other slopes subject to erosion by runoff waters shall be properly protected by riprap, sod, seeding with rapid-growing grass or vegetation, and ditch checks. All such work shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction, State of Illinois. 
(7)  Streetlights. All streetlights shall be installed on approved poles and arms. Luminaries shall conform to the following Line Material Industry types or approved equals. 
a.  At intersections: Line 2B or 3C, 1ES Type V Distribution. No light source shall be less than 4,000 lumens. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 7, § B, 5-24-65; Ord. No. 89-14, § 1, 6-12-89) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, ch. 22. 
Sec. 23-133. - Storm drainage structures. 
(a)  The size and capacity of all drainage structures shall be computed using "Talbot's Formula" for run-off. Wherever practical, pipe culverts shall be used. The minimum length of culverts shall be at least equal to the distance from edge of shoulder to edge of shoulder, plus six times the vertical distance from the edge of shoulder to the flow line of the culvert. No culvert shall have a diameter of less than 12 inches. In no case shall entrance culverts be less than 20 feet in length. 
(b)  All bridges and culverts having a span of more than ten feet shall be approved by the village engineer. 
(c)  The storm sewer system shall be designed by the "Rational Method" with self-cleaning velocities as follows: 
(1)  The part of the system which serves as main or terminal collectors shall be of sufficient capacity to carry the maximum storm water flows which may occur in a ten-year period. 
(2)  That part of the system which serves as lateral collectors, and which can readily be augmented by future additions, shall be of sufficient capacity to carry maximum storm water flows which may occur in a five-year period. 
(3)  The coefficients of run-off shall be based on the types of development anticipated in all parts of the watershed affecting the drainage structure and shall be subject to approval of the village engineer. 
(4)  The system shall include all necessary appurtenances such as inlets, catch basins and manholes as may be required for proper operation and maintenance. 
(5)  Where the main storm sewer serving a subdivision can be expected to carry a substantial amount of storm water from adjoining land higher in the drainage area, and where the runoff from these lands can be expected to increase in the future because of more intense development, the developer may be permitted to substitute for such a storm sewer an open ditch. Such ditch shall comply with grading, seeding, and sodding specifications of this chapter, and such ditch shall be located on a drainage easement of sufficient width to permit its proper maintenance and to allow the eventual construction of an underground storm sewer adequate to serve the entire drainage area above the subdivision. 
(6)  No sewer line shall be less than ten inches in diameter. 
(7)  All materials for the construction of bridges, culverts, storm sewers, catch basins, manholes, inlets and other facilities shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and Manual of Instructions for Field Engineers, published by the Bureau of Construction, Department of Public Works and Buildings, Division of Highways, State of Illinois. 
(d)  Effective July 1, 2004, wherever the Will County Stormwater Ordinance, adopted by reference as the Stormwater Management Ordinance of the Village of Crete in section 8-20, is more restrictive, then said Will County Stormwater Ordinance shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 7, § C, 5-24-65; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 2, 6-28-04; Ord. No. 2019-03, 1-28-19) 
Sec. 23-134. - Water supply facilities. 
(a)  Individual private wells shall be located at least 25 feet from property lines, 50 feet from septic tanks, 75 feet from soil absorption fields of trench type construction, 100 feet from seepage pits, 25 feet from all cast iron sewer lines with mechanical or leaded joints, and 50 feet from cast iron sewer lines with unleaded joints, vitrified tile lines with water-tight lines or watertight sewers or other approved materials. Wells shall not be located within any area subject to flooding, unless proper protection is provided. Individual wells shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum requirements of the county. 
(b)  Public water supplies and distribution systems shall meet the requirements of the Illinois Department of Public Health and the village engineer. Plans and specifications shall be approved by the Illinois Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 7, § D, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-135. - Sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)  Individual sewage disposal facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum standards as specified in the rules and regulations of the county health department. In addition, septic tanks shall be located so as to permit necessary cleaning and maintenance: where individual sewage disposal systems are located in rear yards, one of the side yards shall have a minimum width of ten feet to provide vehicular access to the rear yard. 
(b)  Community sewerage and sewage treatment facilities shall be designed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state. Plans, specifications and construction work shall be subject to the approval and inspection of both the state and the village engineer. The village engineer shall be given not less than two days' notice in writing when construction is to be started. Effluent requirements for sewage treatment plants shall be based on the flow character, and use of the receiving stream. The village engineer in conjunction with the state shall establish the quality of effluent required in each particular case. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 7, § E, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-136. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2019-03, adopted Jan. 28, 2019, stated that the language previously included herein has been to be no longer operative effective February 1, 2019. Therefore, § 23-136, which pertained to the Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-22, adopted June 28, 2004, has been deleted. Floodplain and stormwater regulations are found in chapter 8 of this Code. 
Secs. 23-137-23-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEDICATIONS, EASEMENTS AND RESERVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-151. - Right of refusal. 
    The number, size and location of dedications, reservations, and easements in subdivisions shall be subject to approval, and the plan commission shall ascertain that the proposed sites are suitable for the proposed uses. The public retains the right to refuse any and all dedications. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 8, § C, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-152. - Dedications. 
(a)  The following provisions shall apply to areas required to be dedicated in subdivisions: 
(1)  All new streets created by subdivision and shown on plats submitted for approval and recording shall be dedicated outright to the public. 
(2)  Additional street widths shall be dedicated along existing major streets where a width greater than that existing is called for by the major street plan and official map. 
(3)  Pedestrian ways bisecting long blocks, or where ever else located, shall be dedicated. 
(b)  Areas to be dedicated in a subdivision shall be clearly identified on the plat as dedicated to the public. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 8, § A, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-153. - Easements. 
(a)  The following shall apply to areas to be shown as easements in subdivisions: 
(1)  Public utilities, storm water facilities, and installations shall be located on suitable easements as specified in article IV of this chapter. 
(2)  Planting strips or other buffer zones, located between reverse frontage lots and a major street, or between incompatible uses, or wherever required. 
(b)  Easements shall be clearly identified on all plats. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 8, § B, 5-24-65) 
Sec. 23-154. - Reservations. 
(a)  Whenever the reasonable requirements provided by this chapter, including the official map, shall indicate the necessity for providing for a school site, park site, or other public lands within any proposed subdivision for which approval has been requested, and no such provision has been made therefor the board of trustees shall require that lands be designated for such public purpose before approving such plat. Whenever a final plat of subdivision, or part thereof, has been approved by the board of trustees as complying with the official map and there is designated therein a school having jurisdiction of such use, be it a school board, park board or other authority, such authority shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or commence proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation within one year from the date of approval of such plat; if it does not do so within such period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners thereof in any other manner consistent with all ordinances including the official map and the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Minimum reservations shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Elementary school sites (for combined school-park use) one acre per 30 dwelling units, with a minimum site size of ten acres. 
(2)  Park and playfield sites, one acre per 80 dwelling units, with a minimum site size of one-half acre. 
(3)  Fire, police, utility services, as required. 
(4)  High school and junior high school sites, as required. 
(c)  Areas reserved shall be clearly identified on the preliminary plat as reserved in accordance with this article. The preliminary plat shall also contain the proposals of the subdivider, as they might otherwise be platted, for the areas under reservation, to be applied in the event the land is not acquired by the public within the period of reservation. Upon completion of the period of reservation, the preliminary plat shall remain a valid preliminary plat for the formerly reserved areas for a period of one year. 
(d)  Where practicable, final plats shall not include areas reserved; the final plats should affect only that portion of the subdivider's land which is unrestricted by the reservations. Where final plats must include areas reserved, such areas shall be clearly identified as reserved in accordance with this chapter and shall not contain any proposals of the developer. Final plats may be submitted for reserved land unacquired by the public at the close of the reservation period. Such plats will be considered additional units of the subdivisions for which initial final plats were recorded. 
(e)  If the appropriate public agency having jurisdiction has not, within the reservation period, acquired the site reserved for a public use by the subdivider, he shall regain full and unencumbered title to the same, and may use it in any way and any purpose permitted by the pertinent regulations then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 571, Art. 8, § C, 5-24-65) 
Secs. 23-155-23-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS OR FEES 

Secs. 23-161-23-170. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-26, § 2, adopted June 12, 1995, repealed Ord. No. 90-10, §§ 1-10, adopted Mar. 26, 1990, set out in this Code as Div. 2, §§ 23-161-23-170, and such repealed ordinance pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 23-171. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the following words are used in this division, such words shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
    Improved land means land located within a development which has been improved by installation of the required land improvements. 
    Demographic study means a study of the estimated ultimate population expected to be generated by a proposed development, based upon empirical historical data from similar developments. Such a study shall take into consideration demographic changes over time, dwelling types, number of bedrooms, and the number of preschool children, school age (grades K-12) children, and adults. 
    Park district means the Crete Park District, Will County, Illinois, or any public district within which a development or part of a development is located. 
    Public land is defined as real estate to be conveyed pursuant to the provisions hereof and to be utilized by the city, school district, and/or park district for uses including, but not limited to, parks, recreational sites, lakes, stormwater retention and detention areas, public forest areas, municipal service areas, public utility substations, storage areas and well sites, public natural resource areas, public golf course areas, school building sites, playgrounds and other similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 3, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-172. - Dedication of park lands or payment of cash in lieu thereof. 
    As a condition of approval of a final plat of a residential subdivision, a final plat for a residential planned unit development, a final plat of other residential development or, approval of a new residential structure building permit, each subdivider or developer or builder will be required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development or new residential structure or make cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village. The calculations for land to be dedicated or cash contributions in lieu thereof shall be established by determining the population of the development or new residential structure and the amount of land required to serve said population, determined as follows: 
(1)  Calculation of estimated population. The current "Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit," as maintained by the Crete Park District, shall be used to calculate the amount of required park site land and cash contributions in lieu thereof. A written objection to use of the said table may be filed by the subdivider prior to village board approval of the preliminary plan. Such objection shall include a demographic study showing the estimated ultimate population to be generated by the subdivision. Final determination of the estimated ultimate population shall be made by the village board at the time of preliminary plan approval. It is recognized that population density, age distribution, and local conditions change over time, and that, therefore, the said table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit is subject to periodic review and amendment as necessary by the Crete Park District. 
(2)  Calculation of park land requirement. The estimated ultimate population of a proposed residential development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for park purposes. The minimum requirement shall be five and five tenths acres of land per 1,000 of ultimate population in accordance with the standards hereinafter set forth, to wit: 
    Park site size and location standards: 
Type of 
Park Sites Recommended 
Size Range Minimum 
Per 1,000 School/park neighborhood playground Minimum park of 5 acres (adjacent to school site) 1.25 Neighborhood park Minimum 3.5 acres 1.0 acres District-wide park or play field Minimum 4 acres up to 30 acres 1.25 acres Community-wide recreation park Minimum 12 acres up to 30 acres 2.0 acres Total 5.5 acres  
(3)  Example of calculations: Development of 100 detached single-family three bedroom homes with 2.801 people per household. 
Total 
ultimate 
population = Number of lots × Ultimate population for detached single-family 
3-bedroom homes = 100 × 2.801 = 280.1 Total 
population × The required acreage for 1,000 population = Total acres required 280.0 ×  5.5 acres   = 1.54    1,000  
(4)  Site approval requirements: The size, location and shape of the park land to be dedicated shall be subject to the approval of the village as part of the preliminary plan. The subdivider shall supply the park district with plats or other documents and information with regard to proposed park sites as soon as received or developed. Prior to village approval of the preliminary plan, the village shall have received a resolution of the park district governing board approving the location and acreage of any park land to be dedicated. The suitability of land to be dedicated for park sites shall be evaluated by the plan commission and village board according to the following standards: 
a.  The site should be essentially regular in shape to facilitate maintenance and to provide the optimum opportunity for recreational use. 
b.  The site should not be located on a major road when such a location would present a traffic hazard to park users. 
c.  The site should not be subject to frequent flooding. 
d.  The site should have soil and topographic conditions suitable to accommodate the anticipated facilities, including but not limited to parking areas, play fields, tennis courts, playground equipment, or other recreational facilities. 
e.  The site should be located in the approximate center of the residential area to be served wherever possible, and adjacent to a school site where consistent with the school site requirements hereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 4, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 98-13, § 1, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 23-173. - Criteria for requiring a cash contribution in lieu of park land. 
(a)  When cash contribution required. When the subdivision is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical, or when available land is inappropriate for park sites, or when park sites have already been provided, the village board may require the payment of cash contributions in lieu of the required land. The village board shall determine whether land or cash will be required when it approves the preliminary plan and may consider the recommendation of the Crete Park District in making such determination. When the Crete Park District has refused to accept a land contribution, the village board may require a cash contribution. 
(b)  Payment of park contribution. The cash contribution in lieu of park land shall be paid directly to the Crete Park District and held in trust to be spent solely in accordance with subsection (c) below, after approval of the final plat by the village board but prior to its execution and recording. The final plat shall not be executed by the mayor or recorded until the village receives an original receipt executed by the treasurer of the park district involved for payment of the amount required. In cases of new residential structure building permits, payment shall be made directly to the Crete Park District prior to issuance of the building permit or as negotiated with the Crete Park District as evidenced by written agreement. 
(c)  Use of contribution by park district. 
(1)  The cash contribution in lieu of park land shall be used solely for the acquisition of park land which will serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of the subdivision for which the contribution was received, or the improvement of existing park land which will serve such needs; provided, however, any expenditure of funds for land or improvements shall satisfy all applicable statutory criteria. Annexation agreements entered by the village pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-15.1-1 et seq. as amended with respect to land to be zoned to include residential uses shall include a provision that all cash received for the park district may be used by the park district for land acquisition, building construction, site improvements, capital improvements, equipment, operations, or any other purpose which will serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of the subdivision for which the contribution was received. 
(2)  Further, the park district shall spend a minimum of 50 percent of the contribution (a) within the subdivision from which it was received, or if no park land exists within said subdivision, (b) within park district real estate nearest said subdivision or for the purchase of park land within one and one-half miles of said subdivision. For subdivisions platted within the village limits, the park district shall spend 100 percent of the contribution within the village limits; for subdivision platted outside the village limits but within the planning jurisdiction of the village, the park district shall spend 100 percent of the contribution within the planning jurisdiction of the village. The village board may vary the requirements of this subsection (c)(2) if it finds that, based upon facts presented by the park district, such variance will result in park facilities which will serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of the subdivision from which the contribution was received. 
(d)  Return of contribution if not expended. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park site land is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded, together with accrued interest thereon, to the owners of record of all lots, except public land, in the subdivision for which such contribution is made. The refund shall be paid to the person who is the owner of record on the day which is the tenth anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The amount of the refund due to each lot owner shall be equal to the amount of the original contribution, divided by the total number of lots in the subdivision (excluding public land) for which the contribution was made. The village may permit one-year extensions of the ten-year restriction if the park district demonstrates that such funds have been allocated for an acquisition or improvement allowed herein, but have not been spent due to additional funds being necessary to complete such acquisition or improvement. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 5, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 98-13, § 2, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 23-174. - Amount of cash contribution. 
    The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of improved land within the subdivision. The fair market value of improved land in and near the village is hereby determined to be $40,000.00 per acre, which shall be used in the calculation of the required cash contributions, except as follows: 
(1)  If the village board determines that the specifics of the subdivision so warrant, it may require a formal appraisal; 
(2)  If the subdivider files a written objection to the use of the $40,000.00-per-acre value, he shall submit a formal appraisal. 
    Such appraisal shall show the fair market value of improved land in the area of the subdivision. Final determination of the fair market value per acre of land shall be made by the village board, based upon the appraisal or appraisals, and upon other information which may be submitted by the park district, school district, or others. The subdivider shall pay all appraisal fees. 
    Cash contributions for new residential building permits, not being calculated as part of a subdivision plat, shall be calculated according to the Crete Park District table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, the minimum park acres of land per 1,000 population determination as set forth above in 23-172(2) and the village board determination of the fair market value of improved land in and near the village as provided above in this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 6, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 98-13, § 3, 6-22-98) 
Sec. 23-175. - Criteria for requiring land dedication and cash contribution. 
    There may be situations when a combination of land and cash in lieu of land are both necessary. At the time of preliminary plan approval, the village board may require a combination of land and cash in any of the following situations: 
(1)  When a previously designated park site lies partly within and partly outside of a proposed subdivision and the acreage of the designated park site within the subdivision is less than the park site acreage required herein, the subdivider shall contribute all of the designated park site lying within the proposed subdivision, and cash in lieu of the additional acreage needed to fulfill the requirements hereof. 
(2)  When part of a designated park site has already been acquired, and the land needed to complete it is less than the land required from the subdivision, then the subdivider shall contribute the amount of land needed from the subdivision to complete the park site and cash in lieu of the additional acreage needed to fulfill the requirements hereof. 
(3)  When the subdivider will be contributing certain park sites, and the balance of the required park site acreage would be too small or otherwise unsuitable for park sites, then the subdivider shall contribute cash in lieu of the balance of the required park site acreage. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 7, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-176. - Reservation of additional land. 
    Whenever the Crete Comprehensive Plan, or the standards of the village, or Crete Park District call for a park site within a subdivision larger than the required land contribution, the land needed in addition to the required contribution shall be reserved on the final plat for subsequent purchase by the park district. The park district shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or commence proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation within one year from the date of recording of the final plat; if the land is not so acquired or condemnation proceedings are not so commenced within said one-year period, the land so designated may then be used by the owners thereof in any other manner consistent with the Crete Municipal Code and compatible with said subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 8, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-177. - Condition of park sites. 
    Land improvements within the subdivision adjoining park sites shall be provided and paid for by the subdivider. In addition, park sites shall be fine graded, provided with a minimum of six inches of topsoil, and seeded as part of the required land improvements. Prior to commencing such work or any land improvements within a park or school site, the subdivider shall furnish a policy or policies of insurance insuring both village and the Crete Park District with coverages as approved by the village board and park district governing body. The subdivider shall provide certificates to village and the Crete Park District showing village and the Crete Park District as additional insureds. Such certificates shall provide for at least 30 days' notice to village and the Crete Park District prior to cancellation or modification in any respect. The failure to provide or maintain the insurance coverages or certificates as mentioned above shall be cause to stop construction and shall be cause for the refusal of issuance of construction and building permits or certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 9, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-178. - Time of conveyance. 
    The park sites required herein shall be conveyed to the appropriate park district grantee, as designated by the village, after village board approval of the final plat, which plat shall not be executed by the mayor or recorded until the governing body of the park district executes a written acceptance of the conveyance. Such acceptance of the conveyance shall not be deemed to constitute acceptance for purposes of maintenance. The subdivider shall be responsible for maintaining the park sites until the land improvements upon and adjoining such sites are officially accepted by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 10, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-179. - Payment of general real estate taxes and agricultural rollback taxes. 
    General real estate taxes and agricultural rollback taxes levied or which become due because of any conveyance against the park site which is conveyed, shall be the responsibility and obligation of the grantor. Grantor shall furnish evidence of payment of these taxes or deposit the amount of those taxes in escrow with the title company furnishing the preliminary report of title, requiring payment of the taxes when they become due. After payment of the taxes, evidence of such payment shall be furnished to the Crete Park District. The amount of any general real estate taxes and/or agricultural rollback taxes for the year of conveyance shall be pro-rated to the date of the delivery of deed. The amount of the general real estate and agricultural rollback taxes shall be based on the assessor's latest known rate, value, and equalizer, if any, for the land being conveyed. 
(Ord. No. 23-180, § 11, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-180. - Real estate conveyance requirements. 
    All real estate conveyed to the park district pursuant to the provisions of this division is hereby designated "public land." The subdivider shall furnish the village and the Crete Park District with a survey of the public land to be conveyed and a commitment, for title insurance issued by a licensed Illinois title insurance company, in a dollar amount equal to the value of the acreage conveyed as determined by the value per acre established in section 23-174 herein. If the village or park district objects in writing to defects in the title, the subdivider shall have 30 days from the date of delivery of such written objections to cure such defects. All deeds of conveyance pursuant to this division shall be recorded, at the subdivider's sole expense, in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in which the property is located. All conveyances pursuant to this division shall be by warranty or trustee's deed subject only to the following: 
(1)  Acts done or suffered by, or judgments against the grantee, its successors and assigns; 
(2)  General taxes for the year of conveyance, and subsequent years; 
(3)  Zoning and building laws and/or ordinances; 
(4)  Public and utility easements of record which are reasonably acceptable to village and grantee; 
(5)  Conditions and covenants of record as contained only in plats of subdivision approved by the village; 
(6)  Rights-of-way for drainage ditches, feeders, laterals, and underground tile, pipe or other conduit; 
(7)  Such other exceptions to title that village and grantee shall find acceptable. 
    Each conveyance shall be accompanied by an appropriate affidavit of title. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 12, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-181. - Private recreational areas in lieu of dedicated park land. 
(a)  Private recreation areas and facilities may reduce the demand for local public recreational services. At the option of the village board, a portion of the public park site requirement may be provided in the form of private recreation areas. The extent of same shall be determined by the village, based upon the needs of the projected residents, the extent to which the private recreation areas are available for use by the residents of the subdivision, and available park land in the general area. 
(b)  In general, a substitution of private recreational areas for public park sites will require a substantially higher degree of improvement, such as the installation of recreational facilities and equipment by the subdivider. Detailed plans of facilities to be installed shall be submitted with the preliminary plan and shall be subject to review and approval of the village board. Before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider shall provide such guarantee that the private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of such legal documents and the provisions of such sureties as village shall request. 
(c)  When an adjustment for private recreation area is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be given. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 13, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-182. - Applicability. 
    If any subdivision subject to the terms hereof is located outside of the corporate limits of the village, and if the county in which the property is located has an ordinance which is more restrictive, or which would require a greater dedication or contribution than this division, as determined by the village, the ordinance of the county which the property is located shall prevail where inconsistent with the less restrictive provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 14, 6-12-95) 
Sec. 23-183. - Amendments to preliminary plan. 
    When a preliminary plan of a subdivision is amended, the required contribution of land or cash shall be recalculated for that portion of the subdivision which is amended based on the estimated ultimate population thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-26, § 15, 6-12-95) 
Chapter 24 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Village clerk, § 2-151 et seq.; village collector, § 2-166 et seq.; village treasurer, § 2-181 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Retailers' occupation tax. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1); provided, however, that the exclusions provided pursuant to P.A. 80-1292 effective August 2, 1978, contained in section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code not apply to such tax. 
(b)  Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by section 3 of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended (35 ILCS 120/3). 
(c)  At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 647, §§ 1-3, 9-10-69; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 12-18-78) 
Sec. 24-2. - Service occupation tax. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of three-quarters of one percent of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-15); provided, however, that the exclusions provided by P.A.80-1292, effective August 2, 1978, contained in section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code shall not apply to such tax. 
(b)  Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by section 9 of the Service Occupation Tax Act (Ill Rev. Stat. ch. 120, par. 439.109). 
(c)  At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. 
(Ord. No. 622, §§ 1-3, 5-13-68; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 12-18-78) 
Sec. 24-3. - Use tax. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-6) upon the privilege of using in the village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside the state at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of state government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent of the selling price of such tangible property. The term "selling price" shall have the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act (35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.). 
(b)  Such tax shall be collected by the state department of revenue and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. 
(Ord. No. 724, §§ 1, 2, 11-11-74) 
Sec. 24-4. - Automobile renting occupation tax. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-7). 
(b)  Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended (35 ILCS 120/2, 120/3). 
(c)  At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 844, §§ 1-3, 1-11-82) 
Sec. 24-5. - Automobile renting use tax. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in the village at the rate of one percent of the rental price of such automobile, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-8). 
(b)  Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended (35 ILCS 120/2, 120/3). 
(c)  The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this village. 
(d)  At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 845, §§ 1-4, 1-11-82) 
Secs. 24-6-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Vehicle license tax authorized, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-4, 625 ILCS 5/2-121. 

Sec. 24-21. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the term "motor vehicle(s)" is used in this article II it shall be construed to include any vehicle which is self-propelled and licensed by this state or any other state as a passenger vehicle (including buses, motorhomes and recreational vehicles) or commercial vehicle which is principally designed to carry freight or cargo, and excludes motorcycles or motorized pedal cycles having three or less wheels in contact with the ground. 
(b)  Whenever the term "owner" is used in this section, besides the actual registered owner the word "owner" means and includes a lessee, licensee, bailee, or possessor of a motor vehicle having the use thereof with the consent of the registered owner or under a lease or other similar contractual agreement. It also means any person who has possession of a non-owned motor vehicle who resides within the village and regularly parks or keeps said vehicle within the village. Provided, however, motor vehicles owned and licensed by any state, county, federal or any taxing body and licensed with a State of Illinois "M" or "U" designated plate, state police district plate, county police plate or other state or federal government plate designating government ownership on its face or vehicles owned by charitable or not-for-profit organizations and bearing a plate designating such ownership are exempt from village vehicle license tax sticker requirement. 
(c)  The term "residing within the village" means and includes living within, residing within or cohabiting with a resident within the village or the owning, leasing, or otherwise controlling of property or a place of business wherein motor vehicles, trailers, or semi-trailers are stored, repaired, serviced, loaded, or unloaded within the city in connection with such business. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.52.1; Ord. No. 91-33, § 1, 9-9-91; Ord. No. 94-30, § 1, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 2, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-22. - Use of funds. 
    All taxes collected pursuant to this article shall, after deduction of the cost of issuing the licenses and collecting the fees, be kept as a separate fund and used only for paying the cost of street and alley repairs and improvements. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.52.8) 
Sec. 24-23. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle owner or operator residing within the village to use, or to cause or permit any of his agents, employees, lessees, licensees, or bailees to use, any motor vehicle or any other vehicle upon the public ways of the city, unless such vehicle be licensed as hereinafter provided. Any motor vehicle which is registered with the Office of the Secretary of State of Illinois to an address within the village, shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such vehicle shall require a village vehicle license. Motor vehicles owned by the village shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle as set forth in this chapter without said vehicle being duly licensed as prescribed herein. The operator of any such motor vehicle shall be subject to the same penalties as the owner for the violation of any of the terms of this article. 
(c)  The owner or operator of a motor vehicle or any other vehicle who resides in the village but maintains a situs or base of such vehicle located outside of the village shall not be exempt from the provisions of this section even if the motor vehicle is registered in another municipality and a similar license fee or tax is in the same or like manner imposed. 
(d)  Every such owner or operator as described above shall pay the tax or license fee according to the schedule provided in section 24-24. Such tax or license must be purchased within 30 calendar days of the acquisition of such vehicle. New residents of the village shall pay such tax within 30 days from the date of establishing residence in the village. 
(e)  Such village sticker emblem shall be affixed, in accordance with the instructions printed thereon which are made a part hereof, and without the use of supplemental adhesives, at the lower right-hand corner on the inside of the glass portion of the windshield of such motor vehicle, approximately one inch from the right and lower sections of the frame of such windshield. 
(f)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (g) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(g)  Any person accused of a violation of this section may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.52.2; Ord. No. 705, § 1, 8-27-83; Ord. No. 812, Art. III, §§ 2, 3, 11-26-79; Ord. No. 91-33, § 2, 9-9-91; Ord. No. 92-6, § 1, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 2, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-24. - Amount. 
(a)  The tax referred to in section 24-23 shall be $50.00. All annual vehicle licenses shall expire on the last day of the fiscal year of the village for which they are issued. Licenses are considered delinquent and subject to citation if not purchased before June 1st. Effective 5/1/2014, the tax to be paid for all license stickers purchased after July 1 of each fiscal year thereafter shall be $100.00; provided further, the tax to be paid for all license stickers in accordance with subsection 24-23(d) shall be two times the amount applicable had it been purchased within the 30-day time period as provided. 
(b)  The village clerk shall mail to all known motor vehicle owners residing in the village a statement of the time of expiration of a current license prior to the date of such expiration or a statement of requirement for a license if none currently held. Failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain or renew a license, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operating or housing a motor vehicle subject to licensing under this article. 
(c)  The tax shall be reduced to $25.00 for all persons who become liable for the payment of said tax after October 31 of each year. Persons requesting the reduced rate shall submit proof of the purchase or acquisition date in the form of a bill of sale or equivalent; provided, however, such reduction is not available for replacement vehicles for vehicles owned prior to October 31 of said year. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above scheduled fees, if the owner of a vehicle has attained the age of 65 years on or before June 1, of the year for which the license is to be issued, and as limited to one vehicle per household, the tax shall be at the rate of $25.00. Proof of ownership shall be established by the presentation of a state registration certificate and the owner's age shall be established by presentation of his driver's license. For license stickers purchased after July 1 the tax shall be two times the amount provided for in this subsection; provided further that this doubled amount shall not be applicable to vehicles subject to the provisions of subsection 24-23(d). 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.52.2; Ord. No. 705, § 1, 8-27-83; Ord. No. 812, Art. III, §§ 2, 3, 11-26-79; Ord. No. 91-33, § 2, 9-9-91; Ord. No. 92-6, § 1, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 2, 3-22-10; Ord. No. 2010-21, § 2, 4-26-10; Ord. No. 2013-12, § 2, 6-24-13; Ord. No. 2013-13, § 2, 6-24-13; Ord. No. 2014-12, § 2, 6-23-14) 
Sec. 24-25. - License. 
(a)  Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle required to pay a tax by the provisions of this article shall file an application with the village clerk, setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a description of the vehicle for which the tax is to be paid. Upon payment of the required tax the village clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license which shall be attested by him, authorizing the use of such vehicle within the village during the fiscal year for which the tax is paid. Such license shall be in the form of a vehicle license tax sticker. The licenses issued to dealers in motor vehicles held for sale and used only for demonstration may be transferred to any other vehicle so held and used by the same dealer; provided that such dealers shall procure one license for each motor vehicle so held by him at any one time during the year. 
(b)  The fee which shall be paid to the village upon transfer of a license to another vehicle or replacement of a license shall be $3.00. 
(c)  As to motor vehicles, the vehicle tax license sticker shall be affixed to the inside of the lower right-hand corner of the front windshield in a space that is clearly visible from the outside. This provision is not intended to, nor shall it conflict with statutes, with respect to certain classifications of vehicles, prohibiting the same. In such instances, the president and board of trustees shall direct alternative placement of vehicle tax license stickers. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.52.2, 2.2.52.5, 2.2.52.7; Ord. No. 629, § 1, 10-28-68; Ord. No. 705, § 1, 8-27-73; Ord. No. 812, Art. III, §§ 2, 5, 11-26-79; Ord. No. 90-11, § 2, 3-26-90; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 4, 2-14-05) 
Secs. 24-26-24-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX 
DIVISION 1. - GAS 

Sec. 24-51. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village of Crete, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(b)  No tax is imposed by this division with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under the provisions of this division for such transactions as are, or may become, subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act," authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(c)  Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, §§ 1-3, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-52. - Definitions. 
    Gross receipts means the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that "gross receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in subsection 8-11(2)(d) of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
    Persons means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 4, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-53. - Effective date. 
    This division shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the 1st day of May, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 5, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-54. - Making a return. 
(a)  On or before the last day of June, 2010 each taxpayer shall make a return to the village treasurer for the month of May, 2010 stating: 
(1)  His name; 
(2)  His principal place of business; 
(3)  His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; 
(4)  Amount of tax; 
(5)  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
(b)  On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the village treasurer for a corresponding one-month period. 
(c)  The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 6, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-55. - Erroneous payments. 
    If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this division, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 7, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-56. - Time limitation to recover tax due. 
    No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this division shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 8, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-57. - Failure to make a return. 
    Any taxpayer who fails to make a return or who makes a fraudulent return or who willfully violates any other provision of this division is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00 and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 9, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-58. - Account maintenance. 
    The village clerk is hereby directed to send a certified copy of the ordinance from which this division derives to each utility company affected by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 10, 3-22-10) 
Secs. 24-59-24-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRIC 

Sec. 24-81. - Tax imposed on the using or consuming electricity. 
    A tax is imposed on all persons within the village limits on the privilege of using or consuming electricity in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, as follows in the following provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-82. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Exempt purchaser: A purchaser who has applied for and received a resale number for the resale of electricity from the village administrator. 
    Gross receipts: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting the electricity, without any deduction on account of the costs of materials used, labor or service costs or any other expenses. 
    Person: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
    Person maintaining a place of business in this state: Any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation, facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state. 
    Purchase at retail: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in subsection 8-11(2) of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
    Purchaser: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than an exempt purchaser. 
    Tax collector: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-83. - Rates for the consumption of electricity. 
(a)  Pursuant to subsection 8-11(2) of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
(1)  For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.61 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(2)  For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.40 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(3)  For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.36 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(4)  For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.35 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(5)  For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.34 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(6)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.32 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(7)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(8)  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.31 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(9)  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.305 cents per kilowatt-hour; 
(10)  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.30 per kilowatt-hour. 
(b)  The tax imposed is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the state. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this divisions the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or Statutes of the United States or the Constitution of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 2, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-84. - Tax in addition to other payments. 
    The tax authorized by this division shall be in addition to the payment of money or value of products or services furnished to this village by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 3, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-85. - Collection. 
(a)  The tax authorized by this division shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this division and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity provided that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed a credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this division. In the event a purchaser shall make only a partial payment of any bill supplied to him, her or it by the supplier, any such partial payment not specifically identified by the purchaser to be applied to the tax imposed by this division shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. 
(b)  On or before the last day of June, 2010 each tax collector shall make a return to the village treasurer for the month of May, 2010 stating: 
(1)  His name; 
(2)  His principal place of business; 
(3)  His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; 
(4)  Amount of tax; 
(5)  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
(c)  On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each tax collector shall make a like return to the village treasurer for a corresponding one-month period. The tax collector making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the tax collector may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(d)  If it shall appear than an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer or tax collector who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall so be credited. 
(e)  No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12,§ 4, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-86. - Account maintenance. 
    The village clerk is hereby directed to send copies of the ordinance from which this division derives to all utility companies affected by this division and to provide to all utility companies affected by this division the names and addresses of all owners of properties subject to the tax within the corporate limits of the village, and to keep the list so provided as current as practicable so that the collection of the taxes is accomplished fairly and equitably toward all property owners and taxpayers. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12,§ 5, 3-22-10) 
Sec. 24-87. - Penalties. 
    Any taxpayer who fails to make a return or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00 and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due, together with all attorney's fees and costs of collection thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12,§ 6, 3-22-10) 
Secs. 24-88-24-115. - Reserved. 
Chapter 25 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; house moving, etc., § 6-33 et seq., driving vehicles across sidewalks or parkways, § 6-37; parking of house trailers at motels, § 12-572; streets and sidewalks, ch. 22; vehicle license tax, § 24-21 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be referred to and cited as the "Village Traffic Code." 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(Art. 4.1), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, and as otherwise provided in this chapter words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as that which is given to them in The Illinois Vehicle Code (Illinois Revised Statute, Chapter 951/2). 
State Law reference- Applicable definitions, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., 625 ILCS 5/11-100. 
(b)  As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Property line shall mean the line marking the boundary between any street and the real property abutting thereon; 
(2)  Public building shall mean a building used by the village, the county, the school district or any other district authority, the state or the Government of the United States of America; 
(3)  Toy vehicle shall mean any nonmotorized vehicle propelled by the use of pedals or similar devices; 
(4)  Loading zone shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1, 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-3. - The Illinois Vehicle Code adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 5/20-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/20-204), the following portions of the 2000 Illinois Vehicle Code, including any subsequent amendment thereto, or revision thereof, are hereby adopted by references as if set out at length herein: 
Chapter 1. Title and Definitions 
Sections 5/1-101 through 5/1-3007 
Chapter 2. The Secretary of State 
Sections 5/2-108, 5/2-118.1 
Chapter 3. Certificates of Title and Registration of Vehicles 
Article IV Original and Renewal of Registration 
Sections 5/3-411, 5/3-413 and 5/3-416 
Article VII. Offenses Against Registration and Certificate of Title Laws or Revocation of Registration or Certificate of Title 
Sections 5/3-701 through 5/3-703, 5/3-707 through 5/3-710 
Chapter 4. Anti-Theft Laws and Abandoned Vehicles. 
Sections 5/4-100 through 5/4-102, 5/4-201 through 5/4-214; 
Chapter 6. The Illinois Driver Licensing Law 
Article I. Issuance of Licenses, Expiration and Renewal 
Sections 5/6-101, 5/6-104, 5/6-112, 5/6-113, 5/6-116 
Article II. Cancellation, Suspension, or Revocation of Licenses and Permits 
Sections 5/6-206.1, 5/6-210 
Article III. Violation of License Provisions 
Sections 5/6-301, 5/6-301.1, 5/6-303 through 5/6-304.1 
Article V. Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act 
Section 5/6-515 
Chapter 7. Illinois Safety Responsibility Law 
Article VI. Mandatory Insurance 
Sections 5/7-601 through 5/7-603, 5/7-610 
Chapter 11. Rules of the Road 
Article I through article XV 
Sections 5/11-100, 5/11-201 through 5/11-1514 
Chapter 12. Equipment of Vehicles 
Article I through article IX 
Sections 5/12-100 through 5/12-902 
Chapter 13. Inspection of Vehicles 
Section 5/13-111 
Chapter 15. Size, Weight and Load Permits 
Article I through article III. 
Sections 5/15-100 through 5/15-319 
Chapter 18C. Illinois Commercial Transportation Law 
Sections 5/18c-7402, 5/18c-7503 
Chapter 25. Child Passenger Protection Act (all provisions) 
Chapter 40. Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act 
Sections 40/1-1 to 40/8-1, 40/10-1 to 40/11-1 
(b)  Three copies of the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted in subsection (a), shall be on file in the office of the village clerk and then kept available for public use, inspection and examination during its regular business hours. 
(c)  In referring to a violation of any of the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as adopted in subsection (a), the violation shall be noted by referring to subsection 25-3 and then citing the appropriate chapter and section number from the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(Art. 4.3), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 84-3, § 1, 2-13-84; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 1, 1-8-01) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.; penalties for ordinance violations, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1. 
Sec. 25-4. - Penalties. 
(a)  Anyone who is charged with an offense of the Village Traffic Code which has been adopted by reference from the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be subject to the penalties, fines and/or imprisonment as provided in the corresponding section of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The minimum fine shall be $100.00 unless a higher minimum fine is provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code. The court or court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter not adopted by reference from the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs paid by compromise payment are prepaid prior to court or the violator fails to appear in court, the court or court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(c)  Violations of provisions of this chapter may be cited in accordance with administrative hearing procedures as set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.12.1), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 87-16, § 1, 4-6-87; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 1, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 16, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 2-8-10) 
State Law reference- Penalties for ordinance violations, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1. 
Sec. 25-5. - Release on bail. 
    Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.12.2), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-6. - Prima facie proof of guilty. 
    The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.12.3), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-7. - Compromising certain violations. 
(a)  Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance section listed herein in subsection (b) may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one-half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(b)  Those ordinance sections subject to compromise payment from this chapter are as follows: 
25-3 Subsection 625 ILCS 5/11-1301 through 625 ILCS 5/11-1304. 
25-3 Subsection 625 ILCS 5/12-201 through 625 ILCS 5/12-811. 
25-12 Registration and regulations of Bicycles 
25-25 Special traffic regulations for persons on skates and skateboards. 
Article II. Stopping, Standing and Parking (all provisions), 
25-37 to 25-51. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.12.4), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 2, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03) 
Sec. 25-8. - Authority of firemen to direct traffic. 
    The fire department officer in command or any fireman designated by him, may exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.4.1), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed § 25-9, Pedestrian control signals, derived from Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.4.2), adopted Sept. 27, 1982. 
Sec. 25-10. - Inoperable and disabled or wrecked vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
    Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Property shall mean any real property within the village which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway shall mean any street, alley or public way within the village. 
    Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(b)  Abandonment of vehicles. No person shall abandon any vehicle within the village and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. Abandonment is presumed where any motor vehicle or other vehicle is either wrecked, burned, partially dismantled or in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or, any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more; or, any motor vehicle or vehicle which is left unattended on any street, highway or public way and by its position or location or by reason of fire, accident, snow or other unusual happening or occurrence it is a hazard to public safety. 
(c)  Disposition of wrecked or abandoned vehicles. No person in charge or control of any property within the village, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 15 days; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the Village for longer time than 15 days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the village. Any such vehicle shall be removed from the property within 15 days after the receipt of official municipal notice to remove said vehicle. 
(d)  Impounding. The chief of police or any member of his department designated by him is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.11.1-4.11.2), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 3, 1-8-01) 
State Law reference- Anti-theft laws and abandoned vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq. 
Sec. 25-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed § 25-11, Animals, derived from Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.5.1), adopted Sept. 27, 1982. 
Sec. 25-11.1. - Exhibitions of speed. 
(a)  The president and board of trustees have determined that acts of motor vehicle exhibition of speed commonly referred to as "burning rubber," "peeling out," "donuts" and other maneuvers of speed made by an operator of a motor vehicle constitutes a nuisance in fact in that such acts adversely affect the safety of the general public and especially the public then lawfully traveling upon the street and highways of the village. 
(b)  Motor vehicle exhibition of speed commonly referred to as "burning rubber," "peeling out," "donuts" and such other maneuvers of speed are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle to perform any act of exhibition of speed upon any street or highway within the corporate limits of the village. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the words "streets and highways" are defined as the entire width between boundary lines of every way or place, of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 84-21, §§ 1-5, 11-12-84; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, 1-8-01) 
Sec. 25-12. - Registration and regulation of bicycles. 
(a)  Every person who owns and/or operates a bicycle within the limits of the village may within 30 days of purchase cause the ownership thereof to be registered with the chief of police or his designated representative. Upon such registration, the chief of police shall cause to be issued to such person a registration tag plate or other means of identification. The identification marker shall at all times be securely fastened to the bicycle for which it is issued. There shall be paid to the chief of police for the marker when issued the sum as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 25-12. 
(b)  The chief of police shall keep a record of the number issued to each person along with the serial number of the bicycle, and the name and address of the person who registered the bicycle. 
(c)  In the event that an owner loses his identification tag plate or other means of identification, or the same should be destroyed or stolen, he shall report the same to the chief of police immediately, and the chief of police shall then issue a new registration tag at the cost as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 25-12. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or counterfeit any registration tag, plate or other means of identification issued in conformity with this section. 
(e)  Bicyclists riding or traveling upon any streets of the village shall not ride more than two abreast. Such bicyclists shall operate their bicycles on the right-hand side of the center of the street and shall travel as near to the righthand curb as possible. 
(f)  All persons riding bicycles upon any street within the village shall observe all traffic ordinances, rules and regulations, especially as to traffic lights, highway stop signs and signal any change of direction or course of travel in the same manner and in the same way as such signals are required under the law governing the use of automobiles upon the streets and highways. 
(g)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section may have either his registration suspended or his bicycle impounded, neither to exceed a period of ten days, or be fined in accordance with section 25-4. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.5.2), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to register and regulate bicycles, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(8); bicycle regulations generally, 625 ILCS 5/11-1501 et seq. 
Sec. 25-13. - Through streets. 
    The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by ordinance as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic control signal. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.7.1), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to designate through streets, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(6); vehicles entering stop or yield intersections, 625 ILCS 5/11-904; stop and yield signs, 625 ILCS 5/11-1204. 
Sec. 25-14. - One-way streets or alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys designated by ordinance as one-way streets or alleys in any direction other than as so designated. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.7.2), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to designate one-way streets, Ill. Rev. Stat. 625ILCS 5/11-208(a)(4); operation of vehicles on one-way streets, 625 ILCS 5/11-708. 
Sec. 25-15. - Stop streets. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer, in which event the driver shall comply with the directions of the police officer. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.7.3), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-904; stop signs, 625 ILCS 5/11-1204. 
Sec. 25-16. - Yield streets. 
    Any street designated by ordinance as a yield right-of-way street and so posted is hereby declared to be a yield right-of-way street; the driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right-of-way sign shall reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than 20 miles per hour and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting street either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on such intersection as to constitute a hazard; however, said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as safety permits. If a driver is involved in a collision at any intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right-of-way sign, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.7.4), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicles at yield intersections, 625 ILCS 5/11-904; yield signs, 625 ILCS 5/11-1204. 
Sec. 25-17. - Signs. 
    Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through streets, stop and yield right-of-way streets, all one-way streets and alleys and all stop intersections. All traffic control signs, signals and devices in place on the adoption date of this Code are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.7.5), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-18. - Vehicle condition and equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required by statute, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of law. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street, any motor vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway. 
(e)  The maximum width, length and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in the Illinois Vehicle Code. No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof. No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two units, but such limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime when transporting pipes, poles, machinery and other objects which cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public utility when engaged in emergency repair work; however, such loads carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of the load. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street with a weight, including load, in excess of that permitted on improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not conforming to such law, or in violation of special weight limits provided for by ordinance and sign posted. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.8.1-4.8.6), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Vehicle condition and equipment generally, 625 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.; vehicle size, weight and load, 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq. 
Sec. 25-19. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving motor vehicle or wagon. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.9.1), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1504. 
Sec. 25-20. - Toy vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person upon a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.9.2), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 3-26-90) 
Sec. 25-21. - Riding on running boards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside step of any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.9.3), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-22. - Trucks prohibited on certain streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purpose of making a delivery and then for one block only on any street so designated by ordinance and sign posted. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.9.4), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-23. - Limited load streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the village when the gross weight on the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicle exceeds 16,000 pounds. Where lower limits are imposed by ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.9.5), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed § 25-24, Railroads, obstructing crossings, derived from Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.10.2), adopted Sept. 27, 1982. 
Sec. 25-25. - Special traffic regulations for persons on skates and skateboards. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "skateboard" shall mean every device propelled by motor or human power upon which any person may stand, sit or otherwise ride, having three or more wheels any of which is under four inches in diameter. 
(b)  Special regulations. No person shall skate or ride upon a skateboard in the village in violation of the following regulations: 
(1)  Any person on skates or a skateboard on a roadway shall obey the instruction of official traffic signals and signs unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on skates or a skateboard on a roadway in a reckless manner. 
(3)  Every person on skates or a skateboard on a roadway shall ride as near as possible to the right-hand side of the roadway and exercise due care when passing a standing vehicle. 
(4)  Whenever a person on skates or a skateboard is operating upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person on skates or a skateboard to attach himself to any motor vehicle located or moving upon a public roadway. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on skates or a skateboard on any private property within the village without the owner's(s') written consent. 
(7)  No person on skates or a skateboard shall be upon the roadway between sunset and sunrise. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates or a skateboard to go upon any sidewalk within the following commercial areas of the village: 
a.  On either side of Main Street from Division to North Street; 
b.  On either side of Exchange Street from Lumber Street to Wood Street; 
c.  On either side of Cass Street from Benton Street to Wood Street; 
d.  On either side of Benton Street from Cass Street to Exchange Street. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates or a skateboard to go upon any of the village's alleyways in the following commercial areas: 
a.  The alley lying parallel with and located between Benton Street and Main Street from Exchange Street to Division Street; and 
b.  The alleyway lying parallel with and located between Main Street and Wood Street from North Street to Cass Street. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a ramp or other devise for the purposes of jumping upon skates or a skateboard when operating said skates or skateboard within any of the commercial streets and alleyways enumerated in subsection (b)(8) and (9) above. 
(c)  Permitted violation. No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years shall allow, permit or encourage any such minor to violate the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Impounding skateboards. Upon the violations of any of the provisions of this section, by any person, the skates or skateboard used in such violation may be impounded and upon conviction may be forfeited to the village. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 2, 3-26-90) 
Secs. 25-26-25-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate the standing or parking of vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(A)(1); stopping, standing and parking generally, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301 et seq. 

Sec. 25-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed § 25-36, Railroads, obstructing crossings, derived from Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.15), adopted Sept. 27, 1982; and Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87. 
Sec. 25-37. - Signs. 
    Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.14), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed § 25-38, Removal of illegally parked vehicles, derived from Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.4), adopted Sept. 27, 1982. 
Sec. 25-39. - Parking during snow removal. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in the village at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of two inches or more has occurred unless the snow in the street has been removed. The depth of snow shall be measured at the public works garage by the superintendent of public works or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.1), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 91-39, § 1, 11-11-91) 
Sec. 25-40. - Parking during street cleaning operations. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion thereof in the village at any time when such street is being cleaned. Signs indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be posted immediately before the cleaning of the street, and shall be removed after the cleaning of the street is finished. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.2), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-41. - Time limit parking. 
    Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for more than two hours in any consecutive period of time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. in any area designated by ordinance as a restricted parking area. The portion of Main Street (Illinois Route 1) between Division Street and North Street shall be designated and posted with traffic control signs as a restricted parking area limited by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.3), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 91-40, § 1, 10-28-91) 
Sec. 25-42. - Illinois Route 1. 
    With respect to Illinois Route 1, commonly known as Main Street, the following parking regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Parking shall be parallel to the curbs between North Street and Division Street; 
(2)  Parking shall be parallel to the curbs and restricted to one side of the street between First Street and North Street; 
(3)  With regard to parking along the southbound lane north of Crete Lanes' north property line, there shall be no parking restrictions; 
(4)  With regard to parking along the southbound lane south of Crete Lanes' north property line, parking shall be restricted during the hours of 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. daily; 
(5)  With regard to parking along the northbound lane north of Exchange Street to North Street, there shall be restricted parking from 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. daily; 
(6)  With regard to parking along the southbound lane south of Exchange Street to Division Street, there shall be no parking restrictions; 
(7)  With regard to parking along the northbound lane, south of Exchange Street to Seehausen's south property line, there shall be restricted parking from 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. daily; and 
(8)  With regard to parking along the northbound lane of Main Street, south of Seehausen's south property line, there shall be no parking restrictions. 
Except for the parking provisions provided in above, parking shall be prohibited throughout the remainder of Illinois Route 1. 
The board of trustees may authorize parking regulatory signs to be placed on any street in the village if the board of trustees deems such signs necessary for traffic control and the safety and welfare of village residents. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.5), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 84-8, § 1, 5-17-84) 
Sec. 25-43. - Angle parking. 
    On those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb indicated by such marks. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.7), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Angle parking, 625 ILCS 5/11-1304. 
Sec. 25-44. - Parking vehicles for sale or using parked vehicle to peddle goods. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the sole purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park or stop any vehicle upon any street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled or sold except where a permit or license has been obtained from the village. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any private property for the sole purpose of displaying it for sale except as hereinafter provided. Vehicles may be displayed on property zoned for new or used car lots (as provided for in chapter 28 of this Code) and where a properly approved and licensed business is operational provided the vehicle is under the ownership or control of the business license holder. In residentially zoned areas of the village, the vehicles belonging to the property owner or renter who resides on the premises may be displayed for sale on the premises of the owner or renter but only within properly permitted parking areas of the premises. Parking a vehicle for the purpose of sale in the required landscaped areas, namely the front or corner side yard as defined in chapter 28 of the Municipal Code, of any lot is prohibited. 
(c)  The phrase "displayed for sale" or "for the purpose of sale" shall have the meaning of being labeled or marked as "for sale". 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.12), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 93-11, § 1, 3-22-93) 
Secs. 25-45, 25-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed §§ 25-45, 25-46, Loading zones and All night parking, derived from Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.9), (4.6.10), adopted Sept. 27, 1982. 
Sec. 25-47. - Alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.11), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed §§ 25-48, parking in cab stands and bus stands, derived from Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.12), adopted Sept. 27, 1982. 
Sec. 25-49. - Parking on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.13), 9-27-82) 
Sec. 25-50. - Parking of commercial vehicles. 
(a)  The parking of a commercial vehicle or truck either having registration for gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 16,000 pounds or measuring in excess of eight feet in height or in excess of 24 feet in length or not being legally registered, and the parking of trailers with commercial markings or measuring in excess of ten feet in length or eight feet in height or any trailer regardless of size having open cargo space not clean and well kept, free of garbage, debris or materials offensive to public sensibilities, or not being legally registered, or the parking of buses at any location within the municipal limits of the village is prohibited, unless: 
(1)  During a time period when material or persons are being actively loaded or unloaded from any such vehicle or trailer provided that persons engaged in the loading or unloading are physically present at the vehicle or trailer; 
(2)  If located within the following zoning districts: 
a.  I-1 Industrial; 
b.  B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4 Commercial; 
c.  A G Agriculture; 
(3)  If said vehicle or trailer is lawfully registered with a recreational vehicle designation; 
(4)  If located on a zoning lot on which construction or building is actively in progress pursuant to a valid village building permit; 
(5)  The vehicle is licensed to a governmental entity or a utility company and is actively being utilized in maintaining utilities within the municipal limits of the village; 
(6)  The vehicle or truck is being utilized in providing emergency services for the protection of life or property within the municipal limits of the village; 
(7)  The vehicle displays a permit granted by the village administrator or chief of police; 
(8)  The vehicle, trailer or bus is located on a street or alley not in excess of one hour between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (prevailing local time); providing, the chief of police or his designee may extend said period not to exceed two additional hours should the extension relate to the public health, welfare and safety. 
Notwithstanding the above exceptions, all trailers, regardless of size or whether commercial markings are present or not, if otherwise lawful to be parked or stored as provided above, must be located within the lot lines of the private property involved and on a parking surface composed of an asphalt or concrete pad wholly encompassing the area underneath the trailer, unless located on an agriculture zoning lot. Further, any trailer permitted under exceptions (2), (4), (5), (6) or (8) may be loaded provided the load is securely fastened and wholly within the confines of the designed cargo compartment such that same can be legally transported under the Illinois Vehicle Code with no special permits. 
    Commercial vehicles used in conjunction with charitable or eleemosynary groups or institutions and whose use is necessary to effectuate charitable or eleemosynary purposes may park overnight on a street or alley within the hours otherwise prohibited herein, not to exceed two days in any given 30-day period, provided an authorized agent of such institution shall first apply for and secure a written permission from the village administrator or chief of police after application to the village clerk specifying the date or dates relative to such parking. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Bus means every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying more than ten persons. A "commuter van" is a motor vehicle designed for the transportation of not less than seven nor more than 16 passengers, which is: 
(1)  Used in a ridesharing arrangement; or 
(2)  Owned or leased by or on behalf of a company or an employee organization and operated on a nonprofit basis with the primary purpose of transporting employees of the company between the employees' homes and the company's place of business or a public transportation station and in which the operating, administrative, maintenance and reasonable depreciation costs are paid principally by the persons utilizing the commuter van. 
    Commercial vehicle means any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. The display of commercial markings shall be considered evidence of being used in furtherance of a commercial enterprise. 
    Gross vehicle weight means the gross weight in pounds including vehicle and maximum load. 
    Permit means a written permit which authorizes the parking of a certain vehicle for an established period of time granted by the village administrator or chief of police after application is made in writing to the village clerk. The village administrator or chief of police will review safety issues and zoning conformance issues, including traffic sight lines, visibility to adjacent structures, type of zoning district involved, size of vehicle, any unique hazards related to the vehicle or location, and length of time requested in issuing a permit. Appeals from adverse decisions regarding a permit may be directed to the corporate authorities. 
    Trailer means every vehicle without motive power in operation designed for carrying person, or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.6.15), 9-27-82; Ord. No. 96-50, § 1, 10-28-96; Ord. No. 2005-21, § 2, 8-22-05) 
Sec. 25-51. - Recreational vehicle parking and storage. 
    No recreational vehicle may be parked on any street or alley of the village after 10:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m. (prevailing local time). No recreational vehicle may be stored or parked on private property within a residentially zoned area unless such vehicle is wholly located within the lot lines of the private property and at such location and on a parking surface composed of an asphalt or concrete pad wholly encompassing the area underneath the vehicle and located in compliance with applicable zoning code provisions. 
    For the purposes of this section, "recreational vehicles" includes, but is not limited to, every camping trailer, motorhome, mini-motorhome, travel trailer, truck camper, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile, snowmobile trailer or van camper or any other vehicle including air, land or watercraft used primarily for recreational purposes and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial business. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 1-12-98) 
Sec. 25-52. - Special event permit parking. 
(a)  Special event parking prohibitions are hereby established by the corporate authorities specific to each event. Upon designation of date, time and location for special events, signs shall be posted indicating the parking area is limited to special event permits only. 
(b)  It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street, public alley or portion thereof at any time special event parking prohibitions have been established by postings which have been placed identifying such restriction unless pursuant to a special event parking permit issued by the chief of police or his designee. Special event parking permits shall be placed upon the vehicle in an area identified by the chief of police or his designee and displayed for the duration of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, § 2, 4-26-04) 
Sec. 25-53. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be parked or stored on any residential zoning lot unless placed on a parking surface composed of asphalt or concrete wholly encompassing the area underneath the vehicle. Parking surfaces not a part of an approved driveway may not be located within the front yard of any residential lot. 
(b)  Vehicles may not be parked or stored upon grass, dirt, gravel, parkways where curbs are present, sidewalks or in violation of the provisions of the Crete Zoning Ordinance [chapter 28]. 
(c)  "Approved driveway" includes those gravel driveways governed by article III, Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses, of the Crete Zoning Ordinance. The existence of an approved zoning variance as shown by an ordinance shall be a defense to a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-31, § 2, 8-14-06) 
Secs. 25-54-25-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SNOWMOBILES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01, repealed §§ 25-67-25-69, 25-71, 25-73, 25-75-25-89, derived from Ord. No. 812, art. II, § 2, and art. V, §§ 5-18, 20, 23, 24, adopted Nov. 25, 1979; and Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.13.2)-(4.13.4), adopted Sept. 27, 1982. Such provisions pertained to the operation of snowmobiles. 
State Law reference- Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, 625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq.; municipal ordinances regulating snowmobiles, 625 ILCS 40/7-1. 

Sec. 25-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dedicated snowmobile route shall mean a route within the corporate limits of the village that has been specifically dedicated by the board of trustees. 
    Operate shall mean to ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control the operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the snowmobile is under way. 
    Operator shall mean every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
    Owner shall mean a person, other than a lien holder, having title to a snowmobile (the term includes a person entitled to the use or possession of a snowmobile subject to an interest in another person, reserved or created by agreement and securing payment or performance of an obligation, but the term excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security). 
    Snowmobile shall mean a self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by skis or runners and supported in part by skis, belts or cleats. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.13.1), 9-27-82) 
Secs. 25-67-25-71. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's footnote to art. III. 
Sec. 25-72. - Snowmobile routes. 
    The use of the snowmobile is permitted only on the snowmobile routes designated below: 
Beckwith Lane. 
Columbia Street, from Vincennes Avenue to Farm Street. 
Farm Street at the end of the village limits to spread into the fields. 
All of Wood Street to Herman. 
Herman Street. 
Lincolnshire from Beckwith Lane to Richton Road. 
Lincolnshire East from Ronald Road to Richton Road. 
Ronald Road. 
Richton Road. 
Swiss Valley, from State Street to Richton Road. 
State Street. 
Vincennes Avenue. 
Wood Street. 
First Street. 
    Snowmobiles shall not be used or operated upon any public road or highway in the village except roads or highways designated as snowmobile routes. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.13.4), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate snowmobile routes, ILCS 40/5-2. 
Sec. 25-73. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's footnote to art. III. 
Sec. 25-74. - Racing. 
    No person shall engage in any race on any roadway within the corporate limits of the village. The term "race" shall mean the act of two or more individuals competing or racing on any street or highway in a situation in which one of the snowmobiles is beside or to the rear of a snowmobile operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking him, either by acceleration or maneuver or one or more individuals competing in a race against time on any street or roadway within the corporate limits of the village. 
(Ord. No. 812, Art. V, § 4, 11-26-79) 
Secs. 25-75-25-89. - Reserved. 
Note- See the editor's footnote to art. III. 
Sec. 25-90. - Operation on private property. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile on private property, without the written or verbal consent of the owner or lessee thereof. Any person operating a snowmobile upon lands of another shall stop and identify himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly authorized representative, and, if requested to do so by the landowner, shall promptly remove the snowmobile from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 858, § 1(4.13.4), 9-27-82) 
State Law reference- Operation on private property, 625 ILCS 40/5-1. 
Editor's note- Formerly, §§ 25-101-25-112, comprised an art. IV, Abandoned vehicles, towing, etc., derived from Ord. No. 85-3, § 1(4.11.1)-(4.11.7.2), (4.11.9), (4.11.10), adopted Mar. 11, 1985. Such provisions were repealed by Ord. No. 2001-02, § 4, adopted Jan. 8, 01. Former §§ 25-91-25-100 were nonsubstantive. 
Secs. 25-91-25-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING AND ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE 

Sec. 25-100. - Administrative composition. 
    The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall provide for a compliance administrator, hearing officer, computer operator/system coordinator and hearing room personnel (deputy), with the power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Compliance administrator: Shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to: 
a.  Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s). 
b.  Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance violation notices and other notices as may be required under this article or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this article. 
c.  Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability. 
d.  Conduct hearings, as a hearing officer with the same power and authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the appointed hearing officer. 
e.  Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s) verifying that the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability was issued in accordance with this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3. 
f.  Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this article, hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5. 
g.  Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notices of impending impoundment or validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension, in an administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of this article, hereinafter set forth. 
h.  Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created. 
i.  Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the circuit court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf of this village in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by current law. 
j.  To select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this article, hereinafter set forth. 
(2)  Hearing officer: Shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to: 
a.  Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the adjudicator. 
b.  Administer oaths. 
c.  Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production of relevant papers or documentation. 
d.  Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) as are established in section 25-107 hereof. 
e.  Make final determination of: 
1.  Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation(s) liability. 
2.  Validity of notice of impending impoundment. 
3.  Validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension in accordance with the provisions of this article, herein after set forth. 
f.  Provide for the accurate recording of the administrative adjudication hearing(s). 
(3)  System coordinator/computer operator: Are hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the administrative adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis, including but not limited to: 
a.  Input of violation notice information. 
b.  Hearing date(s) and notice dates. 
c.  Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s). 
d.  Issue payment receipts. 
e.  Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of liability, notice of impending impoundment, and notice of impending drivers license suspension, as directed by the compliance administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
f.  Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid. 
(4)  Hearing room personnel: Are hereby authorized and directed to: 
a.  Maintain hearing room decorum. 
b.  Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom bailiffs of the circuit court. 
c.  Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer or compliance administrator. 
d.  This position is limited to off-duty, full-time, part-time or auxiliary police officers. 
(5)  Appointments: The village president is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill the requirements of one or more of the above-stated positions. 
(6)  Compensation: To be paid for each of the above-stated positions shall be as determined by the village president and approved by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-101. - Procedure. 
    The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in accordance with the following procedures and final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice of impending impoundment, validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension, impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in accordance with the provisions set forth below: 
(1)  Violation notice. Vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) ("violation notice"(s)) shall be issued by the person(s) authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set forth. 
(2)  Authorization. All full-time, part-time, auxiliary police and code enforcement officers, as well as, other specifically appointed individuals shall have the authority to issue violation(s) notices. 
(3)  Detection of violations. Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation(s) notices and who detects a violation of any section of any applicable municipal ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth. 
(4)  The vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation "violation notice" shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance). 
b.  The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated. 
c.  Vehicle make and state registration number. 
d.  The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment. 
e.  The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice. 
f.  A section entitled, "Request for Hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by: 
1.  Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly identified, "request for hearing". 
2.  Placing his/her name and current address in the place provided. 
3.  Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place. 
4.  Filing the violation notice with the "request for hearing" portion fully completed; with the compliance administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the compliance administrator. 
g.  The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the violation may be contested on its merits. 
h.  That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty shall operate as a final disposition of the violation. 
i.  A section entitled, "Nonresident Request for Hearing Nonappearance", which clearly sets forth that a nonresident registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice without personally appearing by: 
1.  Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly identified, "nonresident request for hearing nonappearance". 
2.  Placing his/her name and current address in the place provided. 
3.  Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place. 
4.  Filing the violation notice with the "nonresident request for hearing" portion fully completed, with the compliance administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the compliance administrator. 
5.  Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the compliance administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed, if post marked by the due dates herein specified. 
6.  A clearly marked statement that execution of the nonresident request for hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to a personal appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized statement of facts submitted by the nonresident and the facts contained in the violation(s) notice(s). 
(5)  Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the person issuing such notice by: 
a.  Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle; or 
b.  Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the vehicle, if present. 
(6)  The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by: 
a.  Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service; or 
b.  In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the compliance administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her control. 
(7)  The original or a facsimile of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be retained by the compliance administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business. 
(8)  Prima facia evidence of correctness. Any violation(s) notice(s) issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facia correct and shall be prima facia evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. 
(9)  Admissibility. The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-102. - Administrative hearings. 
    An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits: 
(1)  Shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the "cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, or the lessee of the "cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  Hearing dates. Shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in the violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices issued in accordance with this article. Violators shall be given no less than three opportunities to appear and failure to appear by the third scheduled hearing date will result in a "final determination of liability" as hereinafter set forth. 
(3)  Shall be tape recorded. 
(4)  Shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall consider testimony and other evidence without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance with section 25-107 hereof. 
(5)  Representation by attorney. Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing, parking, or compliance violation on it's merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. 
(6)  Review. The final determination of any matter which may be decided by the hearing officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-103. - Additional notices. 
    Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), or upon final determination of violation liability, the compliance administrator shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which: 
(1)  Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State. 
(2)  Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease. 
(3)  Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid. 
(4)  Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States Mail. 
(5)  The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following sequence and contain, but not be limited to the following information: 
a.  Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), additional notice(s) shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to the following information: 
1.  Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s). 
2.  Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated. 
3.  Vehicle make and state registration. 
4.  Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment. 
5.  Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current status, other than paid in full. 
6.  Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on it's merits. 
7.  Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on it's merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability for the "cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated. 
8.  Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s) liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the municipality. 
b.  A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be sent following an appearance by the violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to appear by the violator by the third and final hearing date upon conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to the following information and warnings: 
1.  A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the municipality. 
2.  A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the municipality within the time specified may result in the municipality's filing a complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference. 
3.  A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the municipality may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations. 
4.  A warning that the person's drivers license may be suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking violations under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference. 
c.  A notice of impending suspension of a person's drivers license shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s): 
1.  The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in the municipality's notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 incorporated herein by reference. 
2.  The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-104. - Final determination of liability. 
    A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall: 
(1)  Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth; or 
(2)  Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third and final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall become final. 
a.  Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or 
b.  Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a filing having been made. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-105. - Administrative review. 
    A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be filed in the office of the compliance administrator within, but not later than, 14 days from the date the determination of liability is made. 
(2)  The compliance administrator shall act upon the petition(s) timely filed and render a decision thereon within 14 days of the date filed. 
(3)  The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be limited to the following: 
a.  The person against whom the determination of liability is made was not the owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) were issued. 
b.  The person's having paid the fine or penalty prior to the determination of liability for the violation(s) in question. 
c.  Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
(4)  Should the determination of liability be set aside, the compliance administrator shall: 
a.  Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that the determination of liability has been set aside. 
b.  Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which determination of liability has been set aside. 
c.  Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of liability. 
d.  Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice(s) are deposited in the United States Mail. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-106. - Nonresident procedures. 
    Nonresidents of this municipality who have been served vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in accordance with this article, may contest the alleged violation on its merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally appearing at an administrative hearing by: 
(1)  Completing, in full, the "nonresident request for hearing" section of the violation notice, served upon him/her pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space specified in the violation notice, and acknowledging that his/her personal appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement filed by him/her and the facts contained in the violation notice. 
(3)  Filing the violation notice with the "request for hearing" section fully completed with the compliance administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the compliance administrator. 
(4)  Filing a notarized a statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the compliance administrator postmarked within ten days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the compliance administrator. The acceptance of a "nonresident request for hearing" after the due date or with cause, at the discretion of the compliance administrator, be accepted for hearing consideration and decision. 
(5)  The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is contained in the violation notice. 
(6)  Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted. 
(7)  Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States Mail. 
(8)  All other provisions of this article shall apply equally to nonresidents of this municipality. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-107. - Schedule of fines/penalties. 
(a)  The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) shall be as follows: 
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE 
Fine Schedule General Fine Amount Handicapped Fine Amount Traffic 
Compliance Step 1 Upon service of a "Violation Notice" issued and paid prior to the commencement of the 1 st Hearing Date, the fine amount will be: $50.00 $250.00 $50.00 Step 2 Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 1 prior to or to the 1 st Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid prior to the 2 nd Hearing Date will be: $100.00 $250.00 $100.00 Step 3 Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 2 prior to the 2 nd Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid on the 2 nd Hearing Date or prior to the 3 rd Hearing Date will be: $200.00 $250.00 $200.00 Step 4 Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 3 prior to the 3 rd Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid on the 3 rd Hearing Date or upon the finding of Liability for the violation, after failure to appear at the 3 rd Hearing, will be: $250.00 $250.00 $250.00  
(b)  The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied for each violation of any applicable municipal ordinance. 
(c)  The municipality adopts by reference all current and future local standing, parking or condition of vehicle ordinances, and those provisions of the Illinois Complied Statues governing the standing, parking, or condition of vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the geographical boundaries of the municipality and in those areas subject to off-street parking agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-108. - Certified report and contesting certified report. 
(a)  Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the municipality after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for ten or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the compliance administrator shall make a certified report to the Secretary of State stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the municipality as a result of ten or more violations of municipal vehicular standing or parking regulations and thereby cause the suspension of that person's driver's license. 
(b)  The compliance administrator shall take no further action unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the municipality are paid or upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in error. At such time, the compliance administrator shall submit to the Secretary of State a notification which shall result in the halting of a driver's license suspension proceedings. The person named therein shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no charge. 
(c)  Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by completing a form provided by the office of the compliance administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  The person was neither the owner, nor the lessee of the vehicle (so receiving ten or more violation notices on the date or dates such notices were issued; or 
(2)  The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten or more violations indicated on the certified report. 
(d)  The compliance administrator shall render a determination within 14 business days of receipt of the objection form and shall notify the objector of the determination. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-109. - Immobilization/towing and impoundment. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable for five or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and impounded if: 
(1)  The compliance administrator has determined that a person has been determined to be liable for five or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines or penalties for which remain unpaid. 
(2)  The person determined to be liable for five or more violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the municipality geographical boundaries. 
(3)  A pre-towing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the municipality which contains, but shall not be limited to the following: 
a.  That a final determination has been made on five or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines and penalties for which remain unpaid. 
b.  A listing of the violation(s) for which the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation: 
1.  The vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice number. 
2.  Date of issuance. 
3.  Total amount of fine(s) and penalty(s) assessed. 
c.  That the motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and located within the municipality is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and penalties are not paid within 14 days of the date of the notice. 
d.  That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of one notice and by filing the request for hearing with the compliance administrator within, but not later than 14 days of the date of the notice. 
The request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the compliance administrator. 
(4)  The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the compliance administrator to contest the validity of the notice. 
(5)  Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment, the compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of said notice, by disproving liability for the unpaid final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability listed on the notice, on the next available hearing date, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 60 days after the request for hearing is filed. 
a.  The compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner. 
b.  Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing. 
c.  Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States Mail. 
(b)  The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and impounded under this section, shall have the right to a prompt administrative hearing without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties for which final determination has been made. 
(1)  The compliance administrator shall serve a post-towing notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded under this section which notice shall contain, but not be limited to the following information: 
a.  Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment. 
b.  Location of vehicle. 
c.  That the vehicle was immobilized under this section of this article for nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for the violation of five or more violation(s) of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation(s) for which the registered owner has been determined liable and notified of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment. 
d.  Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment. 
e.  That the registered owner may contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the request for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the compliance administrator within, but not later than, 14 days of the date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the compliance administrator. 
(2)  Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next available hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the compliance administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 60 days after the request for hearing is filed. 
a.  The compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner. 
b.  Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing. 
c.  Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States Mail. 
(3)  An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative decision within the meaning of 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of the fines and penalties due and owing the municipality as specified in the notice sent in accordance with subsection 25-109(3) hereof and the payment of towing charges and accrued daily impound charges or upon order of the hearing officer following hearing contesting the validity of the impoundment. 
(d)  The compliance administrator shall appoint or retain the services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance herewith, provided: 
(1)  The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to local and state law. 
(2)  The individual, agency or company is fully insured. 
(3)  The individual, agency or company has available a secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of this section a secured area shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chain-link or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-110. - Judicial review. 
    Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) and final administrative decisions issued after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and impoundment made under this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as is set forth in 735 ILCS 5/301, et seq. incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-111. - Debt to municipality. 
    Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this article and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created under this article and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition of that violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Sec. 25-112 - Judgment. 
(a)  The compliance administrator shall, following the expiration of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for a final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s), execute all required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect moneys from the person(s) who have been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a debt due and owing the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 by: 
(1)  Filing a complaint in the circuit court paying for the entry of a judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been made. 
(2)  The complaint filed by the compliance administrator or individual or agency on behalf of the municipality seeking entry of a judgment against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) shall have appended: 
a.  A certified copy of the final determination of the standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s). 
b.  A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) was issued in accordance with this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3. 
(3)  Nothing shall prevent the municipality from consolidating multiple final determinations of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability in an action in the circuit court against an individual. 
(4)  Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money judgments. 
(b)  Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of this article by any method provided under 735 ILCS 5/2-203, incorporated by reference, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided the total amount of fines and penalties for final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed $2,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-53, § 2, 7-27-09) 
Secs. 25-113-25-140. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12; traffic, ch. 25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 26-21. - Definition. 
    The term "taxicab" as used in this article shall mean any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire which does not operate on a fixed route. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.45.2) 
Sec. 26-22. - Business license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the village without first having secured a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk, and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the intended place of business and the number of cabs to be operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the president and secretary thereof shall be given. 
(b)  No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character, nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be ineligible for a license. 
(c)  The annual fee for such a license shall be an amount as listed in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 26-22 for each taxicab operated. Whenever the number of taxicabs operated shall be increased during the license year, the licensee shall notify the village clerk of such change and shall pay the additional license fee. Such fee shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by ordinances and the village clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of cabs covered by each license. Such tag or sticker shall be displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab while it is in use, and may be transferred to any taxicab put into service to replace a vehicle withdrawn from service. 
(d)  The license shall notify the village clerk of the motor number and state license number of each cab operated and of the corresponding municipal tag or sticker number. 
(Code 1965, §§ 2.2.45.1-2.2.45.3-2.2.45.5; Ord. No. 801, § 1, 4-28-80) 
Sec. 26-23. - Insurance. 
    No taxicab shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or public liability insurance policy providing the following minimum amounts of coverage: 
(1)  $100,000.00 for injuries to, or death of any one person; 
(2)  $300,000.00 for personal injuries or death arising out of any one occurrence; 
(3)  $50,000.00 for damage to property. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.45.7; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 26-24. - Vehicles. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license plate. No taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, and windshield wiper in good condition. The chief of police may inspect every taxicab so often as may be necessary to enforce this section. 
(b)  Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side, in letters readable from a distance of 20 feet, the name of the licensee operating it. If more than one vehicle is operated by the licensee vehicle cab shall be designated by a different number, and such number also shall so appear on each side of such cab. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.45.5) 
Sec. 26-25. - Obedience to traffic rules. 
    It shall be the duty of every driver of a taxicab to obey all traffic rules established by statute or ordinance. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.45.8) 
Sec. 26-26. - Passengers generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person is not intoxicated and conducts himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger. The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the cab. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.45.10) 
Sec. 26-27. - Rates of fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination of a trip. Rates of fare shall be such as are approved from time to time by the president and board of trustees of the village. No extra charge shall be made for baggage or parcels the size of which permits them to be carried in the cab. 
(Code 1965, § 2.2.45.11) 
Chapter 27 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fees and fines schedule, § 2-301; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; plumbing code, § 6-126 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 11; water pollution or obstruction of water supply, § 13-13; water supply and sewage disposal in subdivisions, §§ 23-113 et seq., 23-134 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Waterworks and sewerage system combined; department of public works established. 
(a)  [Combined waterworks and sewerage system; department of public works.] 
(1)  The existing waterworks system of the village and the existing sanitary sewerage system of the village are combined into a single utility known and designed as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village. Except as otherwise hereinafter provided to the contrary, all property comprising the existing waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system of the village shall constitute the properties of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village. 
(2)  There is also established a department of public works to operate and maintain said combined system together with other assigned duties regarding public buildings and infrastructure. The superintendent of public works shall be appointed annually by the village president with the consent of the board of trustees and shall be responsible for the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village. The superintendent of public works shall have all powers to hire and terminate employees of the public works department, have responsibility for the preparation and implementation of the public works department budget and be responsible for the efficient operation of the public works department within budgetary constraints. The superintendent of public works shall further oversee all public works including construction and maintenance of roads, sanitary and storm sewers, public owned storm detention and retention, and construction and maintenance of public buildings, structures and facilities. 
(b)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided to the contrary, the existing waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system are owned and operated by the village as a combined utility, known as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village, and all improvements and extensions to such waterworks or sewerage system, either or both, shall be considered as improvements and extensions to the combined utility; all the properties, assets, obligations and liabilities, of all kinds, of said waterworks system and of the sanitary sewerage system, existing, outstanding and accruing or to accrue, except as otherwise hereinafter provided to the contrary (please refer to subparagraph (c) hereinafter), shall be held, used, confessed and acknowledged as the properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of the combined utility. 
(c)  The cost of all periodic repair and maintenance of each and every water and sewerage system connection or "tap-in" shall be borne solely and exclusively by the "connecting party" or "property owner," as the case may be. The duty of payment for all repair and maintenance costs shall extend to the whole of each water and or sewerage extension as provided hereinafter without exception for either the reason or cause of repair or the fact that all or any portion of the user's extension may be within village property or property deemed to be within an easement or right-of-way belonging to the village. As used in this subparagraph, the phraseology "user's extension" shall, in the case of water connection or "tap-in", refer to the whole of the extension from the village's interceptor or "buffalo box" to the connecting party's or property owner's house or other end use exclusive of the village's "water meter," or metering device. In the case of a sewerage connection or "tap-in," the phraseology "user's extension" shall refer to the whole of the extension from the village's lateral or "trunk line" to the connecting party's or property owner's house or other end use. 
(Code 1965, §§ 7.1.1-7.1.3; Ord. No. 89-25, § 1, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 2003-30, § 2, 8-25-03) 
Sec. 27-2. - Inspections. 
    Employees of the waterworks and sewerage system of the village shall have the right at all times of access to any premises served by the system. Any person refusing to permit any employees of the waterworks and sewerage system to inspect his premises shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.13) 
Sec. 27-3. - Connections generally. 
(a)  No connection shall be made with the combined waterworks and sewerage system without a permit from the village clerk. Any connection or opening made with the waterworks and sewerage system which is in any manner different from the mode prescribed for such opening or connection shall be unlawful. 
(b)  The village clerk is hereby authorized to grant such permits as he may deem proper, allowing persons to connect to the village's waterworks and sewage systems. The charge for tapping the village's waterwork mains and connecting therewith shall be an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-3 for each "tap-in" and connection. For such charge, the village shall furnish the meter and "readout" meter. All costs and fees incurred as and for labor and materials required as part of the construction and installation of the "tap" and connection shall be at the expense of the property owner. All such "tap-ins" and connections shall be provided and constructed in a manner prescribed by the president and board of trustees as administered by the department of public works of the village. The permit fee for connection to the village's sewer system shall be an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-3. The property owner and/or applicant involved in each such connection shall pay any and all fees and costs for labor and materials required in connection with the installation of sewer service from the village's sewer main to the property line. All such labor and materials shall be performed and sewer services shall be constructed in the manner prescribed by the president and board of trustees as administered by the department of public works of the village. All such construction and installation work must be inspected and approved by the department of public works. The connection charge and permit fee described hereinbefore shall be paid into the village's waterworks and sewage fund. 
(Code 1965, §§ 7.2.10, 7.2.11; Ord. No. 85-14, § 1, 10-14-85; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Sec. 27-4. - Special charges for extensions. 
(a)  When the village pays the cost of constructing new water main extensions or sewer main extension to furnish new service or when it is expressly understood by a separate special agreement that the costs of such water or sewer main construction are to be assumed by another person, there shall be imposed on all users connecting to the water or sewer main extension an additional charge equivalent to the pro-rata share of the cost of installing said extension. Such charge shall be computed by dividing the actual cost of all pipes, fittings, and other material used, the cost of all labor in and about constructing the extension, including engineering costs allocable to the extension by the total number of front feet abutting the extension. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.15) 
(b)  In circumstances not contemplated by subsection (a) in which potential users will be limited, and/or where the extension of water lines will affect an expansion of the water system as a whole, or where larger piping than the normally used piping is utilized, or where a new water storage tank is constructed to serve areas not, or which were only partially served prior to the installation of the improvements, or for other good and valid purposes or reasons which, if not considered, would result in unrealistic or inequitable additional charges, or where any combination of the above factors shall exist, the president and board of trustees may by resolution adopt additional charges contrary to the provisions of subsection (a). 
(c)  In order to implement subsection (b), the president shall appoint a committee consisting of two village trustees and the village engineer to consider such special circumstances as may obtain and to report its findings and recommendations within 60 days of its appointment to the board of trustees, which report shall be in writing. A resolution shall then be presented to determine whether or not the report and the recommendations contained therein shall be adopted. If the resolution shall be approved, the schedule of fees on the described area shall become immediately in full force and effect. 
(d)  All such special charges shall be placed in a special bank account and shall be recorded in a special book of account to be set up and maintained by the village, which book of accounts shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times. Funds so collected and deposited shall be disbursed on November 1 each year until the village or such person constructing the extension under special agreement has been reimbursed for 85 percent of the entire cost paid by it for such extension, or until ten years has elapsed, whichever shall occur first. All rights, title and interest for such extensions within the corporate limits of the village, including easements and rights-of-way, shall remain vested in the village. 
(Code 1965, §§ 7.2.15, 7.2.16; Ord. No. 746, § 7.2.15a, 5-10-76) 
Sec. 27-5. - Read-out meters. 
    Water service connections shall not be authorized, nor a certificate of occupancy delivered to the owner or user of any premises which will utilize the village's water service unless such premises shall have installed a read-out meter. This provision shall also apply to subdivisions and parcels of land outside the corporate limits which, pursuant to agreement between the owner or developer of same and the village, will receive water service from the village. As used in this section the term "readout meter" shall mean a relay meter, relaying for outside vision or inspection by a water meter reader employee of the village for billing purposes, the readings of the principal water meter of the premises upon which it is installed. The cost to the user for the installation of a read-out meter shall be established at $20.00 if such installation is requested by a user. 
(Code 1965, §§ 7.2.1, 7.2.12; Ord. No. 614, § 1, 10-17-67; Ord. No. 83-11, § 1, 8-22-83) 
Sec. 27-6. - Rules and regulations. 
    The president and board of trustees are hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations consistent with this chapter for the connections to the waterworks and sewerage system, specifying the types and size of pipes and all the other appurtenances and extensions thereto, and amend the same from time to time as may be deemed necessary. All service pipes and connections to the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall comply with the said specifications and rules. Any person, firm or corporation not complying with the specifications and rules for connections to the waterworks and sewerage system shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.12) 
Sec. 27-7. - Collection and handling of funds. 
(a)  The village collector shall render bills for service from the combined water and sewerage system and all other charges in connection therewith and collect all moneys due thereon. 
(b)  All moneys derived from the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be held by the collector separate and apart from all other funds of the village and shall be delivered to the village treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the same or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the president and board of trustees. 
(c)  The village treasurer shall receive all such moneys and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage fund" of the village. The treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by law. 
(d)  The village clerk shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made by an independent auditing concern an audit of the books, to show the receipts and disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system. 
(Code 1965, §§ 7.2.6-7.2.9) 
Sec. 27-8. - Altering water lines so as to prevent metering of water; tampering, etc., with meters, pipes, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or anyone acting at the instance of or in collusion with any person to dismantle, alter or change in any way whatsoever, the water line, or any portion thereof, used in connecting any facility served by village water services when it is reasonably foreseeable that such act may prevent the metering of water services relating to the facility. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person or anyone acting at the instance of or in collusion with any person to alter, change, tamper, turn on or turn off or operate a water control valve (buffalo box) without written authorization by either the director of public works or the building inspector. The owner and/or resident of a property benefited by an unlawful act committed in violation of this subsection (a)(1) shall be subject to penalties for violations of this subsection as if the violation had been committed by the owner and/or resident personally. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or anyone acting at the instance of or in collusion with any person to disconnect a water line or lines from any water metering device or to damage, destroy or remove any water metering device or to damage, destroy or remove any water metering device or "readout" meter providing metering of water services to any facility served by the village water services. 
(c)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $75.00 nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (d) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(d)  Any person accused of a violation of this section may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 84-22, § 1(7.2.21), 11-26-84; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 2, 4-23-12) 
Sec. 27-9. - Smoke testing of sewer system. 
(a)  The village public works department is hereby authorized and directed to smoke test all or various portions of the village's sanitary sewer system following the issuance of notice as provided in subsection (b). The costs and expenses of the smoke testing shall be passed through to and charged against each sewer user in the form of an additional quarterly charge as shown in chapter 2, article V, to the right of the reference to section 27-9. 
(b)  The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish and mail notices in substantially the following form: 
Notice of Smoke Testing 
of Public Sewer 
Within the Village of Crete 
    Notice is hereby given that ten days after the date of this notice, the village's public works department will conduct a smoke test of all or various portions of the village's public sewer system by introducing into said system a pungent, thick smoke produced by one or more smoke machines. The public is hereby notified that smoke used in said tests may appear from various residential connections. The appearance of smoke in residential connections may denote an illegal connection, which will require ordinance compliance on the part of the particular property owner. The public is requested to fully cooperate with various officials and employees of the village's public works department so as to minimize the village's cost while achieving the overall purposes of this particular test. 
    By authority of the president and board of trustees of the Village of Crete, Will County, Illinois. 
Dated: This _______ day of _______, 1990. 
/s/   
      Village Clerk 
      of Village of Crete   Such notice shall be given (by publication) in the Crete Record once, not less than ten days prior to the beginning of all or any portion of the testing and (by mail) to each person owning a lot or parcel within any particular affected area not less than ten days prior to the testing of the particular area of sanitary sewer. 
(c)  The village public works departments is further hereby authorized and directed to perform any and all additional inspections, repairs, and tests, including, but not limited to videotaping, relining and dye testing to determine points of unlawful connections or infiltration or inadequate, misfunctioning or unauthorized connections or infiltration to the sanitary sewer system. Costs and expenses shall be funded pursuant to the charge described in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 90-24, §§ 1, 2, 8-27-90; Ord. No. 2005-30, § 3, 7-25-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90-24, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 27, 1990, enacted provisions pertaining to smoke testing of the village sewer system. Such provisions, previously and inadvertently omitted, have been included by the editor and designated as § 27-9. 
Secs. 27-10-27-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Waste water service charges, § 27-51 et. seq., billing and collection of sewage service charges, § 21-61 et seq. 

Sec. 27-21. - Free service prohibited. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the village's combined water and sewerage system. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.3) 
Sec. 27-22. - Within corporate limits. 
(a)  The following shall be the rates and charges for water and/or sewer service supplied by the village for premises located within the corporate limits based upon the amount of water consumed as shown by water meters: 
(1)  For users of combined water and sewerage service, the rate to be charged is as shown in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-22. 
(2)  For users of water only, the rate to be charged is as shown in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-22. 
(3)  For users of only sewerage system: 
a.  Each single-family unit or single residential premises shall pay an amount as listed in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-22. 
b.  Commercial and industrial users shall contract individually with the village based on rates to be established based on the volume and nature of the effluent or other pertinent considerations or an amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-22. 
(b)  Further, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) providing for water usage rates, each water account will be charged a flat fee of $4.00 per month for the purpose of construction and maintenance of iron removal processing. Where water is supplied through a common meter serving multiple residential units, including, but not limited to, apartments, house trailers, mobile homes in trailer parks, multifamily structures of four units or more, nursing homes, hotels, motels, hospitals, senior assisted living units, and the like, the flat fee shall be calculated per said units and billed to said account. 
(c)  The rate for water imposed for various uses within the corporate limits during construction periods shall be in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-22. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.1; Ord. No. 645, § 1(7.2.1(a)), 6-28-69; Ord. No. 756, § 1(7.2.1(b)-7.2.1(d)), 1-10-77; Ord. No. 83-11, § 1, 8-22-83; Ord. No. 85-10, 8-26-85; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2016-16, § 3, 8-22-16) 
Sec. 27-23. - Outside corporate limits. 
    The president and board of trustees reserve the right to impose special rates and charges for users of the combined waterworks and sewerage system outside the corporate limits which shall be no less than the rates and charges imposed for users within the corporate limits. No such special charges or rates shall, however, operate to reduce the revenues of the combined water and sewerage system so that they shall be insufficient to provide ample funds to meet all requirements of any ordinance authorizing the issue of waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds as long as any of the revenue bonds remain outstanding and unpaid. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.2) 
Sec. 27-24. - Persons liable. 
    The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the village water and/or sewerage service on such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.3) 
Sec. 27-25. - Reading of meters by customers. 
    If a customer of the village's water service is not at the premises served at the time of meter reading, thus preventing the reading of the meter, the village shall cause a self-addressed, postage paid card to be left with the consumer. The consumer in such event shall read the meter himself and forward the same to the municipal building without delay. Should the card not be returned within five days, the village shall bill the consumer in the form of an average billing, taking into account the two previous billings experienced by the consumer and prorating the same to secure an average figure. At the next billing period an adjustment will be effected. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.1; Ord. No. 83-11, § 1, 8-22-83) 
Sec. 27-26. - Billing, due date, etc. 
    All bills for the village's water and sewer service shall be rendered quarterly as of the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed. All bills are payable not later than the close of business on the fifteenth day of the month the bill is received. A penalty of five percent is added to all bills not timely paid. Notice of disconnection as provided in section 27-28 shall be mailed for all bills not timely paid. When the fifteenth day of the month is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, bills may be paid on the next following day. 
(Code 1965, §§ 7.2.1, 7.2.3; Ord. No. 83-11, § 1, 8-22-83; Ord. No. 2003-58, § 1, 12-8-03) 
Sec. 27-27. - Lien for unpaid bills. 
    The charges for service from the village's combined water and sewerage system are not paid within 25 days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which service is supplied. The village clerk shall file from time to time as directed by the president and board of trustees, sworn, detailed statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the county recorder of deeds, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien for payment of the service rendered. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.4) 
Sec. 27-28. - Termination of service for nonpayment. 
    If the rates or charges for service from the village's combined water and sewerage system are not paid within 15 days after rendition of the bill for such services, the village clerk shall notify in writing the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service that such delinquency exists and that services shall be discontinued without further notice. Upon the disconnection of any service, a charge in the amount as set forth in article V of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 27-28 shall be made for reconnecting the same after settlement of the delinquent account. 
(Code 1965, § 7.2.5; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2003-58, § 1, 12-8-03) 
Secs. 27-29-27-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- With the concurrence of the village, Ord. No. 817, Arts. I-VII, adopted Feb. 25, 1980, and Ord. No. 818, Arts. I, III, adopted May 10, 1980, together with Appendix I thereto, have been included herein as art. III, Sewers, §§ 27-36, 27-41-27-47, 27-51-27-55, 27-61-27-69. Appendix 2 to Ord. No. 817, containing permit forms, has been omitted from codification, but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the village clerk and the superintendent of the department of public works. 
Cross reference- Ordinances specifically saved from repeal, see the adopting ordinance, page vii, the fifth paragraph, subsection (a), and § 1-3(14), of this Code. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-36. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Administrator means the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Approving authority means the _______ of the _______. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and ground-water drainage. 
    Director means the director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Effluent criteria are [as] defined in any applicable NPDES permit. 
    Federal act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500) and P.L. 93-243). 
    Federal grant shall mean the U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the act and implementing regulations. 
    Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial waste shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Major contributing industry shall mean an industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: 
(1)  Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday; or 
(2)  Has a flow greater than ten percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or 
(3)  Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or 
(4)  Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works. 
    May is permissive (see "shall"). 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) shall mean a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater analyses. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    NPDES permit means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the federal act. 
    Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard Methods". 
    Population equivalent is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound of BOD and 2.2 pounds of suspended solids. 
    ppm shall mean parts per million by weight. 
    Pretreatment shall mean the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the Village of Crete, Will County, Illinois. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary (or combined sewer system), even though those sewers may not have been constructed with village funds. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage is used interchangeably with "wastewater". 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage. 
    Sewerage shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory (see "may"). 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard methods shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    State act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970. 
    State grant shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois. 
    Storm sewer shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Stormwater runoff shall mean that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods". 
    Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    User class shall mean the type of user either residential or commercial (nonindustrial) or industrial as defined herein. 
    Industrial user shall mean any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A-Agriculture, forestry, and fishing. 
(2)  Division B-Mining. 
(3)  Division D-Manufacturing. 
(4)  Division E-Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services. 
(5)  Division I-Services. 
    Residential or commercial or nonindustrial user, shall mean any user of the treatment works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user. 
    Village means the Village of Crete, Will County, Illinois. 
    Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse. 
    Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or pollution control plant". 
    Water quality standards are [as] defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois. 
    Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 817, App. 1, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 818, App. 1, 3-10-80) 
Secs. 27-37-27-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 27-41. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  Unlawful deposits on property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  Unlawful discharges into natural outlets. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(c)  Septic tanks, cesspools, etc. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  Connection to public sewers. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary for combined sewer of the village is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so. 
(Ord. No. 817, Art. I (§§ 1-4), 2-25-80) 
Sec. 27-42. - Private sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  When use allowed. Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the provisions of section 27-41(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permit required, application, fee. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the county health department and the village. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village and the Will County Health Department, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the village or the county health department. A permit inspection fee of $15.00 shall be paid to the village at the time the application if filed. 
(c)  When permit effective; inspections. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village and the county health department. They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Village of Crete and the Will County Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of written notice by the Village of Crete and the Will County Health Department. 
(d)  Compliance with all regulations required. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system not in compliance with the Will County Sewage Treatment and Disposal Ordinance. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  Abandonment of system upon availability of public sewer. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 27-41(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  Operation and maintenance. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village. 
(g)  Additional requirements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Will County Health Department. 
(h)  Connection to public sewer; closed private system. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to such sewer within 60 days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. No. 817, Art. II(§§ 1-8), 2-25-80) 
Sec. 27-43. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use, alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village. 
(b)  Compliance with discharge standards. All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent state and local standards. 
(c)  Classes of permits; application, fee. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the village building department. A permit and inspection fee of $15.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. 
(d)  Permit issuance. A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. 
(e)  Owner's costs. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(f)  Separate building sewers required, exception. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(g)  Connecting new buildings to old sewers. Old buildings sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the village to meet all requirements of this division. 
(h)  Specifications for construction. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply. 
(i)  Elevation and lifts. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)  Specific drainage connections prohibited. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(k)  Specifications for connection. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent of public works of the village before installation. 
(l)  Supervision of connection required. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent of public works of the village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent of public works of the village. 
(m)  Protection and restoration of excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. 
(Ord. No. 817, Art. III(§§ 1-13), 2-25-80) 
Sec. 27-44. - Regulation of discharges into public sewers. 
(a)  Drainage and process waters prohibited. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Discharge of unpolluted waters. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the engineer of the village. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five point five or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  Industrial cost recovery system required. No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until the village has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which: 
(1)  Meets the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended and applicable federal regulations; and 
(2)  Has been approved by the agency in accordance with the conditions of any grant made to the village or the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or by the State of Illinois for the construction of any part of the sewer system or sewage treatment works of the village or the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District. 
(e)  Harmful discharges limited or prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the engineer of the village and the superintendent of public works of the village that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the engineer of the village and the superintendent of public works of the village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65° (C)); 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65° C); 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourth horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent of public works; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)  Any radio active wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine point five; 
(9)  Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as permitted by the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations; 
(10)  Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations; 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in section 27-36; 
(12)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(f)  Disposition re hazardous or nuisance waste or waters. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (e) above, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128-Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, process, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, or constitute a public nuisance, the village or the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of Division 3 of this article. 
If the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District permits the pretreatment of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Thorn Creek Basin Sanitary District and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(g)  Owner maintenance of pretreatment, etc., facilities. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 817, Art. IV(§§ 1-7), 2-25-80) 
Sec. 27-45. - Protection of sewage works from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charges of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 817, Art. V(§ 1), 2-25-80) 
Sec. 27-46. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Right of entry; inquiry limitations. The superintendent of public works and other duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this division. The superintendent of public works or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  Observance of safety rules; liability. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the superintendent of public works or duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the village employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 27-44(g). 
(c)  Private property easements. The department of public works and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 817, Art. VI(§§ 1-3), 2-25-80) 
Sec. 27-47. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Notice of violation; permit revocation. Any person found to be violating any provision of this division except section 27-45 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this division. 
(b)  Fine; continuing violation. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $500.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Liability of violator. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation. 
(d)  Fine; subsequent violation. Any person found to have been previously in violation of any provision of this division, and thereafter having been deemed to have corrected said violation and thus be in compliance, shall be subject to the following fine schedule upon being found in violation of the same provision: 
(1)  One thousand dollars for a subsequent violation; 
(2)  Five hundred dollars for each day beginning on the 15th day following the date the subsequent violation is found and said violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 817, Art. VII(§§ 1-3), 2-25-80; Ord. No. 2006-18, § 2, 5-22-06) 
Secs. 27-48-27-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Water and sewer rates and charges, § 27-21 et seq. 

Sec. 27-51. - Basis for computation of charges. 
    The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable. 
(1)  The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service of all outstanding bonds by the number of users, usage. Through further divisions, the quarterly debt service charges can be computed. 
(2)  The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters. It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows: 
a.  The estimated projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year, for all works categories. 
b.  Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume. 
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by certified public accountants for the village in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. I(§ 1), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-52. - Measurement of flow. 
    The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of ten gallons. 
(1)  If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person may be required to install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. 
(2)  Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. 
(3)  Metering devices for determining the volume of waste may be required to be installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled, without consent of the village. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. I(§ 2), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-53. - Debt service charge. 
    The debt service charge calculation and rate shall be as established by the village. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. I(§ 3), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-54. - Basic user rate. 
(a)  There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge and a basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village. 
(b)  The calculations and rate for the basic user rate, the excess charge rate and the minimum flat rate charge shall be as established by the village. 
(c)  In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the village to be in excess of the prescribed standard, the village may require such flat rate user to install metering devices, at his own expense, on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. I(§ 4), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-55. - Computation of wastewater service charge. 
    The wastewater service charge is computed by the formula as shall be as established by the village. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. I(§ 5), 3-10-80) 
Secs. 27-56-27-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BILLING AND COLLECTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Water and sewage rates and charges, § 27-21 et seq.; billing, due date, unpaid bills, §§ 27-26, 27-27. 

Sec. 27-61. - Billing. 
(a)  Rates or charges for service shall be payable quarterly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. 
(b)  Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the village collector on the first day of the quarter succeeding the period for which the service is billed. 
(c)  All sewer bills are due and payable 15 days after being sent out. A penalty of five percent shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day after they have been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 1), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-62. - Delinquent bills. 
    If the charges for such services are not paid within 30 days after rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 2), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-63. - Lien; notice of delinquency. 
(a)  Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 105 days for quarterly service after it as been rendered, the village collector shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(b)  If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the village has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address be known to the village collector whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of 105 days for a quarterly bill after it has been rendered. 
(c)  The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 3), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-64. - Foreclosure of lien. 
    Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the village. The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 105 days in the case of a quarterly bill after it has been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 4), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-65. - Revenues. 
(a)  All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage fund. All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the village collector separate and apartment from his private funds and separate and apartment from all other funds of the village, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the village collector not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the president and board of trustees of the village. 
(b)  The village collector shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the "Sewerage Fund of the Village of Crete". The collector shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the Revised Cities and Villages Act, effective January, 1942. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 5), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-66. - Accounts. 
(a)  The village collector shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system. 
(b)  In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including the replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the wastewater cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: 
(1)  Billing data to show total number of gallons billed; 
(2)  Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year; 
(3)  Number of users connected to the system; 
(4)  Number of nonmetered users. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 6), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-67. - Notice of rates. 
    A copy of this article properly certified by the village clerk shall be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Will County, and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage system of the Village of Crete on their properties. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 7), 3-10-80) 
Sec. 27-68. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this division shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to occur or continue. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 8), 3-10-80; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03;Ord. No. 2006-43, § 17, 12-11-06) 
Sec. 27-69. - Access to records. 
    The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions of any state grant. 
(Ord. No. 818, Art. III(§ 9), 3-10-80) 
Secs. 27-70-27-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 27-76-27-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DROUGHT CONDITIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 88-15, § 1, adopted June 27, 1988, added provisions, pertaining to water restrictions during drought conditions, designated as §§ 27-29 and 27-30. For purposes of classification, such provisions have been redesignated by the editor as Div. 2, §§ 27-86 and 27-87, herein set out. 

Sec. 27-86. - Restrictions on water usage. 
(a)  The president and board of trustees of the village (hereinafter referred to collectively as the "village board") may, after due and careful consideration of prevailing weather conditions tending to create drought conditions, upon the passage and approval of a resolution, effectively ban the usage of water by any person, firm or corporation drawing water from the village's municipal water supply for private outdoor usage during times of general drought and when the public interest will be deemed to be served thereby. In this connection, the phraseology "usage of water" shall mean the continued withdrawal of water for outdoor usage from the village's municipal water supply. Such phraseology is not intended to restrict the use or reuse of water for indoor domestic use or uses or general commercial or industrial uses. 
(b)  The village board may ban water usage in one of three different stages depending upon the severity of prevailing weather conditions and the extremity of resulting drought conditions. Usage of water for nonessential outdoor uses shall be restricted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Stage I restrictions. Stage I restrictions shall limit the usage of water to the extent that those who have an even-numbered mailing address shall be allowed to use water for outdoor purposes only on even-numbered days during the period of time in which the village board's Stage I restriction shall be in force and effect. Those village residents having an odd-numbered mailing address shall be allowed to use water for outdoor purposes only on each odd-numbered day during the said ban period. 
(2)  Stage II restrictions. Stage II restrictions shall restrict water usage to the extent provided under a Stage I restriction, but shall further restrict water usage to the extent that such water usage provided for under a Stage I ban shall only be allowed during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. during a Stage II restriction. The determination as to whether a particular day and date shall be considered as an even-or odd-numbered day or date shall be ascertained by reference to the start of the time during which outdoor usage of water is allowed. In this connection, the first "7:00 p.m. hour" shall determine whether the day and the date is considered as even or odd in number. When a Stage II restriction on water usage has been declared, washing of cars or motor vehicles shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Stage III restrictions. Stage III restrictions on water usage shall effectively prohibit the usage of water for any outdoor purposes in its entirety. Exceptions to a Stage III restriction may be granted only by appropriate action of the village board. 
(c)  Exceptions to general restrictions on water usage. During the time during which an official Stage I or Stage II restriction is in effect, an exception to such restriction shall consist of usage of water for outdoor purposes in relation to newly sodded yards or other newly planted landscaping and to water usage required in filling swimming pools and cleaning motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 88-15, § 1, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 95-52, § 2, 10-23-95) 
Sec. 27-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, deleted § 27-87, which pertained to penalties for violation of water restrictions and was derived from Ord. No. 88-15, § 1, adopted June 27, 1988. 
Secs. 27-88-27-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES V-IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 27-101-27-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 27-1001. - Penalty; compromise payment. 
(a)  Unless a section or division provides a specific penalty, whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be (a) guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. 
(Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 17, 12-11-06) 
Chapter 28 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; drainage and flood control, ch. 8; mobile home parks, ch. 14; planning and development, ch. 19; subdivisions, ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Crete Zoning Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 850, Art. 1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-2. - Rules of construction. 
    The following rules shall be observed and applied in the interpretation of this chapter except when the text clearly indicates otherwise. 
(1)  The word "lot" shall include plot and parcel. 
(2)  The words "building and/or structures" shall include all non-living improvements upon the land. 
(3)  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "designed for", "intended for", "occupied for or by", and "maintained for". 
(4)  The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 12.0, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning set forth below, except where otherwise specifically indicated. 
    Abutting: To have a common property line or district line. 
    Accessory building or use: A building or use which: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use. 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served. 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served. 
(4)  Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or potential use served with the single exception of such accessory off street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served. 
    Adjacent: Lying near or in the immediate vicinity. 
    Adjoining: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near. 
    Advertising: See "sign." 
    Aerials or antennas: Structures or devices used to detect or radiate electromagnetic waves; specifically that part of a radar or of a radio-sending or radio-receiving set that consists of that apparatus that radiates waves or receives them. Structures shall not be located in the front yard or side yard of a residence or business district and shall not exceed the height limitation established by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Agriculture: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. Included are truck-farming, poultry farming, beekeeping, raising of fruit and berries, and the selling of agricultural products, but shall not include mechanized industrial animal farms. "Agriculture" shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage to swine or other animals. 
    Agricultural building or structure: Any building or structure existing or erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with the exception of dwelling units. 
    Alley: A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property. Frontage on the alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this chapter related to frontage on a dedicated street. 
    Alteration: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a building or structure. 
    Animal hospital: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals. 
    Apartment: See "dwelling unit." 
    Apartment building: See "dwelling, multifamily." 
    Arterial street: See "road classifications." 
    Auditorium: A room hall or building made a part of a church, theatre, school, recreation building, or building assigned to the gathering of people as an audience to hear lectures, plays and other presentations. 
    Automobile laundry: A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than two automobiles, providing space, water, equipment or soap for the washing of automobiles by the operator or customer. Production line methods using mechanical devices are permitted. 
    Automobile repair, major: The general repair, engine rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service; such as body, frame and fender straightening and repair and painting of motor vehicles. 
    Auto repair, minor: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service to automobiles but excluding any operation specified under "automobile repair, major." 
    Automobile service station: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail to the public, automobile fuels stored only in underground tanks and located wholly within the lot lines; lubricating oil or grease for the operation of automobiles; and the sale and installation of tires, batteries, other minor accessories, and minor auto repair, but not including a bulk plant, conduct of major auto repairs, automobile wrecking, automobile sales or automobile laundries; provided, however, that the washing of individual's automobiles where no chain conveyor is employed may be included. 
    Awning: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the public way. 
    B & B operator: The owner of a bed and breakfast who is required to reside within the dwelling which houses the bed and breakfast operation. 
    Banquet hall: A building, or portion thereof, primarily intended to accommodate large groups of diners on special occasions. 
    Basement: That portion of a building having more than one-half of its height below lot grade. 
    Basement-Subgrade: That portion of a building which is partly underground but has at least one-half of its average height above lot grade. 
    Bed and breakfast: An operator-occupied, single-family dwelling providing accommodations for charge to the public for not longer than a 30-day period or greater than 60 days in a year which operation and which charge includes providing breakfast to the guests only. 
    Billboard: See "sign, advertising." 
    Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, municipal boundary lines, township lines, or county lines. 
    Buildable area: The area of a lot remaining after the minimum open space and/or yard requirements of this chapter have been complied with. 
    Building: Any structure built, used, designed, or intended for the support, shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced fire or party walls extending continuously from the ground through all stories to and above the roof, each part shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building, detached: A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot. 
    Building height: The vertical distance from the sidewalk level, or its equivalent established grade opposite the center of the front of a building to the highest point of the underside of the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean level of the underside of the rafters between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Where no sidewalk level has been established, the height of a building may be measured from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Building permit: A permit issued by the building inspector for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building. 
    Building, principal: A nonaccessory building in which a principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
    Building, residential: Any building that is used exclusively for permitted residential uses. 
    Building setback line: The minimum distance between a street right-of-way and the nearest supporting member of any structure on the lot. 
    Bulk: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and their location with respect to one another and includes: 
(1)  Height and area of buildings. 
(2)  Location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, streets, or other buildings. 
(3)  Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio). 
(4)  All open space allocated to buildings. 
(5)  Amount of lot area required for each dwelling unit. 
    Business: An occupation, employment, or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials; or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered. 
    Business street: See "road classifications." 
    Canopy: A roof-like structure projecting from a wall and supported in whole or in part by vertical supports to the ground, and erected primarily to provide shelter from the weather. 
    Carport: An open-sided, roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building. 
    Cellar: A story having more than one-half of its height below the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement. 
    Certificate of deposit: See "guarantee of improvements." 
    Child care center: Day care centers which receive preschool or school age children, or both, for short-term or extended hours of care, or out of school hours, and which provide essential personal care, protection, supervision, training, and programs to meet the needs of the children served. 
    Clinic, medical or dental: An organization of specializing physicians or dentists, or both, who have their offices in a common building. A clinic shall not include inpatient care. 
    Collector street: See "road classifications." 
    Common open space: Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights-of-way and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a planned development. Common open space may contain structures for recreational use. No area within 30 feet of any building or structure except a structure used for recreational use shall be includable as common open space. 
    Condominium: A form of cooperative ownership which permits individual ownership of a specific part of a building, with common ownership of all spaces beyond the specific apartments. Each apartment can be owned in fee simple, with no restrictions on the sale, rental, or transfer of same, other than restrictions on all real estate. Condominiums must meet requirements of the Illinois law. 
    Conforming building or conforming structure: Any building or structure which: 
(1)  Complies with all the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or 
(2)  Is designed or intended for a conforming use. 
    Corner lot: See Lot, corner. 
    Convalescent home: See "nursing home," "home for the aged," "homes for ill or physically infirm persons"-related definitions, "hospital," "intermediate care facility," "sheltered care facility," "sheltered care house" and "skilled nursing facility." 
    Court: An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building, which is totally or partially enclosed by building or buildings and is completely open to the sky. 
    Curb level: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street, the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the level of the centerline of the street shall be considered the "curb level". 
    Day care center: Any child day care facility receiving more than eight children for daytime care during all or part of the day. The term "day care center" includes facilities called "child care centers," "day nurseries," "nursery schools," "kindergartens," "play groups," and "centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped" with or without stated educational purposes. The term does not include: 
(1)  Kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by public or private elementary school systems or secondary level school units or institutions of higher learning; 
(2)  Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or service, or other similar facility, where transient children are cared for temporarily while parents or custodians of the children are occupied on the premises, or are in the immediate vicinity and readily available; 
(3)  Any type of day care center that is conducted on federal government premises; or 
(4)  Special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instruction, and similar activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic, charitable, and governmental organizations. 
    Day nurseries: Day care centers which receive preschool age children for short-term or extended hours of care, and which provide essential personal care, protection, supervision, training, and programs to meet the needs of the individual children served. 
    Dedicated street: See "road classifications." 
    Density, gross: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units in a development by the gross area of the tract of land upon which the dwelling units are located. 
    Density, net: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling units in a development by the net area of the residential tract and permanent open space. Streets, alleys, utilities and other nonresidential uses shall not be included. 
    Drive-in establishment: An establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked upon the premises. 
    Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses. 
    Dwelling unit: One or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities. 
    Dwelling, attached: A dwelling containing two or more dwelling units and joined to other dwellings by party wall or walls, originally constructed for said purposes. 
    Dwelling, converted: Any building which was originally designed and constructed as one, two or three-family dwelling, but which has been changed or altered by the construction of additional dwelling units to provide for more families than the original building. 
    Dwelling detached: A dwelling unit which is surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family: A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units, originally constructed for said purpose, and not including converted dwellings. 
    Dwelling, semi-attached: A dwelling which is jointed to another dwelling by a garage, carport, recreation structures, or other nonresidential facility. 
    Dwelling, single-family: A dwelling containing accommodations for and occupied only by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Educational institution: A public, parochial, charitable or nonprofit junior college, college or university, other than trade or business schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities for students, teachers and employees. 
    Efficiency unit: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closet or dining alcove directly off the principal room. 
    Essential services: Services provided by public and private utilities necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal structure. These services include underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage and communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, hydrants, etc., but not including buildings that do not need to be in the immediate area of the uses they service. 
    Excavation: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Existing grade: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling. 
    Family: An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants), not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities, fraternities or other similar organizations. 
    Farm: Land being used for agricultural purposes. 
    Farm homestead: The building located on a farm that is the residence of the farm owner or tenant operator. 
    Fast-food restaurant: See "restaurant, fast-food." 
    Fence: Any construction of wood, metal, wire mesh, masonry or other material erected for the purpose of assuring privacy, protection or restraining animals. 
    Fence, decorative: A fence intended primarily for aesthetic purposes. Such fences shall at 50 percent of the overall dimensions open affording a direct view through those portions of the fence. 
    Flood base elevation: That elevation of the highest flood of record, determined by the village engineer's record of the elevations of the highest flood at locations as indicated on the floodplain map of the village on file in the office of the village clerk. Flood base elevations at intermediate locations shall be interpolated along the watercourse between the two nearest flood base elevations, one for each upstream and downstream. The controlling flood base elevation for any building site shall be the same as the flood base elevation at the nearest point of the watercourse. 
    Floodplain: That area of land adjoining a watercourse or other body of water which has been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater. 
    Floodplain map: Any accepted engineering standards or mapping used to delineate the minimum flood base elevations for the village, and may include the following: 
(1)  Hydrologic Investigations Atlas, Series HA, as amended from time to time: 
(2)  Geologic maps prepared by the Illinois State Geologic Survey; 
(3)  Mapping and/or source information from the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service; 
(4)  Mapping and/or source information from the Will South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District; and 
(5)  Maps of groundwater conditions prepared by the state water survey. 
    Floodproofing: A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, intended primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages to properties, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings in a flood hazard area. 
    Floodway: The channel of the stream or body of water and those portions of the adjoining floodplains designated by the village as necessary to carry and discharge the floodwater flow of any such river, stream, or other body of water. 
    Floor area (for determining floor area ratio): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. The "floor area of a building" shall include the basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above the established curb level, elevator shafts and stairwells at each flood floor space used for mechanical equipment, (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof), penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet, ten inches or more, interior balconies, mezzanines, enclosed porches and floor area devoted to accessory uses. 
    The "floor area" of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials, including, but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks, shall be determined on the basis of the height of such structures in feet; ten feet in height shall be deemed to be equal to one floor. If a structure measures more than five feet over such floor equivalent, it shall be construed to have an additional floor. 
    Floor area (for determining off street parking and loading requirements: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space such as counters, racks or closets and any floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. (See illustration in article XX). 
    However, "floor area" for the purposes of measurement for off street parking spaces shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted to off street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space; or mechanical or storage floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, to the production of goods, or to business or professional offices. 
    Floor area ratio (F.A.R.): The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area ratio as designated for each district, when multiplied by the lot area in square feet, shall determine the maximum permissible floor area of the building or buildings on the lot. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Freeway: See "road classifications." 
    Frontage: That portion of a lot or parcel directly abutting a dedicated street. 
    Garage, private: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is intended and used to store not more than four private motor vehicles owned by members of the family or families residing upon the premises, provided that not more than one-half of the space may be rented for the storage of private motor vehicles of persons not residing on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one- or two-car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage may be used for the storage of not more than one commercial truck having a load capacity of three-fourths of a ton or less. 
    Garage, public: Any building other than a private or a storage garage where motor vehicles are equipped, repaired, serviced, hired, sold, or stored. 
    Garage, storage: Any building used for the storage only of motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not to transients, and where no equipment, parts, fuel, grease or oil is sold and vehicles are not equipped, serviced, repaired, hired, or sold. No commercial motor vehicle exceeding two tons capacity shall be stored in any storage garage. 
    Grade: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
    Grading: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill. 
    Grade, street: This term shall have the same meaning as the term "curb level." 
    Guarantee of improvements: A guarantee to the village that the requirements of this chapter will be met in full by a specified date. Such guarantee can be in the form of a certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, performance bond or other form that will enable the village to obtain and use funds provided by the permittee to complete the required improvements in the event the permittee fails to do so. 
    Guesthouse: A small house or cottage that is separate from the main house on a property that is used for the temporary housing of guests not for charge. A guesthouse cannot be used as a rental property. 
    Hardship: A condition that would result from the strict application of the terms of this chapter, provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The condition is unique to the property and is not applicable generally to other property within the district; 
(2)  The situation was not created by anyone having an interest in the property; 
(3)  The request for a hardship variation is not based exclusively on a desire to make more money out of the property; 
(4)  The hardship exists due to the particular physical characteristics of the property in question. 
    Home for the aged: Any home operated not for profit under the auspices of a religious, fraternal, charitable, or other nonprofit organization, or by a county pursuant to an "Act in relation to homes for the aged," approved July 21, 1959, as heretofore, or hereafter amended, or operated not for profit under an endowment, which through its ownership or management, and as its principal objective, provides maintenance, personal care, nursing, or sheltered care to aged persons, and in the conduct of which provides such service or services to three or more persons over 60 years of age. 
    Home for ill or physically infirm person: A home providing meals, shelter, assistance with personal functions, general supervision and professional nursing assistance for persons because of age or physical or mental disability is incapable of maintaining their own residence and caring for their own needs. 
    Home occupation: See section 28-264 of article V, Home occupation. 
    Hospital or sanitarium: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care for not less than 24 hours in any week of three or more nonrelated individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical conditions. 
    Hotel: An establishment which is open to transient guests in contradistinction to a boarding, rooming or lodging house, and is commonly known as a hotel in the community in which it is located; and which provides customary hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture, and bellboy service. 
    Industrial street: See "road classification." 
    Intermediate care facility: Basic nursing care and other restorative services under periodic medical direction. Many of these services may require skills in administration. Such facilities are for patients who have long-term illness or disabilities which may have reached a relatively stable plateau. 
    Irrevocable letter of credit: See "guarantee of improvements." 
    Kindergartens: Day care centers which receive children between the ages of four and six years, and which are established and professionally operated primarily to conduct educational programs for early childhood development. 
    Laboratory: See "research laboratory." 
    Land use plan map: The map adopted by the board of trustees detailing the planned usage for the village and its one and one-half-mile jurisdiction. 
    Livable floor area: All internal floor area of a dwelling unit excluding basements, garages and utility rooms. 
    Loading and unloading space or berth, off-street: An open, hard-surfaced area of land other than a street or a public way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference with public streets and alleys. Such space shall be not less than 12 feet in width, 50 feet in length, and 14 feet in height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space. 
    Lot: A parcel of land which is either a lot of record or a zoning lot. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Lot area, gross: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly recorded lake or river. 
    Lot, corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Lot line, corner side: The boundary of a corner lot that abuts a dedicated street other than the front lot line. 
    Lot line, front: The lot line abutting a dedicated street. In the case of a corner lot, the lot line abutting the street having the least length shall be the front lot line. In the case of a through lot the zoning administrator shall establish the front lot line. 
    Lot line: See "property line." 
    Lot line, rear: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to, the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds prior to May 24, 1982. 
    Lot, reversed corner: A corner lot the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Lot, through (double frontage): A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the narrowest width within the first 30 feet of lot depth immediately in back of the front yard setback line. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Lot, zoning: A single tract of land location within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
    Major thoroughfare: See "road classifications." 
    Marquee: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way. 
    Mezzanine: An intermediate story between the floor and ceiling of a main story and extending over only part of the main floor. 
    Mobile home: Any vehicle or similar portable structure designed, used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and to permit the year-round occupancy thereof for one or more persons. 
    Mobile home park: A parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for locating three or more mobile homes provided each mobile home contains a kitchen, flush toilet and shower or bath and that such mobile home park shall be for use only by nontransient dwellers remaining continuously for more than one month, whether or not a change is made. It shall not include a sales lot in which motor vehicles or unoccupied trailers are parked for the purpose of inspection or sale. 
    Motor vehicle repair, major and minor: See "auto repair," major and minor. 
    Motel: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a single zoning lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists. A motel furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service, and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. In a motel less than 50 percent of the living and sleeping accommodations are occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other than transient persons. 
    Motor vehicle: Any passenger, vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor-trailers, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power. 
    Nonconforming building or structure: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing on May 24, 1984, or at the time of adoption of any amendment thereto, which: 
(1)  Was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Does not comply with the bulk and other requirements of this chapter in the zoning district in which the building or structure is located. 
    Nonconforming use: A use which lawfully occupies a building or land on May 24, 1982, or at the time of adoption of any amendment thereto, and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming vacant lots of record: Vacant lots of record which do not meet the required lot size requirements of the district they are located in. 
    Nursery schools: Day care centers which receive children between the ages of two and six years and which are established and professionally operated primarily for educational purposes to meet the development needs of the children served. 
    Nursing home: A private home, institution, building, residence, or other place whether operated for profit or not, or a county home for the infirm and chronically ill operated pursuant to The County Home Act, as now or hereafter amended, or any similar institution operated by a political subdivision of the state which provides, through its ownership or management, maintenance, personal care, or nursing for three or more persons, not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage, or any similar facility in which maintenance is provided to three or more persons who by reason of illness or physical infirmity require personal care or nursing. 
    Off-street loading: See "loading and unloading space." 
    Open sales lot: A lot or parcel of land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or trading of all goods and commodities and including the storage of same prior to sale or exchange. 
    Open space: Any land developed as yards, parks, recreational areas including community centers, and landscaped green areas and exclusive of areas developed for off-street parking. 
    Owner: Any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity having possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession in land, buildings or possessions. 
    Parcel: Contiguous land in one ownership. 
    Park: Land used for active or passive recreation, owned or controlled by a local park district, school district, county forest preserve district, homeowner's association, the village or another governmental entity or nonprofit organization. 
    Parking area, private: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a public way or street, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory. 
    Parking area, public: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles under one and one-half tons capacity, and available to the public, whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or customers. 
    Parking lot: Public or private land intended for the use as a facility for parking motor vehicles. Parking may be with or without fee. 
    Parking space, automobile: Space within a public or private parking area of not less than 180 sq. ft., nine feet by 20 feet exclusive of access drives for the storage of one-passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-half tons capacity. 
    Party wall: A common wall which extends from its footing below grade to the underside of the floor and divides buildings. 
    Performance bond: See "guarantee of improvements." 
    Performance standard: A criterion established to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The more frequently used performance criteria include the following: 
(1)  Active to intense burning, which is the rate of combustion described by material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples include sawdust, powdered magnesium and pyroxylin. 
(2)  Closed cup flash point, which is the lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid, under prescribed conditions, will give off a flammable vapor which will burn momentarily. 
(3)  Decibel, which is a unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. A sound level meter is calibrated in decibels. 
(4)  Detonable material, which is a material which decomposes by detonation. Such material includes explosives, unstable compounds and fissionable matter. 
(5)  Earthborne vibration, which is the periodic displacement, measured in inches of earth. 
(6)  Fireproof container, which is an enclosure of steel or concrete but not lead or other low-melting metals or alloys, unless the lead or low-melting metal or alloys are completely encased in steel. 
(7)  Flash point, which is the lowest temperature at which a flammable liquid will momentarily burn under prescribed conditions. The tag flash point testers shall be authoritative. 
(8)  Footcandle, which is a unit of illumination; technically, the illumination at all points one foot distance from a uniform point source of one candle power. 
(9)  Free burning, which implies a rate of combustion described by a material which burns actively, and easily supports combustion. 
(10)  Frequency, which signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound. 
(11)  Impact noise, which is a short duration sound such as those from a foregoing hammer or punch press. 
(12)  Impulsive noise, which is a sound which is no longer than two seconds in duration, followed by no less than a two-second rest. 
(13)  Intense burning, which implies a rate of combustion described by a material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. 
(14)  Microcurie, which is one-millionth of a curie, which is a standard unit of radioactivity. 
(15)  Moderate burning, which implies a rate of combustion described by material which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns. 
(16)  Noxious matter, which is a material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the physical or economic well being of individuals. 
(17)  Octave band, which is a prescribed interval of sound frequencies which classifies sound according to its pitch. 
(18)  Odor threshold, which is the lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will produce an olfactory response in a human being. 
(19)  Odorous matter, which is any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive in any way. 
(20)  Particulate matter, which is material, other than water, which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid. 
(21)  Preferred frequency octave bands, which are a standardized series of octave bands prescribed by the U.S.A.S.I. in SI.6-1967, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements. 
(22)  Ringelmann chart, which is a chart on which is described in the U. S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888 or its successor, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of grey for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. 
(23)  Ringelmann number, which is the shade of smoke as it appears on the standard Ringelmann Chart published by the U. S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular No. 8333 (1967). 
(24)  SCF (standard cubic feet), which is the measure of the volume of a gas, at any other conditions, reduced to 1,473 pounds per square inch absolute and 60 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(25)  Slow burning or incombustible, which implies materials which do not in themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material which will not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for five minutes to a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit, shall be designed "incombustible". 
(26)  Smoke, which is small gasborne particles, other than water, that form a visible plume in the air. 
(27)  Sound level of an operation or use, which is the intensity of sound, measured in decibels, produced by such operation or use. 
(28)  Sound level meter, which is an electronic instrument which includes a microphone, an amplifier and an output meter which measures noise and sound pressure levels in a specified manner. It may be used with the octave band analyzer that permits measuring the sound pressure level in discrete octave bands. 
(29)  Sound pressure level, which is the intensity of a sound measured in decibels mathematically described as 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar. 
(30)  Toxic matter, which is material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts. 
(31)  Threshold limit value, which is the maximum allowable airborne concentration of toxic material, as established by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. 
(32)  United States of American Standards Institute (U.S.A.S.I.), which is a national organization promulgating authoritative standards in any technical field. Formerly American Standards Association. 
(33)  Vibration, which is the period displacement or oscillation of the earth. 
    Permanent open space: A contiguous land area that is designed for educational, religious, recreational or institutional purposes, or such land which is recommended for such designation by the village at or before the time of approval of a subdivision or planned development. 
    Permitted use: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and standards of such district. 
    Permittee: The person who receives the zoning certificate. 
    Principal use: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be "permitted" or "special." 
    Planned development: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a size sufficient to create its own environment, controlled by a single landowner or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed as a single entity, the environment of which is compatible with adjacent parcels, and the intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is located; the developer may be granted relief from specific land-use regulations and design standards and may be awarded certain premiums in return for assurances of an overall quality of development, including any specific features which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole and which would not otherwise be required by this chapter. 
    Porch: A roofed over structure projecting out from the walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part. 
    Private road: See "road classifications." 
    Property line: An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning lot or line at the boundary of a lot of record. 
    Public open space: A publicly-owned area; including, but not limited to the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, waterways, parkways and streets. 
    Public way: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare. 
    Public utility: Any person, firm or corporation duly authorized to furnish under regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, water or sewerage systems. 
    Railroad right-of-way: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots, or stations, loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards. 
    Reservoir parking: Off street parking spaces or lot areas allocated to temporary standing motor vehicles awaiting entrance to a particular establishment. 
    Research laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. 
    Residential street: See "road classifications." 
    Restaurant: A business where the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or beverage on the premises is the principal business operation; including a cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room, tearoom and dining room, but not including a drive-in or fast food restaurant. 
    Restaurant, drive-in: A restaurant that dispenses foodstuff and/or beverage to persons in parked or stopped motor vehicles. 
    Restaurant, fast-food: A restaurant whose principal business is the dispensing of edible foodstuffs and/or beverages in disposable containers to be eaten on the premises or taken out. This type of restaurant is usually self-service. 
    Retail, retail store: Sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for resale. 
    Right-of-way: Land dedicated for street purposes. 
    Road classifications: The status of freeways, arterial streets and secondary arterial streets shall be determined by such designation on the land use plan map. For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Freeway or expressway: A trafficway providing at least two lanes going each direction with a median strip preventing crossover between the two lanes. Freeways are characterized by high speed travel, limited access to adjoining property owners and generally serve as vehicle transportation routes within an urbanized area or between urban areas or states. 
(2)  Arterial street: A trafficway generally providing two lanes going each direction. A median strip may or may not be present. Arterial streets are characterized by moderate to high speed travel, possible limitations on access to adjoining property owners and generally serve as vehicle transportation routes within a region. 
(3)  Secondary arterial street: A trafficway providing one or two lanes in each direction. A median strip is rarely present. Secondary arterial streets are characterized by moderate speed travel (higher speeds may be allowed in sparsely populated areas), residential access is discouraged and the length of such streets is limited. 
(4)  Major thoroughfare: A trafficway with at least two lanes in each direction. A major thoroughfare may or may not be a freeway, arterial street, secondary arterial street, or collector street. 
(5)  Collector street: A street which performs the function of linking the various points of vehicular access along its route and delivering such traffic to an arterial or secondary arterial street. 
(6)  Dedicated street: A street where the maintenance responsibility has been accepted by the federal, state, county, township or village governments. The dedication of land for street purposes does not constitute a dedicated street, such land must be improved with a roadway, that is suitable for and accepted by a unit of government as a dedicated street. 
(7)  Residential street: A dedicated street within a residential zoning district, excluding freeways, arterial streets and secondary arterial streets. 
(8)  Business street: A street within a business district or on the boundary of a business district. A business street may also be an arterial street, secondary arterial street or collector street or major thoroughfare. 
(9)  Industrial street: A street developed to serve an industrial district. 
(10)  Private road: A trafficway not maintained or owned by a governmental entity. 
(11)  Street: Any of the following may also be termed a street: Freeway, arterial street, secondary arterial street, collector street, dedicated street, residential street, business street, industrial street. 
For the purposes of this chapter freeways, arterial streets, secondary arterial streets, collector streets, major thoroughfares, residential streets, business streets and industrial streets may meet the requirement for dedicated streets. 
    Secondary arterial street: See "road classifications." 
    School: A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches of learning and study comparable to that taught in the public schools under the Illinois school laws, including pre-kindergarten, elementary school, and junior and senior high schools, but excluding trade, business or commercial schools. 
    Setback: The distance between the exterior lot lines and any structure on the lot. 
    Shed: A small single story accessory building usually utilized for storage, gardening or hobbies. 
    Sheltered care facility: A facility which provides care and assistance, supervision overnight, and a suitable activities program. Provisions are made for medical care as necessary. Such facilities are for individuals who do not need nursing care, but do need personal care assistance, supervision, and/or oversight in meeting their daily personal needs. 
    Sheltered care home: Any county sheltered care home or a sheltered care home operated as part of a county nursing home or a private boarding home, institution, building, residence, or other place, whether operated for profit or not which, through its ownership or management, provides sheltered care to three or more persons who are not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage, or any similar facility in which maintenance is provided to three or more persons who by reason of physical infirmity require personal care. 
    Sign: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. 
    Sign, advertising (billboard): A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. Such signs are prohibited. 
    Sign, freestanding: Any sign independently mounted or mounted on a building and extending more than one foot from the surface of the wall such sign is mounted on. A single freestanding sign may have separate component signs mounted from a common supporting structure. Temporary or mobile signs shall not be considered a freestanding sign. 
    Sign, surface area: The entire area within a perimeter enclosing the outer limits of a sign face(s). A permitted sign may have two faces arranged back to back or consisting of two sides of a single structure with each of the two such sign faces having the maximum permitted surface areas. 
    Sign, identification: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein. 
    Sign, illuminated: A sign having its own light source. 
    Sign, political: A temporary sign supporting a candidate for public office or urging action on an issue. 
    Special use: A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district or districts. After due consideration, in each case, of the impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location, such use may or may not be granted, subject to the terms of the chapter. 
    Storage, outdoor: The outdoor accumulation of vehicles, equipment or products, or materials for permanent or temporary holding. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each 14 feet or fraction thereof. 
    Story, half: That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than four and one-half feet above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings, less than three stories in height, a half-story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of this chapter. In the case of multiple-family dwellings three or more stories in height, a half-story shall be counted as a story. 
    Street: See "road classifications." 
    Street line: The division line between private property and a dedicated street. 
    Structural alteration: Any change, other than incidental repairs which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the addition, removal, or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground including a fence or freestanding wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure. 
    Structure, temporary: A movable structure not designed for human occupancy nor for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure. A sign, billboard, or other advertising device detached or projecting shall be construed to be a temporary structure. 
    Swimming pool, private: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained by an individual for the sole use of his household and guests, without charge for admission, and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit, located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence. 
    Swimming pool, public: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained and operated by a private party for gain; by municipality or other unit of government for the general public whether or not an admission fee is charged. 
    Tavern, lounge, or bar: A building or portion thereof where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises but not including restaurants where the principal business is serving food. 
    Townhouse: A type of multifamily dwelling one or two stories in height, typically the living room, dining room and kitchen are on the ground floor with sleeping rooms on the second floor. Dwelling units typically have a common side wall and are owner occupied. 
    Trailer: A vehicle without motive power used or adaptable for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, and has been reasonable may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place. The term "trailer" shall include "camp car" and "house car". A permanent foundation shall not change its character unless the entire structure is erected in accordance with the building code. 
    Unified control: The combination of two or more tracts of land wherein each owner has agreed that his tract of land shall be developed as part of a planned development and shall be subject to the control applicable to the planned development. 
    Use: The purposes for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased. 
    Use, lawful: The use of any structure or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this chapter or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined. 
    Use, nonconforming: See "nonconforming use." 
    Used car lot: A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are displayed for sale or trade outside of buildings. 
    Value: Valuation of a building shall be the assessed valuation, or where no assessed valuation exists, its appraised valuation as converted to assessed valuation. 
    Variation: A relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variations will not be contrary to the public interest and where, due to conditions peculiar to the property and the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties. 
    Wholesale establishment: A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers. 
    Yard: An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter yard extends along a lot line, and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which such zoning lot is located. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Yard, corner side: A side yard which adjoins a public street. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Yard, front: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side lot lines. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Yard, interior side: A side yard which is located immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another zoning lot. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines. (See illustration in article XX.) 
    Zoning administrator: The person designated by the president and board of trustees as the officer responsible for enforcing and administering all requirements of this chapter. 
    Zoning certificate: The certificate issued by the zoning administrator issued prior to the granting of a building permit, business license, or occupancy permit certifying that all provisions of this chapter have been met. 
    Zoning district: See "district." 
    Zoning lot: See "lot, zoning." 
    Zoning map: The map incorporated into this chapter as part hereof, designating zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 12.2, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 1, 11-25-02; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 3-22-04; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12) 
Sec. 28-4. - Intent and purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the people; 
(2)  To divide the village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of building structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other specified uses; 
(3)  To protect the character and the stability of the residential, commercial and industrial areas within the village and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas; 
(4)  To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property; 
(5)  To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light and air, and to protect the public health; 
(6)  To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, commercial, industrial or other uses within such areas; 
(7)  To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein; 
(8)  To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts; 
(9)  To prevent additions to, or alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder; 
(10)  To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles; 
(11)  To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards, in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare; 
(12)  To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them; 
(13)  To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the village; 
(14)  To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district; 
(15)  To define and limit powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein; 
(16)  To insure and facilitate the preservation of sites, areas and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-5. - Minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public, health, safety, morals and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.1-1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-6. - Conflicting laws. 
    Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.1-2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-7. - Existing agreements. 
    This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.1-3, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-8. - Existing violations. 
(a)  No building, structure or use, not lawfully existing on May 28, 1982 shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this chapter and to the extent that, and in any manner that, the unlawful buildings, structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the building, structure or use remains unlawful hereunder. 
(b)  Any building, structure or use established or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinance which was in effect at the time of establishment or alteration of such building, structure or use shall not be validated by the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, §§ 8.1-4, 9.9, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-9. - Contiguous parcels. 
    When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimensions to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership, at the time of construction, such lots shall be considered a single lot. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.3-6, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-10. - Existing building permits. 
    Any building permit for a building or structure that does not conform with the provisions of this chapter that was issued prior to May 28, 1982 shall only be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. No extension or reissuance of a building permit for such buildings or structures shall be granted unless the construction has begun and is partially completed or the proposed building or structure or use is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.3-7, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-11. - Compliance. 
(a)  No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered and no building structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied or arranged or designed for use or occupancy nor shall any excavating or grading be commenced in connection with any of the above matters, except as permitted by the regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning district in which such building, structure or land is located. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be provided, all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning district in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located. 
(c)  Where a structure and use thereof of land lawfully exists on May 28, 1982 and is classified by this chapter as a special use in the district where it is located, such use shall be considered a lawful special use. A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures herein set forth shall be required only for any expansion or major alteration of any such existing special use. If an existing special use ceases for a period of more than six months, the special use can only be re-established under the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  Any legally established building, structure, or use may continue subject to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(e)  Any lot of record existing on May 28, 1982 which is unable to meet the requirements of this chapter as to lot area, lot width and yard requirements shall only be used in accordance with the provisions of section 28-204. 
(Ord. No. 850, §§ 8.3.1-8.3.5, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-12. - Exemptions. 
(a)  As required by statute the type or location of any poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or any other similar distributing equipment of a public utility is exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be enforced so as to impose regulations or required permits with respect to land within an AG district used strictly for agricultural purposes or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair or extension of buildings or structures used or to be used entirely for agricultural purposes, except that all such buildings shall conform to the yard requirements, lot size requirements and building bulk limitations and signs provisions of this ordinance. All non-agricultural uses of the AG district shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Pipelines and other underground installations, to the extent that the same are completely buried beneath the surface of the soil, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided that any incidental or associated structures, installations or equipment except markers used in connection with such pipe lines are subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flag poles, smokestacks, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, water towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers and spires, wireless towers, radio transmission towers, radar installations, telescopes, military installations of the U.S. government, necessary mechanical appurtenances and television or other antennas may exceed the height limitations of this chapter. 
(e)  The board of trustees may approve a planned development including structures that exceed the height limitations of the district such uses are located in. 
(f)  No building or structure including those listed in subsections (d) and (e) which are subject to notice under Federal Aviation Regulations par. 77 shall be constructed until approved by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.8, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-13-28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-31. - Penalties. 
(a)  Whosoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00. Except when fines and costs are paid by compromise payment as provided in subsection (b) below prior to court, the court clerk shall add to the fine any and all costs and fees upon an authorized disposition. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of this chapter may settle and compromise said claim without a court appearance by payment of one half of the minimum required fine to the village clerk at the village hall within ten business days of the date of violation if the compromise box designation is so checked on the complaint and notice to appear form. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part thereof on which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to occur or continue. 
(c)  Enforcement of this chapter and any violations thereof may be cited in accordance with hearing procedures as set forth in chapter 6, article XIV, "Administrative Hearing and Adjudication Procedures". 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.14, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. 2003-35, § 2, 9-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-43, § 18, 12-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-52, § 3, 7-27-09) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1. 
Sec. 28-32. - Reserved. 
Sec. 28-33. - Fees. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses required for zoning certificates, certificates of occupancy, business licenses, variations, special use permits, amendments, planned developments, appeals, mobile home parks and other matters pertaining to this chapter. Such fee shall be as set forth in article v of chapter 2 immediately to the right of the reference to section 28-33. 
(b)  Until all such fees have been paid, no application for any of the above shall be deemed to have been filed and no action shall be taken on such application. 
(c)  All fees shall be paid to the office of the village collector. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.13, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, 1-5-87) 
Secs. 28-34-28-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES AND OFFICERS 

Sec. 28-46. - Generally. 
(a)  The primary responsibilities of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the following four offices of the government of the village: 
(1)  Zoning administrator; 
(2)  Zoning board of appeals; 
(3)  Plan commission; 
(4)  Board of trustees. 
(b)  In addition to the previously mentioned administrative offices, other officials, appointees or employees of the village will be required to perform functions as specified in this chapter. 
(c)  The principal administrative functions of this chapter are: 
(1)  Variations; 
(2)  Amendments (text and map); 
(3)  Special use permits (including planned developments and mobile home parks); 
(4)  Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-47. - Zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator and such deputies or assistants that shall be duly appointed shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and in addition thereto shall: 
(1)  Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof; 
(2)  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter; 
(3)  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter including, but not limited to maps, amendments, special use permits, variations, appeals and applications therefor; 
(4)  Provide public information on all matters pertaining to this chapter; 
(5)  Receive and forward to the plan commission all applications for special use permits; planned developments, mobile home parks and amendments (R-3, R-4 and B-4 applications only); 
(6)  Receive and forward to the zoning board of appeals for appeals, variations, amendments and other matters the zoning board of appeals is required to act on under this chapter; 
(7)  Receive and forward to the board of trustees all applications the board is required to act on; 
(8)  Attend all meetings of the zoning board of appeals, plan commission, and board of appeals where action pertaining to this chapter will be considered; 
(9)  Review at intervals not to exceed one year all provisions of this chapter and make reports of any recommendations to the board of trustees; 
(10)  Secure the required signed affidavits from applicants in support of mailed or hand delivered notices to adjoining property owners and posted notices on the property; provide sufficient signs to applicants for posting notice on said property; effect the required newspaper notice of hearing. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.2, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 97-12, § 2, 4-14-97) 
Sec. 28-48. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals that exists on May 28, 1982 as established by ordinance pursuant to section 11-13-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-13-32) is hereby authorized to continue. 
(b)  One member of the zoning board of appeals shall be designated by the village president, with the consent of the board of trustees, to serve as chairman and shall serve as such until his successor is appointed. The chairman shall have the authority to call meetings, preside over meetings, compel the attendance of witnesses and administer oaths. 
(c)  One member of the zoning board of appeals shall be designated by the president with the consent of the board of trustees, to serve as secretary and shall serve as such until his successor is named. The duties of the secretary shall be to record the minutes of meetings, to maintain records in conjunction with the zoning administrator's office, and serve as acting chairman in the absence of the chairman. 
(d)  The president with the consent of the board of trustees shall make appointments to fill any vacancies that may occur. The president, subject to the approval of the board of trustees, shall have the power to remove any member for a designated cause. 
(e)  All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such other times as the zoning board of appeals may determine. All hearings conducted shall be in accordance with law. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule, regulation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning board of appeals shall be filed immediately in the office of the village clerk and zoning administrator and shall be public record. The zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own rules and procedures in keeping with the provisions of law. All adopted rules and procedures shall be reduced to writing and made available for the public. 
(f)  The zoning board of appeals is hereby vested with the jurisdiction and authority: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or other administrative officer under this chapter. 
(2)  To hear and review applications for amendments to this chapter and report findings and recommendations to the board of trustees (except those requesting an R-3, R-4 or B-4 rezoning). 
(3)  To hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees on applications for variations from the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  To hear and make recommendations to the board of trustees on all matters as required under this chapter. 
(g)  All decisions and findings of the zoning board of appeals on any appeal, after a public hearing, shall, in all instances, be the final administrative decision and shall be subject to judicial review as by law may be provided. The concurring vote of four members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.3, 5-24-82) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-231 et seq. 
Sec. 28-49. - Plan commission. 
(a)  A plan commission is hereby established. The plan commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The appointed members shall serve the following staggered terms: One for one year; one for two years; one for three years; one for four years; one for five years; and two for six years. Each of the members shall be reappointed for a six-year term with one (or two) member's appointment expiring each year. 
(b)  One member of the plan commission shall be designated by the president with the consent of the board of trustees to serve as chairman and shall serve as such until his successor is appointed. The chairman shall have the authority to call meetings, preside over meetings, compel the attendance of witnesses and administer oaths. 
(c)  One member of the plan commission shall be designated by the president with the consent of the board of trustees to serve as secretary and shall serve as such until his successor is named. The duties of the secretary shall be to record the minutes of meetings, maintain records in conjunction with the zoning administrator's office and serve as acting chairman in the absence of the chairman. 
(d)  The president with the consent of the board of trustees shall make appointments to fill any vacancies that may occur. The president, subject to the approval of the board of trustees, shall have the power to remove any member for a designated cause. 
(e)  All meetings of the plan commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the plan commission may determine, provided the plan commission conducts a scheduled meeting no less frequently than once a month. 
(f)  All hearings conducted by the plan commission under this chapter shall be in accordance with law. In all proceedings of the plan commission provided for in this chapter, the chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, shall have the power to administer oaths. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this chapter shall be given under oath. The plan commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every amendment and special use and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the plan commission under this ordinance shall be filed in the office of the village clerk and shall be a public record. The plan commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or with applicable law. 
(g)  The plan commission shall: 
(1)  Hear and review all applications for special use permits, planned developments, mobile home parks and R-3, R-4, B-4, and B-B applications for rezoning, and report the findings and recommendations to the board of trustees. 
(2)  Receive from the zoning administrator his recommendation as related to the effectiveness of this ordinance and report its conclusions and recommendations to the board of trustees not less frequently than once a year. 
(3)  To hear and decide matters upon which it is required to pass under this chapter. 
(4)  Consider and recommend to the board of trustees any item referred to the plan commission by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.4, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 85-10, 8-26-85; Ord. No. 88-11, § 2, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 92-04, § 1, 3-9-92; Ord. No. 96-47, § 2, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 96-47, § 2, 10-14-96) 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Plan commission, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq. 
Sec. 28-50. - Board of trustees. 
    The board of trustees shall: 
(1)  Receive from the zoning board of appeals recommendations, amendments and variations to this chapter and determine final disposition of any such matter. 
(2)  Receive all recommendations from the plan commission relating to special use permits, planned developments, mobile home parks, amendments for R-3, R-4, B-4, and B-B rezonings and determine the final disposition of any such application. 
(3)  Review all applications for non-listed uses and determine the final disposition of any such application. 
(4)  Decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.5, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 88-11, § 2, 6-27-88) 
Secs. 28-51-28-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CERTIFICATION OF ZONING 

Sec. 28-61. - Generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings, including building permit, business licenses and occupancy permits shall be issued unless the application for such permit has been examined by the zoning administrator and has affixed to it his certificate, indicating that the proposed use of land, buildings or structures complies with all the provisions of this chapter. Any certification of zoning issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.6, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-62. - Exceptions. 
    No certification shall be required for maintenance, repair, minor structural alterations determined to be routine and minor by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.6-5, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-63. - Plats and plans. 
    Every application for a certification of zoning with the exception of occupancy permits, or as hereinafter provided, shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Two copies of a current plat of the piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions and monumenting, as certified by a "registered Illinois land surveyor", as a true copy of the piece or parcel, lot, lots, block or blocks or portion thereof, according to registered or recorded plat of such land. 
(2)  Two copies of additional drawings drawn to a scale in such form as may, from time to time, be presented by the zoning administrator showing the ground area, height and bulk of the building or structure, the building lines in relation to lot lines. The use to be made of the building, structure or land and such other information as may be required by the zoning administrator for the proper enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  Two copies of a plan detailing the number and configuration of parking spaces, points of ingress and egress, areas to be landscaped and construction specifications. 
The zoning administrator may in those cases where in his judgement the information is not necessary because of existing evidence waive all or portions of the requirements of subsection s (1), (2) and (3) above. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.6-1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-64. - Occupancy permits. 
    Prior to affixing a certification of zoning to any occupancy permit, the zoning administrator shall conduct an on-site inspection of any building, structure, or use where an occupancy permit is required. When the zoning administrator has inspected such locations and determined that all provisions of this chapter have been complied with, he will affix a certification of zoning. Any certification of zoning issued in conflict with the provisions shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.6-2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-65. - Issuance and appeals. 
    Within 15 days after the receipt of a complete and valid application the zoning administrator shall take action. If all provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the zoning administrator shall issue a certification of zoning. If the provisions of this chapter have not been met, the zoning administrator shall not issue a certification of zoning and will notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for refusal. If the zoning administrator fails to act within 15 days, the applicant may treat the application as denied and file an appeal to the zoning board of appeals in the manner prescribed in division 9 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.6-3, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-66. - Period of validity. 
    If the certification of zoning is affixed to a business license or building permit, the certification shall remain valid for the period of validity of the business license or building permit. No certification of zoning for an occupancy permit shall be valid for a period longer than 180 days from the date of its issuance unless the use or occupancy authorized has been established within such period. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.6-4, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-67-28-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Variations, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3.1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-81. - Authorized. 
(a)  In specific cases where practical difficulties or a particular hardship would be incurred by the strict applications of the provisions of this chapter the zoning board of appeals, after conducting a public hearing, may recommend to the board of trustees a variance of the regulations of this chapter, but only in accordance with the requirements set forth in this division. 
(b)  Variations from the regulations of this chapter shall be recommended by the zoning board of appeals only in accordance with the standards established in section 28-84 below, and may be recommended only in the following instances and in no others: 
(1)  To permit any yard or setback less than a yard or a setback required by the applicable regulations; 
(2)  To permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area of width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than 75 percent of the required area and width; 
(3)  To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as required facilities for two or more uses, provided that substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week; 
(4)  To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than one parking space or loading space, or 25 percent of the required facilities, whichever number is greater; 
(5)  To increase by not more than 25 percent the maximum distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served; 
(6)  To permit a variation relative to the maximum height abovegrade, or the minimum elevation (head clearance) abovegrade of signs; to permit a variation relative to minimum setback requirements for signs; and to permit a variation relative to maximum projection of signs in all districts; 
(7)  To permit a variation relative to minimum dwelling size within a residential district; 
(8)  To permit a variation of the conditions of use or special requirements of any district; 
(9)  To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building or structure which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, explosions, acts of God or acts of a public enemy; 
(10)  Any requirement of sections 28-246, 28-247, 28-248, 28-250, 28-251, 28-252, 28-253, 28-255(a) and 28-313. 
(Ord. Co. 850, §§ 7.7-1, 7.7-6, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2005-36, § 2, 9-26-05; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 3, 2-12-07) 
Sec. 28-82. - Procedures. 
    The procedure for obtaining a variation from the requirements of this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  An application for a variation shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who will forward such applications to the chairman of the zoning board of appeals. The application shall contain such information that the board of trustees may, by rule require. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing within 60 days after receiving the application from the zoning administrator. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before such hearing. 
(3)  Appellant shall notify all adjoining property owners by regular mail or hand delivery at least five days prior to the hearing. Applicant shall provide a sworn certification to the village administrator that such was mailed or hand delivered with a listing of those notified. Further, the applicant and/or his assigned agent is required to erect at least one sign for every 500 linear feet of street frontage with a minimum of one sign on each street abutting the property. It will be the responsibility of the applicant and/or his assigned agent to ensure that the sign(s) is/(are) placed and maintained as herein provided. Failure to properly post sign(s) shall be grounds for deferral or denial of the application. Sign(s) shall be posted upon the subject property at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The applicant and/or his assigned agent is responsible for removing said sign(s) within five days after the final determinations before the zoning board of appeals. Should the applicant and/or his assigned agent refuse or fail to remove such sign or signs as herein provided, the village administrator shall cause said sign(s) to be removed and shall bill the applicant for the cost of said removal. The applicant shall provide a sworn certification to the village administrator that such notice was posted and maintained upon the subject property prior to the public hearing. The village administrator may vary the provisions of this subsection (3) when these provisions are found inappropriate under the circumstances to provide the intended notice, and shall then require an alternative method of sign display that will provide the intended notice to the public. If an alternative method is deemed necessary the required fees will be determined by the village administrator and paid by the applicant and/or his assigned agent. 
(4)  Within 30 days of the public hearing the zoning board of appeals shall submit their findings and recommendations to the board of trustees. The zoning board of appeals may recommend approval or denial of any variation authorized in section 28-85, in accordance with the standards of section 28-84. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.7-2, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 97-12, § 3, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 2, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 28-83. - Action by board of trustees. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall not act upon a proposed variation to this chapter until it shall have received a written report and recommendation from the zoning board of appeals on the proposed variation. 
(b)  The board of trustees may grant or deny any application for a variation provided, however, that in case of a written protest against any proposed variation, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage, directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk, the variation shall not be passed, except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the board of trustees. 
(c)  If an application for a proposed variation is not acted upon finally by the board of trustees within 90 days of the date the board of trustees receives the zoning board of appeals recommendations, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the board of trustees and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.7-3, 5-24-82) 
State Law reference- Variations generally, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3.1 et seq.; certain variations to be granted by two-thirds vote of board of trustees, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-10. 
Sec. 28-84. - Standards for issuance. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall not make a recommendation to the board of trustees to vary the regulations of this chapter, unless in each specific case there are findings of practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of those regulations relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land and in making said findings, the zoning board of appeals shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the conditions upon which an application for a variation is based are unique; 
(2)  Whether the purpose of the variation is based exclusively upon a desire to increase financial gain; 
(3)  Whether the granting of the variation will be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located and whether the variation, if granted, will alter the essential character of the locality; 
(4)  Whether the proposed variation will impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; and 
(5)  Whether the alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and has not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the property. 
    The zoning board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this section and the objectives of this chapter. 
(6)  Where the zoning board of appeals is considering a variance application to code requirements found in section 28-255, exterior surface requirements, in addition to considering the above factors (1) through (5) that may apply, the following factors are also to be considered: 
a.  Architectural design features which would unreasonably limit the incorporation of a masonry exterior; 
b.  The overall building height, square footage, length of sidewall dimensions and location of foundation in relation to lot lines and structures in the area taking into consideration the smaller the home and closer proximity to adjacent structures the greater requirement for masonry; 
c.  Any local historical evidence of exterior building materials on residential home design styles identified or recognized by the American Institute of Architects as 19 th century up to the mid 20 th century in origin; 
d.  The existence or lack thereof of architectural features on all elevations. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.7-4, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2005-36, § 2, 9-26-05) 
State Law reference- Prerequisites for variances, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-4, 5/11-13-5. 
Sec. 28-85. - Term. 
    No ordinance varying the requirements of this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date of such ordinance unless the permitted variation has been substantially implemented. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.7-6, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-86. - Effect of denial. 
    No application for a variation which has been denied by the board of trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.7-7, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-87-28-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMENDMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinance amendments, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-14. 

Sec. 28-101. - Generally. 
    The regulations and districts established by this chapter may be amended from time to time by the board of trustees through the enactment of an amending ordinance. No such amending ordinance shall be adopted prior to zoning board of appeals conducting a public hearing and submitting a report of its finding and recommendations to the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.8-1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-102. - Initiation. 
    Amendments may be proposed by the board of trustees, zoning board of appeals, plan commission and by any other person having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is described in the application for an amendment. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.8-2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-103. - Procedures. 
(a)  With the exceptions of application to rezone property to an R-3, R-4, B-4, or B-B district (such applications shall be processed in accordance with division 7 of this article). The process for amending this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  An application for an amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who shall forward such application to the board of trustees prior to the next scheduled meeting of the board of trustees. The application shall be in such form and contain such information and be accompanied by such plans as the board of trustees may by rule require. 
(2)  A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded by the village clerk to the chairman of the zoning board of appeals with a request to hold a public hearing. 
(3)  The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing within 60 days after receiving the application from the board of trustees. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before such hearing. 
(4)  Applicant shall notify all adjoining property owners by regular mail or hand delivery at least five days prior to the hearing. Applicant shall provide a sworn certification to the village administrator that such notice was mailed or hand delivered with a listing of those notified. Further, the applicant and/or his assigned agent is required to erect at least one sign for every 500 linear feet of street frontage with a minimum of one sign on each street abutting the property. It will be the responsibility of the applicant and/or his assigned agent to ensure that the sign(s) is/(are) placed and maintained as herein provided. Failure to properly post sign(s) shall be grounds for deferral or denial of the application. Sign(s) shall be posted upon the subject property at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The applicant and/or his assigned agent is responsible for removing said sign(s) within five days after the final determination before the zoning board of appeals. Should the applicant and/or his assigned agent refuse or fail to remove such sign or signs as herein provided, the village administrator shall cause said sign(s) to be removed and shall bill the applicant for the cost of said removal. The applicant shall provide a sworn certification to the village administrator that such notice was posted and maintained upon the subject property prior to the public hearing. The village administrator may vary the provisions of this subsection (4) when these provisions are found inappropriate under the circumstances to provide the intended notice, and shall then require an alternative method of sign display that will provide the intended notice to the public. If an alternative method is deemed necessary the required fees will be determined by the village administrator and paid by the applicant and/or his assigned agent. 
(5)  The zoning board of appeals shall within 60 days after the hearing transmit a written report giving its findings and recommendations to the board of trustees. 
(b)  Where the purpose or effect of a proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property, the zoning board of appeals shall make findings based upon evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following matters: 
(1)  Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question. 
(2)  The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question. 
(3)  The suitability of the property in question for the use permitted under the existing zoning classification. 
(4)  The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question, including changes if any, which have taken place since the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning classification. 
(5)  Conformance or nonconformance with the officially adopted plans of the village. 
(c)  The zoning board of appeals shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such an amendment is in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant. The zoning board of appeals may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the zoning classification of the property in question to any different classification than that requested by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.8-3, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 88-11, § 2, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 97-12, § 4, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 2, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 28-104. - Action by board of trustees. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this chapter until it shall have received a written report and recommendation from the zoning board of appeals the proposed amendment. 
(b)  The board of trustees may grant or deny an application for an amendment; provided, however, that in case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage, directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk, the amendment shall not be passed, except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the board of trustees. 
(c)  If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the board of trustees within 90 days of the date the board of trustees receives the zoning board of appeals recommendations, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the board of trustees and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.8-4, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-105. - Effect of denial. 
    No application for a zoning map amendment which has been denied by the board of trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of condition found to be valid by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.8-5, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-106. - Repeal of amendment. 
    In any case where a change of boundary lines of the zoning district map has been granted, and where no development has taken place within two years, the zoning board of appeals may hold a public hearing, after notice of public hearing has been given, and recommend to the board of trustees that such zoning be affirmed or repealed and rezoned to its most appropriate district classification. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.8-6, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-107-28-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Special uses, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1.1, 5/11-13-7 et seq. 

Sec. 28-121. - Generally. 
(a)  This chapter is based upon the division of the village into districts, within which the uses of land, and the uses and bulk of buildings and structures are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, can only be properly classified in any particular district upon consideration in each case of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such uses fall into three categories: 
(1)  Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest. 
(2)  Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give use to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property, public facilities, or the village, as a whole. 
(3)  Uses, either public or private that because of past or present conditions need special consideration. 
(b)  A special use permit shall authorize only such uses that are listed on the permit and only under the conditions of this chapter and any such other conditions that may be made part of the special use permit. A special use permit shall be null and void unless work thereon is substantially under way within 12 months of the date of issuance. The board of trustees, based on evidence presented in a written application may extend the 12-month limit for implementing uses permitted by a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 850, §§ 7.9-1, 8.3-8, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-122. - Authorized. 
    Special use permits may be granted by the board of trustees, but only in accordance with the requirements set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.9-2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-123. - Procedures. 
    With the exception of special uses for planned development and for mobile home park applications, (such applications shall be processed in accordance with divisions 7 and 8 of this article) the process for obtaining a special use permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  An application for a special use permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator, who shall forward such application to the board of trustees prior to the next scheduled meeting of the board of trustees. The application shall be in such form and contain such information and be accompanied by such plans as the board of trustees may, by rule require. 
(2)  A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded by the village clerk to the chairman of the plan commission with a request to conduct a public hearing. 
(3)  The plan commission shall hold a public hearing within 60 days after receiving the application from the board of trustees. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before such hearing. 
(4)  The plan commission shall within 60 days after the hearing transmit a written report detailing its findings and recommendations, to the board of trustees. The report should contain: 
a.  The extent to which the proposed special use departs from the zoning and subdivision regulations of the village. 
b.  The conformance or non-conformance of the proposed special use with the standards of section 28-125. 
c.  The relationship and compatibility of the proposed special use to adjacent properties and neighborhoods. 
d.  The effect of the proposed special use on the development pattern, tax base and economic well being of the village. 
e.  Any necessary conditions or guarantees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.9-3, 5-24-82) 
State Law reference- Special use permit hearings, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-7. 
Sec. 28-124. - Action by board of trustees. 
(a)  After receiving the plan commission report, the board of trustees may, based on the standards contained in section 28-124 grant or deny the application for a special use permit; provided, however, that in the case of a written protest against proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage, directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the village clerk, the amendment shall not be passed, except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the board of trustees. 
(b)  The ordinance granting a special use permit shall include all conditions of such special use permit. 
(c)  If an application for a proposed special use is not acted upon finally by the board of trustees within 90 days of the date the board of trustees receives the plan commission report, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the board of trustees and the petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.9-4, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-125. - Standards for issuance. 
    No special use permit shall be granted unless: 
(1)  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public's health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare. 
(2)  The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(3)  The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(4)  Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided. 
(5)  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(6)  The special use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable regulation of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may in each instance be modified by the board of trustees pursuant to the recommendation of the plan commission. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.9-5, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-126. - Effect of denial. 
    No application for a special use permit which has been denied by the board of trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the order of denial except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of condition found to be valid by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.9-6, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-127-28-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 28-141. - Generally. 
    Planned developments are of a substantially different nature than other special uses permitted under this chapter, therefore, the procedures and standards in this division shall govern the processing, approval and development of planned developments. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-142. - Purposes and objectives. 
    The planned development is allowed for the purpose of obtaining the following objectives; any recommendations or approvals of a planned development shall be based on a consideration of how the planned development achieves the objectives: 
(1)  Variety and flexibility in land development that is necessary to meet changes in technology and demand, that will be consistent with the best interests of the entire village. 
(2)  The allocation, maintenance, and permanent preservation of common open space, recreation areas and facilities; to offer, recreational opportunities close to home, to enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by the conservation of natural resources. 
(3)  A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict application of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic and geologic features, air and water quality, and other natural resources and amenities. 
(5)  A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities, that results in better development and design, and the construction of aesthetic amenities. 
(6)  An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings and other facilities. 
(7)  Land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort and welfare. 
(8)  Innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development so that growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of space ancillary to the buildings. 
This division is not intended as a panacea and should not be utilized as a device for making increased densities more palatable, or as a means of circumventing the village's development regulations. This division should only be employed in instances where there is truly some benefit for the community to be derived from its use. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-143. - Procedures. 
(a)  The process for review and approval of planned developments shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to the filing of a formal application the developer shall request a pre-application conference with the zoning administrator and the appropriate village staff as well as representatives of the board of trustees or the plan commission. The pre-application conference is mandatory but does not require formal application or fee. 
    The purpose of the pre-application conference is to make advice and assistance available to the applicant before presentation of the preliminary plan, so that the applicant may determine: 
a.  Whether the proposed planned development appears in general to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances; 
b.  Whether any zoning amendment or variation is required in connection with the proposed planned development; 
c.  Whether the proposed planned development will be in conformity with the land-use policies and objectives of the village, as expressed from time to time by appropriate ordinances or resolutions of the board of trustees. 
(2)  Preliminary plan application. 
a.  Application for approval of a planned development shall be filed with the zoning administrator. This application shall contain the information listed in section 28-144 and any information the board of trustees may, by rule require. The application and supporting plans and information shall be forwarded to the board of trustees prior to the next scheduled meeting of the board of trustees. 
b.  After the board of trustees has formally received the application, the application shall be forwarded by the village clerk to the chairman of the plan commission with the request to conduct a public hearing for the purpose of considering the application. 
c.  The plan commission shall hold a public hearing within 60 days after receiving the application from the board of trustees. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before such hearing. 
d.  Appellant shall notify all adjoining property owners by regular mail or hand delivery at least five days prior to the hearing. Applicant shall provide a sworn certification to the village administrator that such notice was mailed or hand delivered with a listing of those notified. Further, the applicant and/or his assigned agent is required to erect at least one sign for every 500 linear feet of street frontage with a minimum of one sign on each street abutting the property in order to adequately inform the public. It will be the responsibility of the applicant and/or his assigned agent to ensure that the sign(s) is/(are) placed and maintained as herein provided. Failure to properly post sign(s) shall be grounds for deferral or denial of the application. Sign(s) shall be posted upon the subject property at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The applicant and/or his assigned agent is responsible for removing said sign(s) within five days after the final determination before the plan commission. Should the applicant and/or his assigned agent refuse or fail to remove such sign or signs as herein provided`, the village administrator shall cause said sign(s) to be removed and shall bill the applicant for the cost of said removal. The applicant shall provide a sworn certification to the village administrator that such notice was posted and maintained upon the subject property prior to the public hearing. The village administrator may vary the provisions of this subsection d. when these provisions are found inappropriate under the circumstances to provide the intended notice, and shall then require an alternative method of sign display that will provide the intended notice to the public. If an alternative method is deemed necessary the required fees will be determined by the village administrator and paid by the applicant and/or his assigned agent. 
e.  The plan commission shall within 60 days after the hearing transmit a written report detailing its findings and recommendations to the board of trustees. The report should contain: 
1.  The degree to which the proposed planned development achieves the objectives of section 28-142. 
2.  The relationship and compatibility of the proposed planned development with adjacent properties and neighborhoods. 
3.  The effect of the proposed planned development on the development pattern, tax base and economic well-being of the village. 
4.  The specific relief and variations from the zoning and subdivision regulations of the village. 
5.  Any necessary revisions, conditions or guarantees. 
(3)  Action by board of trustees on preliminary plan. The board of trustees after receipt of the preliminary plan of the planned development, shall approve, modify or disapprove such preliminary plan. The board of trustees may require such special conditions in the approval of the preliminary plan, as it may deem necessary to insure conformity with the intent of all comprehensive plan elements and the stated purposes of the planned development. 
    Upon approval by the board of trustees of the preliminary plan by resolution, a record shall be prepared, including findings of fact and setting forth the terms of relief and/or variations granted from existing ordinances in general. No building permit shall be issued for any structure until a final planned development plan has been filed and approved. 
    Approval of a preliminary planned development plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan, rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan or plans. The final plan or plans shall be submitted by the developer, not later than one year (or such additional time, as may be authorized by the board of trustees) after approval of the preliminary plan, for approval by the corporate authorities of the village and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and conditions, if any, of the preliminary approval. The final plan shall be approved as the final land-use and zoning plan if it conforms substantially with the preliminary plan. The preliminary and final plan may be filed and approved simultaneously, if all requirements hereof are met. 
(4)  Final plan. The final plan of the planned development shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan and contain the materials required by section 28-145 if desired by the developer, the final plan may be submitted in stages with each stage reflecting a portion of the approved preliminary plan which is proposed to be recorded and developed; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required procedure for approval of the final plan of a planned development shall require the following: 
a.  The final plan and supporting data shall be filed with the zoning administrator and forwarded by him to the plan commission for certification that the final plan is in conformity with these regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary plan. 
b.  If the planned development constitutes a subdivision, a final subdivision plat shall be submitted. Any such final subdivision plat shall set forth on the face thereof suitable dedications of permanent open space to be owned in common; easements, rights-of-way; and all other information required for a final plat by chapter 23 of this Code, as the same may be amended and in force from time to time. 
c.  A final site plan of the planned development shall be filed indicating the locations of all buildings, all parking and loading spaces, and any other special structure, facility, or feature approved or required by the board of trustees. 
d.  The final version of the covenants, if any, by which the applicant proposes to regulate land-use and otherwise protect the proposed development, accompanied by the written representation and warranty of the applicant, in form and substance satisfactory to the village attorney, to the effect that the owner of the real property which is the subject of the proposed planned development has not sold or otherwise disposed of any interest in the property and will not sell, or otherwise dispose of any such interest, prior to the filing for record of said covenants in the office of the county recorder of deeds. 
e.  Such deeds or easement agreements, if any, as are required or approved the board of trustees, shall be filed in form and substance approved by the village attorney, conveying a suitable ownership interest in the parcels within the proposed planned development which are to be subject to public or common ownership. 
f.  Filing a copy of the articles of incorporation of the homeowners', merchants', or industrial owners' association, if any, required or approved by the board of trustees, certified by the Secretary of the State of Illinois; not more than 30 days prior to the filing of the final plan; a certificate of good standing for such corporation issued by the Secretary of the State of Illinois, as of a date not more than 30 days prior to the filing of such final plan; and a copy of the bylaws of such corporation certified by the secretary thereof as being a true, correct, and complete copy of such bylaws, as of a date not more than 30 days prior to the filing of such final plan. 
(5)  Approval of final plan by board of trustees. Upon receipt of the final plans and supporting information and a plan commission report confirming the conformance of the final plan with the preliminary plan the board of trustees shall by resolution approve the final plan. 
(6)  Recordation. Approval by the board of trustees of the final plan for any proposed planned development shall be effective only for a period of 40 days after the date of such approval unless, within such 90-day period, the applicant shall record or cause the recordation of the final plan, including any final subdivision plan, the final restrictive covenants, and the deeds and/or easement agreement required or approved by the board of trustees, in the office of the county recorder of deeds. 
(b)  Any applications for amendments to this chapter that would result in the rezoning of property to an R-3, R-4, B-4, or B-B district shall follow the process and meet the requirements of subsection (a) with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The notice of public hearing shall state that the purpose of the public hearing is to consider amending the zoning ordinance to rezone property to a R-3, R-4, B-4, or B-B district. 
(2)  In lieu of subsection (a)(3), the following shall apply: 
    Upon receipt of the preliminary plan and the plan commission recommendations, the board of trustees may grant or deny the application for amendment; provided, however, that in case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered is filed with the village clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the board of trustees. If the board of trustees adopts the ordinance rezoning property to a R-3, R-4, B-4, or B-B district, it shall also adopt a resolution approving the preliminary plan. 
No building permit shall be issued until a final plan has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-2, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 88-11, § 2, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 97-12, § 5, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 2, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 28-144. - Information required on preliminary plan. 
    The following information shall be required with all preliminary plans: 
(1)  A drawing of the planned development shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and their use, common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and drawings and shall include: 
a.  Boundary lines-Bearings and distances. 
b.  Easements-Location, width, and purpose. 
c.  Streets on, and adjacent to, the tract-Street name, right-of-way width, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc. 
d.  Utilities on, and adjacent to, the tract-Location, size, and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and streetlights; direction and distance to, and size of, nearest water mains and sewers adjacent to the tract showing invert elevation of sewers. 
e.  Ground elevations on the tract-For land that slopes less than one-half percent, show one-foot contours; show spot elevations at all breaks in grades, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than one-half percent show two-foot contours. 
f.  Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the village engineer-Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet. 
g.  Zoning on, and adjacent to, the tract. 
h.  Internal uses of each building or structure, as well as the specific overall land-use of the premises. 
i.  Title and certificates-Present tract designation according to official records in offices of the county recorder of deeds; title under which the proposed development is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, and notation stating acreage. 
j.  Names-The names and addresses of the persons to whom notices of hearings hereunder may be sent including the subdivider, the designer of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land to be platted. 
k.  Open space-All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated. 
l.  General location, purpose, and height of each building, other than single-family residence on individually platted lots. 
m.  Map data-Name of development, north point, scale and date of preparation. 
n.  Approximately square footage of each use. 
o.  Number of units-Dwelling, business or industrial. 
(2)  Explanation of the character of the planned development and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations. 
(3)  Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project. 
(4)  A development schedule indicating: 
a.  Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area, density, use, and public facilities such as open space to be developed with each state. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material. 
b.  Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage. 
(5)  Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development and any of its common open space. 
(6)  Information on the density of residential uses, including dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units by type, and the number of buildings by type. 
(7)  Information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential development, including the amount and location of common open space. 
(8)  Information on all service facilities and off-street parking facilities. 
(9)  Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building, and the number, size, and type of dwelling units. 
(10)  Preliminary plans for (items c-g may be waived by the plan commission): 
a.  Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of pavement, and construction details. 
b.  Sidewalks, walkways, bikepaths. 
c.  Sanitary sewers. 
d.  Storm drainage. 
e.  Water supply system. 
f.  Underground lighting program. 
g.  A general landscape planting plan. 
(11)  A traffic impact study conducted by a transportation engineer (mutually agreed on by the board of trustees and the developer), detailing the projected traffic impact of a proposed development shall be prepared at the request of the plan commission. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-4, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-145. - Contents of final plans, covenants, etc. 
(a)  A final plan, suitable for recording with the county recorder of deeds shall be prepared. The purpose of the planned development plan is to designate with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands, not so treated, into common open areas and building areas, and to designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building or structure, as well as of the land in general. The final plan of the planned development shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development within the planned development. 
(2)  If subdivided lands are included in the planned development, a subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the requirements of chapter 23 of this Code. 
(3)  An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use area, including common open space. 
(4)  Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed, and a designation of the specific internal uses to which each building shall be put. 
(5)  Certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication of land and recording of the document. 
(6)  Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area, including land areas, number of buildings, number of dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  All common open space, at the election of the village, shall be: 
(1)  Conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, or conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the planned development or adjoining property owners or any one or more of them; or 
(2)  Guaranteed by a restrictive covenant describing the open space and its maintenance and improvement running with the land for the benefit of residents of the planned development or adjoining property owners and/or both. 
(c)  All public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the planned development shall be either constructed in advance of the approval of the final plan, or a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, certificate of deposit or other guarantee of improvements for an amount determined by the village engineer in a form approved by the village attorney shall be provided to guarantee the completion of all public facilities not completed at the time of final plat approval. 
(d)  Final agreements, provisions, or covenants shall govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-5, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-146. - Legal status of plans and covenants and changes thereto. 
    All planned developments shall be developed in strict compliance with the recorded final plan and supportive data. All final plans and covenants filed and recorded hereunder shall be contractual undertakings by, and shall be binding upon, the applicants therefor, the owners of the land covered by such planned development, their successors and assigns, and shall limit and control the construction, location, use and operation of all land in such planned development, and all improvements and structures to be located thereon. No changes shall be made in the planned development except as follows: 
(1)  Changes which alter the concept of intent of the planned development including increases in the density, increases in the height of buildings, reductions of proposed open space, changes in road standards, utilities, water, electricity, and drainage, or changes in the final governing agreements, provisions, or covenants, may be approved only by submission of a new preliminary plan and supporting data, and following the "preliminary approval" steps and subsequent amendment of the final plan of the planned development. 
(2)  The plan commission may approve minor changes in the planned development which do not change the concept or intent of the development, without going through the preliminary approval steps. Minor changes are defined as any change not defined as a major change. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-6, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-147. - Use exceptions. 
    The plan commission may recommend, and the board of trustees may authorize that there be permitted in part of the area of a proposed planned development, and for the duration of such development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which development is located, provided that the plan commission shall find: 
(1)  That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the planned development; 
(2)  That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood; 
(3)  That not more than 30 percent of the ground area of the planned development shall be devoted to such specified use exceptions; provided, however, that in a residential planned development not more than eight percent of the total ground area in the planned development which is zoned for residential purposes shall be devoted to uses first permitted within the business zoning districts; and no ground area in the residential planned development shall be devoted to uses first permitted within the I-1 district. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-7, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-148. - Bulk regulations. 
(a)  In the case of any planned development, the plan commission may recommend, and the board of trustees may authorize exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this chapter within the boundaries of such planned development, provided that the plan commission shall find: 
(1)  That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an integrated site plan more beneficial to the residents or occupants of such development as well as the neighboring property, than otherwise would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this article for buildings developed on separate zoning lots; 
(2)  That the overall floor area ratio for the planned development would not exceed by more than 30 percent, the maximum floor area ratio which would be determined on the basis of the floor area ratio required for the individual uses in such planned developments, as stipulated in each district; 
(3)  That along the periphery of such planned developments, yards shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which said development is located. 
(b)  The maximum permitted gross density of planned developments within the residential districts shall be as follows: 
Zoning District Maximum 
Permitted 
Gross Density R-E .....  4  R-1-A .....  5  R-1 .....  6.5 R-2 .....  8  R-3 ..... 10.5 R-4 ..... 16   
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-8, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-149. - Designation of permanent common open space. 
(a)  "Permanent common open space" shall be defined as parks, playgrounds, parkway medians, landscaped green space, schools, community centers, or other similar areas in public ownership or areas covered by an open space easement. 
(b)  No plan for a planned development shall be approved, unless such plan provides for permanent open space equivalent to at least 30 percent of the total area in single-family residential planned developments, 40 percent in multiple-family planned developments, and ten percent in a shopping center or industrial planned development. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-9, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-150. - Spacing between detached residential building. 
    A minimum distance of 25 feet shall be maintained between detached residential buildings. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.10-10, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-151-28-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS 

Sec. 28-166. - Generally. 
(a)  A request for a special use permit for a mobile home park shall be subject to the same requirements and procedures as a planned development as detailed in division 7 of this article. 
(b)  The zoning administrator with the consent of the plan commission may vary requirements of division 7 if in their opinion the requirements are clearly not applicable to a mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.11, 5-24-82) 
Cross reference- Mobile home parks, ch. 14. 
Secs. 28-167-28-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - APPEALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning appeals, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12, 5/11-13-13. 

Sec. 28-181. - Generally. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement or determination made by the zoning administrator or other administrative official. 
(b)  An appeal, in which it is alleged that there is error in any decision made by the zoning administrator under this chapter, may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person or government agency aggrieved by such decision. 
(c)  An appeal shall be filed with the village clerk in such a form that the board of trustees may, by rule require. The village clerk shall, without delay, forward to the zoning board of appeals a notice of the appeal together with all of the information constituting the record upon which the decision appealed was made. 
(Ord. No. 850, §§ 7.12-1, 7.12-2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-182. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the decision appealed unless the zoning administrator certifies to the zoning board of appeals after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of trustees or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator and on due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.12-3, 5-24-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-12. 
Sec. 28-183. - Hearing. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties including the applicant and the zoning administrator. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.12-4, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-184. - Decisions. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall render a written decision on the appeal within a reasonable time, but in no event more than 90 days after the filing of the notice of appeal, and shall promptly forward a copy of the decision to the parties. The zoning board of appeals may affirm or may, upon the concurring vote of four members, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision of the zoning administrator, as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have the powers of the zoning administrator. All decisions, after hearing the zoning board of appeals from the administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations and shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7.12-5, 5-24-82) 
State Law reference- Appeals from decision of board of appeals, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-13. 
Secs. 28-185-28-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses, 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1. 

Sec. 28-201. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses may be continued. 
(b)  This chapter establishes separate zoning districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that district. Each district contains requirements to insure the attainment of the intent and purpose of this chapter. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those districts that those buildings, structures and uses which do not conform with the requirements of the district they are located in not be continued without the restrictions contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-202. - Authority to continue. 
(a)  Any lawfully established use of a building, structure or land on May 28, 1982 or on the effective date of an amendment to this chapter, that does not conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  Any building or structure lawfully established on May 28, 1982 may continue in use provided there is no physical change other than that allowed in this article. 
(c)  Any building for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to May 28, 1982 or the effective date of an amendment hereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started within one year of the date of issuance of the building permit and further provided that all requirements of this chapter that can in the estimation of the zoning administrator be complied with are adhered to. 
(d)  Any business for which a business license had been granted prior to May 28, 1982 may establish that business at the location specified provided that the business begins operation within one year of the date of issuance of the business license and further provided that all requirements of this chapter that can in the estimation of the zoning administrator be complied with are adhered to. 
(e)  Any proposed subdivision that possesses a valid preliminary plat or subdivision under the provisions of chapter 23 of this Code on May 28, 1982 whose lots do not meet the required lot area or lot width requirements of the district such lots are located in may use such lots for purpose designated by the preliminary plat provided all other provisions of this chapter are adhered to and further provided that if the period of validity of such preliminary plat expires without the developer obtaining final plat approval any subsequent action to develop such land shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-203. - Discontinuance of use. 
(a)  Whenever any part of a building structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of this chapter, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use. 
(b)  Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of 180 days, or whenever there is evidence a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not be re-established, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district such land is located in. 
(c)  Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of 180 days shall constitute abandonment and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.3, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-204. - Vacant lots of record. 
(a)  Lots of record existing on May 28, 1982 that do not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be used only as hereafter provided. 
(b)  Wherever one or more lots of record or parts thereof which are contiguous and under common ownership, exist that individually do not meet the requirements of this chapter, but a combination thereof would meet the requirements of this chapter, such combination shall be considered a single zoning lot. 
(c)  Any vacant lot of record having frontage on a dedicated street (not a dedicated right-of-way) on May 28, 1982 may be used for a use permitted within the district such lot is located in provided one of the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  The lot conformed with the minimum lot area and minimum lot width requirements of the previous ordinance. 
(2)  A variation of the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of the district such lot is located in has been granted in accordance with the provisions of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  With the exception of the previous allowances for minimum lot area and minimum lot width all other provisions of this chapter shall be met. 
(e)  Any resubdivision of nonconforming lots of record shall be in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.4, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-205. - Repairs and alterations. 
(a)  Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a non-conformed use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use. 
(b)  No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations: 
(1)  The alteration is required by law; 
(2)  When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the nonconforming building or structure; 
(3)  When the alteration, in the estimation of the building inspector will reduce the degree of nonconformance; 
(4)  When the alteration would result in improved livability of a dwelling unit or units, provided no structural alteration would increase the number of dwelling units; 
(5)  When the building inspector determines a structural alteration is necessary to protect the health and safety of inhabitants or users of the structures; 
(6)  When a nonconforming building or structure contains a use or uses permitted in the district where such uses are located, provided such structural alterations will not increase the degree of nonconformance. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.5, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-206. - Damage and destruction. 
(a)  If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50 percent or more of its replacement value at that time, the building or structure shall only be allowed to be reconstructed in any manner that does not fully comply with the provisions of this chapter under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Single-family, two-family and multifamily residences located in a residential district, that do not meet the lot size requirements may be rebuilt provided all other requirements are met. 
(2)  A variation has been granted based on evidence that full compliance is not possible due to a unique hardship. The variation will specify what requirements are to be waived and to what degree. All other requirements of this chapter shall be met. 
(b)  If damage and destruction does not amount to 50 percent of the replacement costs the nonconforming building or structure may be restored to its original condition. 
(c)  In any event, restoration or repair must begin within two years of the date of the damage or destruction and diligently prosecuted to completion. If this is not done any future use of such land shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.6, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-207. - Additions and enlargements. 
(a)  No nonconforming building or structure or conforming building containing a nonconforming use shall be expanded or enlarged except under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The building or structure is nonconforming due to lack of lot size or lot width. Expansion may occur provided all other provisions of this chapter have been met. 
(2)  A conforming building containing a nonconforming use may be expanded provided the nonconforming use is discontinued. 
(3)  A conforming building or structure that houses more than one use may be expanded provided such expansion is to be utilized entirely by a conforming use. 
(4)  The addition or enlargement would not increase the degree of nonconformance. 
(b)  Expansion may occur if a variation has been granted based on evidence presented to the board of trustees that a unique hardship exists. The variation will specify the conditions under which expansion may occur. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.7, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-208. - Elimination. 
(a)  All signs shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter within a five-year period; otherwise they shall be removed. 
(b)  All mobile homes and mobile structures shall be removed or relocated in manner to bring full compliance with the yard requirements of the district they are located in within a period of five years; otherwise they shall be removed. 
(c)  The period specified for removal shall begin on May 28, 1982, or upon the effective date of any amendment hereto that creates the nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.8, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 85-10, 8-26-85) 
Sec. 28-209. - Conversion to special use. 
(a)  Any nonconforming building, structure or use may be converted to a permitted special use by the granting of a special use permit under the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
(b)  This conversion may only occur when it is shown that the nonconforming building, structure or use is providing a particular service to the residents of the village and that such building structure or use is not detrimental to the village, or adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9.10, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-210. - Rezoning of nonconforming lots. 
    Any zoning lot which is nonconforming due to lot size or width, or any other yard requirement, which has a usable building located thereon, may be rezoned to a different zoning classification so as to allow a reasonable use of the existing improvement, provided that such rezoning is done in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and such rezoning is in conformance with adopted village plans. 
(Ord. No. 89-31, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Secs. 28-211-28-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONING MAP 

Sec. 28-226. - Creation of zoning districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the village is hereby organized into 15 districts, except in existing nonconforming areas and planned developments the minimum area that may constitute a separate or detached part of any zoning district shall be as follows: 
Minimum 
Zoning District     Area  
R-E single-family residence district ..... 5 acres 
R-1A single-family residence district ..... 5 acres 
R-1 single-family residence district ..... 1 acre 
R-2 single-family residence district ..... 5 acres 
R-3 multifamily district ..... 1 acre 
R-4 multifamily district ..... 1 acre 
R-EU single-family residence district ..... 5 acres 
A-G agricultural district ..... 20 acres 
B-1 central business district: 
Must be contiguous to, or within 200 feet of the existing district 
B-2 highway service district ..... 1 acre 
B-3 office and research district ..... 1 acre 
B-4 planned commercial center district ..... 3 acres 
B-B business buffer district ..... 7,000 sq. ft. 
I-1 limited industrial district ..... 5 acres 
I-2 Gateway Commerce District ..... 5 acres 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3.1, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 88-11, § 2, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 89-2, § 1, 2-13-89; Ord. No. 91-12, § 1, 4-22-91; Ord. No. 2000-38, § 2, 9-25-00) 
Sec. 28-227. - Zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts designated above are established as shown on the maps entitled "Official Zoning Map of Crete, Illinois, dated May 24, 1982", which map is attached hereto and is made a part hereof, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3.2, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-228. - District boundaries. 
    When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  District boundary lines are either the center line of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements or the boundary lines of sections, quarter sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended [as] otherwise indicated. 
(2)  In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such strips shall be in accordance with the divisions shown on the maps measured at right angles from the center line of the street or highway, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the maps from section, quarter section or division lines, or railroad right-of-way, unless otherwise indicated. 
(3)  Where a lot held in on ownership and of record on May 28, 1982 is divided by a district boundary line the entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted district, provided that this construction shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of the lot by more than 25 feet. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3.3, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-229. - Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way. 
    All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designed, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting on such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights-of-way or waterways. Where the center line of a street, alley, public way, waterway or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise indicated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.14, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-230. - Zoning of annexed land. 
    Any area annexed to the village shall be automatically zoned R-E single-family residence district, unless the property has been zoned otherwise after a pre-annexation agreement. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.15-1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-231. - Zoning subject to pre-annexation agreement. 
(a)  Where a pre-annexation agreement is in effect that precludes the changing of zoning district classifications on the subject property the provisions of the zoning ordinance in effect at the date of annexation and the zoning district classification specified in the pre-annexation agreement shall apply. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter or any subsequent amendments hereto shall not apply until such time as the term of the pre-annexation agreement has expired or the developer has agreed to the application of such provisions. 
(c)  Within six months prior to the expiration of any such annexation agreement the zoning board of appeals shall initiate an amendment to apply the appropriate zoning district classifications to the subject property, after the expiration of annexation agreement. Such amendments shall be in accordance with the provisions of division 5 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.15-2, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-232-28-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 28-246. - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  On lots or on portions of lots or on any legal combination of lots where the lots were created as part of a subdivision prior to January 1, 1965, and where these lots are located in the R-E, R-IA, and R-1 residential districts, a garage shall be required but may be detached from the main structure. Otherwise, in the R-E, R-IA, and R-1 residential districts, garages shall be required and be attached to the main structure. 
    In the R-2 general residence district, garages shall be required but may be attached or detached from the main structure. 
    Except as noted herein, in all cases only one garage per zoning lot shall be permitted which shall not exceed 899 square feet in size and shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the architectural style of the main structure located on adjacent zoning lots. An attached garage, in all areas, shall be an integral part of the main structure with a minimum of 30 percent of one common wall attached to the main structure. 
    Within the areas zoned R-2 and where the lots of record were created prior to June 1, 1988, one garage per each full increment of 10,000 square feet of zoning lot may be permitted. Such garages shall in all other respects conform to the above noted size and attachment requirements where attached garages are built. 
(b)  Each accessory use shall be located within the prescribed rear yard setbacks of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  No accessory building or structure shall be constructed prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(d)  In residential districts no accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building, nor exceed the height of 20 feet. 
(e)  The size of an accessory building shall not be greater than 200 square feet and no sidewall dimension shall exceed a length of 14 feet; guesthouse square footage shall not exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the main floor of the principal structure. 
(f)  Accessory buildings shall be bolted to a concrete slab. The exterior finish must be masonry, painted wood, stained wood, aluminum siding, vinyl siding, tempered or laminated glass and shall not include sheeting. 
(g)  On a reversed corner lot in a residential district, no accessory building or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall be closer to the side lot line abutting the street than the required front yard or the adjacent lot to the rear. In the above instance, no such accessory building shall be located within five feet of any part of a rear lot line which coincides with a side lot line or portion thereof of property in a residential district. 
(h)  Accessory buildings shall be the same distance from lot line in applicable district where located. 
(i)  A permit must be secured for all accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.4, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 88-3, § 1, 3-14-88; Ord. No. 89-31, § 2, 12-11-89; Ord. No. 95-04, § 2, 3-13-95; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 2, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 2003-49, § 2, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12) 
Sec. 28-247. - Sewage disposal and water supply. 
(a)  All buildings and structures erected after May 28, 1982, shall be served by a public sewage disposal system and also be served by and connected to the village central water supply system. Such sewer and water facilities shall meet all village, county and state requirements. 
(b)  In the event that the sewage disposal system or water supply system is within 200 feet of any zoning lot and, after referral to the village engineer for development of a feasibility report, the village engineer determines that it is feasible for the particular zoning lot to be connected to either or both systems, then the owner of such zoning lot shall be required to extend the sewer and/or water system to the zoning lot and thence across the frontage thereof, or in any other manner as may be approved by the village, to the other side of the width of the particular zoning lot. The size of the improvement (here, referring to sewer and/or water system extensions) and any other engineering requirements shall be determined by application of engineering standards and review of the village's capital improvement plans. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the village and owner(s) of the subject zoning lot or lots shall enter into an agreement with one another providing for the application of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. Such agreement shall include, but not by way of limitation, terms and provisions establishing an equitable means for providing for the recapture of costs that are not to be borne solely by the owner of the particular zoning lot or lots in question. Also, such agreements shall provide assurance to the village that the sewer and/or water connection and extension will be constructed in accordance with village plans and requirements, completed within a reasonable period of time following its undertaking and require that the lot owner(s) post with the village clerk sufficient cash to cover all improvements or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village from a financial institution acceptable to the village. 
(d)  In the event that the village engineer, through the application of a feasibility study, determines that it is not feasible for a particular zoning lot or lots to be connected to the village sewage and/or water systems, the owner or owners of the particular zoning lot or lots shall be granted an exception to the application of the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. The exception shall entitle the owner or owners of a zoning lot or lots to install private sewage treatment facilities and/or an individualized well, provided, however, that such sewage and water facilities shall be approved by the Will County Health Department and meet any applicable requirement imposed by either the village or the Will County Health Department. In the event that an exception is allowed as hereinabove provided, the owner or owners of the subject zoning lot or lots will be allowed to develop and improve such zoning lot or lots by using a private sewage treatment facility and/or individualized and private well; nevertheless, in the event that the village public sewer or public water systems are extended to within 200 feet of any lot line of the particular zoning lot or lots, then, and in that event, the owner or owners of such zoning lot or lots, upon receiving notice and demand from the village requesting that he, or they, disconnect from such private sewage and water systems and connect to the village public sewage and water systems, shall connect to such public sewage and water systems at his, or their, sole cost and expense. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.5, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 89-31, § 3, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 28-248. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Every outdoor swimming pool, whether above ground or level with the ground, having a maximum depth of over 18 inches shall be completely surrounded by a fence not less than five feet in height. A building or existing wall may be used as part of such enclosure. The walls of any above ground swimming pool shall not be deemed to constitute such a fence in and of themselves. Such required fence shall comply with all requirements of other village ordinances pertaining to fences, and the provisions of this section shall not be construed to require or permit any fence heights greater than permitted by such other ordinances. 
(b)  All gates or doors opening through the required fence shall be designed to permit locking and shall be kept locked when the pool is not in actual use or when the pool is unattended. All such gates or doors shall be self-latching and shall have the latches placed at least four feet above the ground or otherwise made inaccessible to small children. 
(c)  No swimming pool shall be located within ten feet of a septic absorption field. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.6, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-249. - Development of air rights. 
    The development of air rights above land located in any zoning district and utilized for public or private use, shall be permitted subject to all the requirements of the zoning district within which such development is located. However, plans for all such air rights development shall be submitted to the plan commission for its recommendations as to the appropriateness of the development in regard to the location of structures, traffic control, placement of utilities, and all other matters related to the physical development of said air rights. Such recommendations shall be forwarded to, and shall be subject to the approval of, the board of trustees in the same manner as special uses. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.7, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-250. - Lots. 
(a)  Except in the case of planned developments, not more than one principal detached residential building shall be located on a zoning lot within the R-E, R-1A, R-1 or R-2 districts. No principal detached residential building shall be located on the same zoning lot as any other principal building. 
(b)  No lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership, unless the division shall conform with all the applicable provisions of chapter 23 of this Code and this chapter. 
(c)  On vacant through lots the front lot lines shall be along the street right-of-way designated by the zoning administrator except that when a front lot line has been established on one or more lots in the same block and all have front lot lines established along the same street right-of-way line, the street right-of-way line designated as the front lot line for such lot or lots shall be the front line on all vacant through lots in such block. Only such obstructions as herein permitted in front yards shall be located in that part of a rear yard adjoining a street that is equivalent in depth to a required front yard, except for lots backing to thoroughfares in subdivisions where no-access strips have been provided on the recorded plats. 
(d)  On a corner lot the front lot line shall be the lot line having the shortest dimension along the street right-of-way line. The other lot line abutting the street right-of-way shall be considered the corner side lot line. 
(e)  Where two or more permitted or special uses, each requiring a minimum area and frontage are provided in the same building or on the same lot, the required area and frontage shall be the sum of the areas and frontage required for each use individually. 
(f)  Every lot shall have frontage on a dedicated street. Such frontage shall be at least 50 percent of the required lot width for the district in which such lot is located. Each lot containing a permitted or special use shall provide for ingress and egress to a dedicated street in a manner that conforms with the standards for design and location of the appropriate state, county and village requirements. 
(g)  In the event that a vacant zoning lot abuts upon a dedicated but unimproved road or street and is located adjacent to or within 200 feet of the existing road, and such road has been improved with curbs and gutters, the right-of-way abutting the vacant zoning lot shall be improved with a road having curbs and gutters; the extension of such road shall be constructed in all respects in compliance with the current standards governing road construction as noted in chapter 23 (entitled "subdivisions") of the Crete Municipal Code. Such improvement must be completed prior to the issuance of the village occupancy permit on any effective zoning lot or lots. 
(h)  In the event that a vacant zoning lot abuts upon a dedicated but unimproved road and is within 300 feet of an existing road which has no curb and gutter improvements, the owner of such zoning lot or lots shall be required to install a road having a minimum width of 24 feet which will fully comply with all standards required of such construction as noted in chapter 23 (entitled "subdivisions") of the Crete Municipal Code. Such improvement must be completed prior to the issuance of the village's occupancy permit on any effective zoning lot or lots. 
(i)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the village and owner(s) of the subject zoning lot or lots shall enter into an agreement with one another providing for the application of the provisions of subsections (g) and (h) of this section. Such agreement shall include, but not by way of limitation, terms and provisions providing assurance to the village that the road improvement will be constructed in accordance with village plans and requirements, completed within a designated and/or reasonable period of time following the beginning of such road improvements and require that the lot owner(s) post with the village clerk sufficient cash to cover all improvements or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village from a financial institution acceptable to the village. 
(j)  The road improvements required in subsections (g) and (h) of this section shall be extended across the front property line of the particular zoning lot or lots for a minimum distance equal to the required minimum lot frontage required in subsection (f) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.9, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 89-31, § 4, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 28-251. - Floodplain regulations. 
(a)  The regulations contained in this section shall be supplementary to any floodplain, flood damage prevention, erosion and sedimentation or any other village ordinance relating to floodplains and to all applicable state laws. 
(b)  The floodplain regulations contained in this section are established for the following purposes: 
(1)  To avoid or lessen the hazards to persons or damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or floodwaters. 
(2)  To maintain the capacity of the floodplain to retain floodwaters. 
(3)  To provide for the development of floodplain lands with uses not subject to severe damage by flooding and uses which are compatible with the other uses permitted in various zones. 
(4)  To avoid the creation of new flood problems. 
(c)  No new or existing buildings or structures shall be erected or moved within a floodplain as indicated upon the floodplain map unless the lowest floor, including the basement floor, is at an elevation which is not less than two feet above the flood base elevation for the site; provided, however, that basement floors may be erected below such elevation when the top of any basement wall or the bottom of any opening therein is not less than two feet above such elevation and if plans and calculations for such floor and walls prepared by a licensed engineer or architect clearly indicate that the design is adequate to withstand expected forces and pressures to which it may be subjected. 
(d)  The elevation of the ground for a minimum distance of 25 feet immediately surrounding any building or structure erected or moved within a floodplain shall be at an elevation of two feet above the flood base elevation for the site and shall extend in width not less than 25 feet at, or above, such elevation to a public street or accessway. 
(e)  The elevation of the finished surface at the crown of any new street constructed within a floodplain shall be not less than two feet above the flood base elevation for the area. The design of such streets or accessways shall be such that the normal direction of course of drainage or runoff through the area is not interrupted. 
(f)  If fill or any type of construction which would displace floodwaters is placed within the floodplain, a flood reservoir shall be constructed which shall hold floodwaters of equal volume to the volume of such fill or construction placed below the flood base elevation, all in accordance with the standard specifications of the village. Each such flood reservoir shall have adequate provision of drainage to the waterway. 
(g)  The board of trustees may, upon the recommendation of the village engineer, authorize any alternate method of flood control and storm drainage other than that specified herein, provided such alternate method shall be in harmony with the purposes and interest expressed in this chapter and be as effective as the measures provided herein. Upon compliance with the requirement of this chapter, the board of trustees, will, upon request of an affected property owner, authorize the village clerk to issue a certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.10, 5-24-82) 
Cross reference- Flood hazard areas, § 8-16 et seq. 
Sec. 28-252. - Open space on lots. 
(a)  The provision of yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in existence. No legally required yards, courts or other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any building, shall by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court or other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building. 
(b)  All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the same zoning lots as such building or group of buildings. 
(c)  No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on May 28, 1982, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction. However, a yard adjoining a street may be reduced to provide right-of-way for a street widening. 
(d)  At the intersection of roads or at the point of ingress and egress onto roads no structure, parked vehicle or plant material shall obstruct a clear path of motor vehicle drivers' vision of approaching vehicles within a triangular square determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured 75 feet equidistant from the point of intersection with the center lines of the roads and the points of ingress and egress. 
(e)  The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified: 
(1)  In all yards: 
a.  Open terraces not over three feet above the average level of the adjoining ground, but not including permanently roofed over terrace or porch; 
b.  Awnings and canopies, but not projecting more than ten feet out, and at least seven feet above the average level of the adjoining ground; 
c.  Steps, four feet or less above grade which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley; 
d.  Chimneys projecting 18 inches or less into the yard; 
e.  Arbors, trellises, flag poles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes and other similar ornamental objects; and 
f.  Fences, walls and hedges subject to the provisions of section 28-253. 
(2)  In front yards: One story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yards; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet or less into the yard. 
(3)  In rear yards: Enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking spaces, accessory shed, tool rooms and similar buildings or structures for domestic or agricultural storage; balconies, breezeways and open porches; one story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet or less into the yard. In any residential district, no accessory shall be nearer than ten feet to any principal building unattached. 
(4)  In side yards: Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the yard for a distance not exceeding two feet. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.11, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-253. - Fences, walls and hedges. 
(a)  No fence, wall or hedge shall be constructed or erected except as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  No fence or wall shall be erected or substantially altered prior to receiving a building permit for such purposes. 
(c)  No private fences, walls or hedges shall be allowed or constructed on public street, highway or alley right-of-ways. Fences or hedges may be placed on public utility easements provided such fences or hedges do not interfere in any way with existing underground, ground or overground utilities. The village or any utility company having authority to use such easements shall not be liable for repair or replacement of such fences in the event they are moved, damaged or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of said easement. Fences in violation of this subsection may be summarily removed by the village. 
(d)  Barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall not be allowed on property in residential districts or on lots in any district being used for residential purposes. Barbed wire or barbed wire fence shall not be allowed in commercial or industrial districts where: 
(1)  The barbed wire is located along a property line that abuts a residence district. 
(2)  The barbed wire is located along a property line abutting a lot used for residential purposes. 
(3)  The barbed wire would be located in any required front or corner side yard. 
(e)  No fence or wall shall be constructed of material intended to inflict bodily harm to a person attempting to climb or scale it. Such material includes, but is not limited to, electrically charged wires or other electrical conduit, razor blades and sharp or ragged metal spikes or spears. Barbed wire may be used only as authorized in the article. 
(f)  All fences and walls shall be constructed in conformity with the wind, stress, foundations, structural and other requirements of the building code and other applicable ordinances of the village. 
(g)  All fences, walls and hedges shall be maintained in good, structurally sound repair and in a neat, clean, presentable and attractive condition. 
(h)  Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in residence districts only in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Fences, walls and hedges located in the rear yard and interior side yards shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(2)  With the following exception no fences, walls or hedges shall be permitted in any front or corner side yards. 
a.  Fences intended primarily for aesthetic purposes. Such fences shall not exceed three feet at its uppermost horizontal level or 42 inches to the top of its uppermost post. At least 50 percent of the square footage of the overall dimensions of the fence shall be open. Such fence shall not have a linear length of greater than 50 percent of the lot width at the building setback line. A woven wire or cyclone type fence shall not be considered a decorative fence. 
b.  Hedges that do not exceed either three feet in height or ten feet in linear length may be permitted. 
c.  Decorative walls, or similar brick or concrete structures may be permitted provided such structures do not exceed three feet in height or a total of 30 linear feet in length. 
(i)  Fences, walls and hedges in all commercial and industrial districts may only be permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Fences, walls and hedges located in the rear yard and that portion of the interior side yards located between the rear lot line and building setback line, shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(2)  With the following exceptions no fences, walls or hedges shall be permitted in any front or corner side yard. 
a.  Fences intended primarily for aesthetic purposes. Such fences shall not exceed 48 inches at its uppermost horizontal level or 54 inches to the top of its uppermost post. At least 50 percent of the square footage of the overall dimensions shall be open. (A woven wire or cyclone type fence shall not be considered a decorative fence). 
b.  Hedges that do not exceed either three feet in height or ten feet in linear length may be permitted. 
c.  Decorative walls or similar brick or concrete structures may be permitted; provided such structures do not exceed three feet in height or 20 linear feet in length. A wall or similar structure exceeding the previous standards with the title and basic description information of the business located on that lot may be allowed as a permitted sign, in accordance with article X. 
(3)  Barbed wire or a barbed wire fence may be used, where not specifically prohibited in this chapter under the following conditions: 
a.  The barbed wire or barbed wire fencing is located in the rear yard or that portion of the interior side yard located between the rear lot line and the building setback line and such wire is only used on the top 18 inches of any fence; or 
b.  The board of trustees has issued a permit to use barbed wire or similar materials as a protective device from a particular hazard. 
(j)  Such screening that may be required by other provisions of this chapter should be in accordance with the provisions of this section. Where a discrepancy between the location of screening required by another provision of this chapter and the provisions of this section exists the zoning administrator shall determine the applicable provisions. 
(k)  The board of trustees may upon written application vary the requirements of this section if presented with evidence of a specific hardship or unique circumstances that could be abated by varying the standards of this section. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.12, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-254. - Site plans. 
(a)  A site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval by the board of trustees in the following situations: 
(1)  Where specifically required in this chapter. 
(2)  Prior to receiving zoning certification for the establishment of a new commercial or industrial use or building or a substantial modification of an existing commercial or industrial use or building. 
(3)  Where a special use permit is applied for. 
(4)  Where a zoning map amendment is applied for. 
(b)  The following information shall be included on all site plans: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the land in question and of the use located on such land. 
(2)  The name of development, north arrow, scale, date of preparation, name and address of preparer. 
(3)  The zoning on and adjacent to the tract. 
(4)  The boundary lines, bearings and distances and overall area of the tract. 
(5)  The location of any buildings and structures, setback distances and distance between structures. 
(6)  The location, configuration, access, ingress and egress, number of spaces and construction specifications of all parking areas. 
(7)  Utilities on, adjacent to, the tract. The location, size and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and streetlights; directions and distance to, and size of, nearest water mains and sewers adjacent to the tract showing invert elevations of sewers. 
(8)  Areas to be landscaped and a general description of such landscaping. 
(9)  Floodplains, if any. 
(10)  Streets on, and adjacent to, the tract-Street name, right-of-way width, curbs, walks, gutters, drainage ditches, culverts, etc. 
(11)  The number of square feet of each building and use within such buildings. 
(12)  Easements and their location, width and purpose. 
(13)  Internal uses of each building or structure, as well as the overall land use. 
(14)  The legal description and property tax number. 
(15)  Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the village engineer. 
(16)  The location and width of sources of ingress and egress. 
(17)  Preliminary architectural plans for all buildings. 
The zoning administrator may waive or vary the previous requirements upon request if the information exists or if the information is clearly not necessary due to the nature or size of the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.13, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-255. - Exterior design requirements. 
(a)  In all single-family detached, single-family attached and in all single-family semi-detached dwellings, built after October 15, 2005, exterior walls shall be constructed of face brick, decorative stone or other village-approved masonry products. Said exterior shall commence from the finished grade and shall extend to the uppermost portion of the first story of such dwelling but in no event shall be less than eight feet above grade. 
Brick or other significant architectural design features shall be used in order to accomplish the design of the building and use of accent areas is encouraged. 
(b)  The exterior of all multifamily structures shall be constructed of face brick, decorative stone or other approved masonry products, or combination thereof. 
(c)  All commercial development other than development in I-1 limited industrial district and I-2 Gateway Commerce District, (including retail, office, hotel/motel type development but not industrial development) shall be constructed of face brick, decorative stone or other approved masonry products, or combination thereof. 
(d)  Any application to vary the above-listed requirements shall be processed pursuant to division 4 of the Crete Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-36, § 3, 9-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-36, § 3, adopted September 26, 2005, deleted § 28-255 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to be designated as § 28-255a. In order to maintain the alpha numeric style of the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as § 28-255. The former § 28-255 pertained to appearance review requirements and derived from Ord. No. 89-32, adopted December 11, 1989. 
Sec. 28-256. - Anti-monotony construction standards for single-family dwelling units. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the meaning set forth below, except where otherwise specifically indicated: 
    Adjacent lots: The phraseology "adjacent lots" shall refer to lots which adjoin or share side property lines or lots which share common front property lines which, although separated by a street, provide a line overlap with one another by more than 30 percent. 
    Streetscape: The term "streetscape" refers to the facade or facades of a single-family dwelling which faces on a public street. The length of a streetscape shall be limited to not more than 20 lots per side of each street. In the event that more than 20 lots abut one another without an intervening cross-street, the village board shall, by ordinance or resolution, establish those lots which shall constitute a separate "streetscape." In making its determination, the village board shall consider the configuration of lots which shall be most influenced and affected by adjacent lots and, where practical, appropriate physical demarkation (e.g. topography, road configuration or natural landscaping). In general, the front orientation of a residence or combined residences shall be determinative of the applicable streetscape. 
(b)  General standards. No two single-family dwellings of similar front elevation or facade shall be constructed or located on adjacent lots; nor shall there be constructed or located single-family dwellings of similar front elevation or facade constituting more than 20 percent of the single-family dwellings in any streetscape; nor shall two single-family dwellings of similar front elevation or facade be constructed or located within any four adjacent lots. Front elevations or facades shall be deemed to be similar when there is no substantial difference in roof lines; no substantial change in windows (e.g. either size, location or type), and either no change in the color of materials used (rather than a change in shade), or, no substantial change in the kind of materials. 
(c)  Roof lines. For the purpose of this section, the following differences in the roof lines of single-family dwellings as seen from the front of the dwelling shall be deemed sufficient to render buildings containing such changes and built within any four adjacent lots to be dissimilar: 
(1)  Changing gable roofs to hip roofs. 
(2)  Changing hip roofs to gable roofs. 
(3)  Providing an intersecting gable roof on the main gable roof, provided that the height of the intersecting roof is at least 50 percent of the height of the main roof. 
(4)  Providing an intersecting hip roof on the main hip roof, provided that the height of the intersecting hip roof is at least 50 percent of the height of the main roof. 
(5)  Subject to review by the building inspector, a shed roof, when used as a front porch for a minimum of 50 percent of the entire width of the house, excluding area of garage. 
(6)  Subject to review by the building inspector, a substantial difference in roof line shall be deemed to exist if the front soffit is increased significantly and is combined with columns at least six inches in width or other architectural features of a similar magnitude, which reach the roof line of the highest floor. 
(7)  Rotating gable roofs 90 degrees on the building. 
(8)  On a tri-level residence or other building types which have three independent major roof areas, the changing of two out of three roof lines shall be acceptable as a substantial change. Acknowledging that certain design elements may prevent the changing of all three roof lines, it is desired that the roofs with the greatest impact on the streetscape be changed. 
(d)  Unacceptable roof changes. The following changes shall not be deemed sufficient to make adjacent structures dissimilar: 
(1)  Gable roof atop a hip roof. 
(2)  Hip roof atop a gable roof. 
(3)  Small gable or hip projections above windows. 
(4)  Window dormers. 
(5)  Change in soffit overhang or minor variation in eave height. 
(6)  Skylight and cupola. 
(e)  Windows. For the purpose of this section the following differences in the size, location or type of windows shall be deemed sufficient to render buildings containing such changes and built within any four adjacent lots to be dissimilar: 
(1)  Changing from single windows to a multiple window arrangement (ganged units). 
(2)  Changing from multiple window arrangement to a single window. 
(3)  Changing the types of windows (e.g. casement to double hung). 
(4)  Providing a bay or bow window in the area of the predominant window. 
(5)  In the event that because of its size, location or design, one window is the predominant window on the front elevation or facade, if the size, location or type of that window is changed to render the dwelling dissimilar, then no other window need be changed. 
(f)  Unacceptable window changes. The following changes shall not be deemed sufficient to constitute a substantial change in window placement and design, namely: The addition or subtraction of muntin bars (dividing lights). 
(g)  Construction material or color. For the purpose of this section, the following differences in construction material between any four adjacent single-family dwellings as viewed from the front of the dwellings shall be deemed sufficient to render buildings containing such changes and built on any four adjacent lots to be dissimilar: 
(1)  Four-inch exposure horizontal siding. 
(2)  Eight-inch exposure horizontal siding. 
(3)  Brick facing. 
(4)  Vertical siding. 
(5)  Stone facing. 
(6)  Stucco or staccato board and trim. 
(7)  In order to constitute a change in materials, the change must occur throughout the facade or elevation for a minimum of one story in height. Color change shall be made by significant changes in adjacent colors. The change must be one of color rather than merely of shade. 
(Ord. No. 89-32, § 1, 12-11-89) 
Sec. 28-257. - Temporary uses and structures. 
(a)  Within each zoning district, the village board, upon application for such, may issue a permit for a temporary use or structure for similar and compatible uses as permitted within each zoning district. 
(b)  The proposed temporary use or structure must be located within the building area of the zoning lot upon which it is to be located. 
(c)  Adequate parking and access to the temporary structure or use must be shown on a site plan as required under section 28-254. Such parking must be in excess of any required parking being provided for any other permitted use located on the same zoning lot. 
(d)  No additional signs may be permitted except as allowed under section 28-351. All signs shall be located within the buildable area of the zoning lot when approved under section 28-351. Flags, pennants and banners shall be deemed as being signs. 
(e)  No temporary use or structure may be used for a period longer than 30 consecutive calendar days unless specifically approved otherwise by the village board. No use or location shall be granted a permit for more than three times within a calendar year. 
(f)  All temporary structures must be reviewed and approved by the architectural advisory board. No temporary structure shall be allowed which is not capable of being safe and sound for its intended purpose and for the period of time in which it is to be used. 
(g)  All uses must have sufficient electrical, plumbing and other mechanical systems necessary for the protection and welfare of the general public and any employees. 
(h)  All outdoor storage must be specifically approved by the village board and be in accord with any conditions or restrictions deemed necessary for the protection and general welfare of the public and protection of adjoining property values. 
(i)  All outdoor sales or other activities must be on a hard and durable surface free from dust, water accumulation and other factors that may be harmful or a nuisance to the general public. 
(j)  Prior to any approval for a temporary use or structure a site plan and applicant for a business license, if necessary, must be submitted for review and approval, see sections 28-254 and chapter 18 of the Crete Code. 
(k)  A performance bond of an amount and form deemed necessary by the village board shall be required to insure proper cleanup and removal of any temporary use or structure but in no case less than $500.00 shall be required except in those situations where the temporary use or structure is under the control of a legally established permanent business located within the village. This exception shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation who is merely associated temporarily with any local business or by conducting such temporary use in connection with, as part of, or in the name of any local business. 
(l)  The temporary use or structure permit issued shall be posted conspicuously in a manner that is clearly visible form adjacent public rights-of-way. 
(m)  Applicants for a temporary user permit shall pay an applicant fee of an amount as listed in section 2-301, schedule of fees, permits and fines, and an additional amount as listed in the same schedule for the actual permit authorized for issuance. Any use or structure placed into use prior to any permit being issued will cause the fees noted herein to be three times the amount listed. 
(n)  The permits issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the mayor of the village and/or the village trustees after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; 
(3)  Any violation of village codes; 
(4)  Conviction of the permit holder for any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting the business or use of property in an unlawful manner or in such a manner so as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(o)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a temporary use or structure shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid to the permit holder, at his last-known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(p)  Any and all fees associated with the use of the property as required by other portions of the Village Code shall be paid at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(q)  The above regulations may be varied for special events that are of general public interest and benefit when specifically approved by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 87-20, § 1, 5-18-87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 87-20, § 1, adopted May 18, 1987, enacted provisions pertaining to temporary uses and structures designated as § 28-255. Such provisions were redesignated as § 28-257 in order to accommodate the inclusion of provisions of Ord. No. 89-32 which were designated as §§ 28-255 and 28-256. 
Sec. 28-258. - Landscaping and screening requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. Landscaping and screening requirements are designed to minimize the adverse impacts of adjoining land uses by visually separating adjoining uses from one another. The phraseology "adverse impacts" refers to such things as dust, dirt, litter, glare of lights, signs, unsightly advertisements and/or buildings and structures, parking areas or other impacts created in the form of vibration, erosion, odor, air pollution and water pollution. 
(b)  Requirements. Unless otherwise provided in the Crete Municipal Code, all yards shall be landscaped and continually maintained with green grass. And except for single-family or two-family structures, every permitted use requiring a parking lot, waste material storage, outdoor storage and the like shall be designed to include a "planting screen" for such parking areas, waste material storage facilities or outdoor storage areas. The "planting screen" shall be of sufficient length and width to achieve a visual separation of the adjoining uses and thereby mitigate the adverse impacts of each adjoining use. Subject to review and approval pursuant to the provisions of section 28-254 (of this article), alternative plans and requirements may be allowed. 
(c)  Planting screens. All "planting screens" shall consist of a combination of plant materials of which 50 percent shall be low-growing plants maturing to a height of not more than five feet, 25 percent of which mature to a height of not more than 15 feet, and the remaining 25 percent of which shall mature to a height of at least 25 feet. At least 30 percent of each height category (listed above) shall consist of evergreen plantings. Earthen berms, masonry walls, fences or a combination of such may be used in part as a partial substitute for the "planting screens" required above, provided, however, that any substitute must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of section 28-254 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
(d)  Placement of materials. The plant material used to satisfy the requirements of screening shall be so spaced that a maturity, each specimen will (when viewed in combination with surrounding specimens) form a tangential line. This requirement shall not govern those plant materials that mature to a height of at least 25 feet. Where berms, walls or fences are not used, the plant materials maturing to a height of less than five feet shall be planted at a density equivalent to three rows deep. If a berm, wall or fence is used, the required density of plant material may be reduced by 60 percent. The fence used must be of natural materials and must effectively block visibility. 
(e)  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Commercial districts. In every commercial district, the required front, side and rear yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the following: 
a.  Front yards-For every 100 lineal feet of front yard there shall be provided one canopy tree; two understory trees; three shrubs. 
b.  Side yards-For every 100 lineal feet of side yard there shall be provided two canopy trees, four understory trees and six shrubs. 
c.  Rear yards-For every 100 lineal feet of rear yard there shall be provided three canopy trees, six understory trees, nine shrubs. 
d.  The requirements as set forth in subsections (e)(1)a-c hereinabove may be reduced by 50 percent when used in combination with any installation of any fence, wall, berm or any combination thereof. 
(2)  Residential districts. In every residential district, the required front, side and rear yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the following and parkway trees shall be required as follows: 
a.  Canopy trees shall be planted in the right-of-way at locations identified by village staff at maximum distances of 50 feet from one another. If applicable, subdivision covenants requiring trees be located on private property may affect the placement of right-of-way trees if said private property trees are planted at time of construction. (Prohibited and recommended tree species are listed in section 23-117, Landscaping and screening requirements.) 
b.  To ensure all yards are landscaped with grass as required with subsection (b) above, an acceptable performance bond or cash in the amount set annually by the village board is required to be posted with the village prior to the issuance of a provisional occupancy permit by the village in all instances where no grass seed or sod has been installed due to weather related delays. In all instances where a performance bond or cash has been posted, grass seed or sod will be installed within 180 days of issuance of the provisional occupancy permit. A permanent occupancy permit and bond or cash release will be issued upon establishment of healthy, growing grass. Bond or cash will be used for installation of sod upon 21-day notice to the homeowners in accordance with appropriate weather pattern. For the purpose of this section, "appropriate weather pattern" under normal circumstances will refer to April, May, September, October and November. Owners of record are still subject to property maintenance requirements concerning their property including weed control until grass seed or sod is installed. 
(f)  Plant types defined. For the purpose of this section, plants maturing to a height of not more than five feet shall be construed as "low-growing plants," and shall include such plants as shrubs and shrubberies, but shall not include grasses or other forms of ground cover. Plants maturing to a minimum height of 15 feet shall be construed as "understory trees." Plants maturing to heights exceeding 25 feet shall be construed as "canopy trees". 
(g)  Landscaping of large parking lots. Where off-street parking for 50 or more vehicles is required, in addition to the required "planting screen," a minimum of 25 square feet (for each parking space) shall be dedicated to open space within the perimeter of the whole of the parking area. Such area shall be landscaped. Each such landscaped area, in addition to satisfying the 25-square-foot requirement aforementioned, shall not be less than 100 square feet in area, nor less than ten feet wide, and shall be located so that no parking space shall be more than eight parking spaces in distance therefrom. The landscaping of such areas shall include a minimum of three canopy trees, two understory trees, and six shrubs for every 500 square feet of required landscaping area. All required plant material shall be maintained (pruned) so as to maximum public safety visibility. 
(h)  Minimum plant size. Unless as otherwise provided to the contrary (in the village's Municipal Code), all plant materials shall meet the following minimum size standards at the time of their planting: 
Plant Material Type Minimum Size Canopy tree ..... 21/2 inch caliper Understory tree ..... 11/2 inch caliper Evergreen tree ..... 5 feet height Shrub Deciduous ..... 24 inches (height) Evergreen ..... 18 inches (height)  
(i)  Planting prohibitions. The trees listed below may not be used in satisfying the various requirements of these regulations, namely: Poplars, Seed-Bearing Locusts, Willows, Box Elders, and American Elms. 
(Ord. No. 91-21, § 1, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 4, 3-27-06) 
Sec. 28-259. - Outdoor storage. 
    All uses in which outdoor storage facilities are permitted (whether as a permitted use or a use available under "special use permit") shall comply with the following provisions, or an equivalent set of provisions approved in connection with the site plan review (pursuant to section 28-254), namely: 
(1)  Type. Only the storage of materials essential to the permitted use may be stored outdoors on the premises. Materials capable of being carried off-site by nature forces shall be properly anchored or protected to avoid such. 
(2)  Location. Storage shall be permitted only in the rear of the principal building of the permitted use and not within any required yard. This provision shall not apply to principal uses, which by themselves are incapable of being housed within a building or structure and which are considered items being offered for sale. 
(3)  Fencing. All storage areas which are potentially hazardous if accessible to the general public, shall be fenced in accord with the regulations of section 28-253 of this chapter of the village's Municipal Code. 
(4)  Durable surface. All storage facilities requiring vehicular access shall be located on asphalt or concrete surfaces having sufficient design and construction standards to support appropriate weight-bearing requirements. 
(5)  Access. All storage areas shall be accessible by means of roadway having sufficient design and construction standards to satisfy appropriate weight-bearing requirements. Such roadway shall be designed so as to minimize traffic congestion on adjoining public roadways. 
(6)  Screening. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of section 28-258 (landscaping and screening). 
(7)  [ Portable storage container units. 
a.]  Portable storage container units may only be utilized in commercial and industrial districts. Portable storage container units may not be stacked. Any portable structure container unit utilized for storage may not exceed ten feet above grade. Further, any storage containers or structures must be screened as provided by subsection (6) above. For the purposes of this section, "Portable storage container units" are any fully or partially closed structures, not permanently affixed to the ground, which are designed or can be utilized for storage of material, which individually or by multiple units, exceed 200 cubic feet. Overseas storage containers and trailers are portable storage container units regulated by this section. 
[b.]  Portable storage container units intended for storage off site may be temporarily located on any zoning lot for up to ten calendar days for loading/unloading provided said units are located on an asphalt or concrete surface having sufficient design and construction standard to support the anticipated weights and further provided said unit location is accessible by means of a vehicular access on asphalt or concrete. No portable storage unit may be temporarily located for loading or unloading on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement containing utilities. 
(Ord. No. 91-21, § 2, 6-24-91; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2004-37, § 2, 11-22-04) 
Sec. 28-260. - Outdoor sales. 
    All uses in which outdoor sales are either a permitted use or a use available under "special use permit" shall comply with the following provisions, or an equivalent set of provisions approved in connection with the site plan review (pursuant to section 28-254), namely: 
(1)  Type. With the exception of permitted temporary uses, only outdoor sales that are an integral part of the permitted use shall be allowed. 
(2)  Location. Outdoor sales shall be permitted only within the buildable area of the zoning lot and not within any required yard. 
(3)  Durable surface. Outdoor sales areas intended to be used by the general public shall be located on an asphalt or concrete surface that is of sufficient design and construction to carry all loads to be imposed thereon. 
(4)  Access. All portions of outdoor sales areas shall be accessible to the handicapped, and to police, fire and emergency aid vehicles. 
(5)  Fencing. All outdoor sales areas wherein various materials and goods are stored and displayed, to the extent that the same may be deemed potentially hazardous to the public (when left unattended), shall be fenced in accordance with sections 28-253 (fences, walls and hedges). 
(6)  Time of operation. All outdoor sales shall be restricted to daylight hours, unless sufficient lighting is provided so as to permit sales after dark. 
(7)  Screening. All outdoor sales shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of section 28-258 (landscaping and screening). 
(Ord. No. 91-21, § 3, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 28-261. - Waste material storage. 
    All areas to be used for the temporary storage of waste materials shall be located and designed to provide convenient access by scavenger services. Access to the waste material storage areas shall be designed to safely carry the wheel loads of the scavenger trucks using such access areas. No access area shall be located so as to create a traffic hazard. Each waste material storage area shall be directly accessible to each use intended to be served thereby, and shall be fully enclosed by a masonry wall not less than five feet, nor more than eight feet in height. The wall of the enclosure offering public visibility shall be constructed with face brick or decorative split face concrete block. Where possible, waste material storage areas shall be located so as not to be readily visible to the general public or to adjoining property, and shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of section 28-258 (landscaping and screening). Upon application of the builder or developer, provisions generally meeting the purposes of this section may be approved in lieu of strict adherence to these requirements. The approval of such variations must be made only as part of the site plan review as required under section 28-254. 
(Ord. No. 91-21, § 4, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 28-262. - Paved driveway or parking slab required. 
    In all commercial and residential districts, the installation of a bituminous surface, e.g. concrete, asphalt or similar paving, shall be installed on all driveways within six months of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 95-18, § 5, 4-24-95) 
Sec. 28-263. - Antenna, satellite dishes and structure heights. 
    The following requirements apply to all zoning districts: 
(1)  Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flag poles, smokestacks, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, barns, silos, stacks, step towers or scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers, grain elevators, spires, wireless towers, penthouses, or mechanical appurtenances to any structure, or standing alone, may be erected up to a height not to exceed the maximum structure height within that zoning district in which it is erected if designed to engineering specifications or proper support as approved by the village and otherwise are permitted within the zoning district. 
(2)  One ground-mounted, tower type, self-supporting antenna structure shall be permitted in the rear yard only and may not exceed ten feet over the specified structure height for that zoning district. Any such structure must be screened, enclosed or otherwise constructed to prevent climbing by unauthorized persons. 
(3)  Satellite dish structures in excess of 24 inches in diameter, are permitted in a rear or side yard and are limited to two such structures for each zoning lot and may not exceed ten feet over the specified structure height for that zoning district and must comply with the applicable setback of the zoning district unless these restrictions clearly impose an unreasonable limitation on the reception of satellite delivered signals. In the event that usable satellite signals cannot be received by locating the satellite dish structure on the rear or side yard and within the appropriate setback, such satellite dish structure may be placed in the front yard within the appropriate setback or on the roof of the dwelling structure provided a showing is made by the applicant that usable satellite signals are not receivable from any other location. When used in this section "usable satellite signals" mean satellite signals that when viewed on conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable television. Satellite dish structures less than 24 inches in diameter may be located anywhere on the zoning lot within the applicable setbacks and require no permit. 
(4)  A building permit is required and must be supported by a plat of survey showing the placement of the above enumerated structures (listed in subsections (1) through (3)) on the lot and a drawing showing all items pertinent to its construction. All building permit fees will be paid before work begins and inspections will be called for 24 hours in advance. The fee amount is set forth in section 2-301 of the Crete Municipal Code unless proof of a business license or contractor's license is shown at the time of building permit application limited to only antenna or satellite dish installations. 
(Ord. No. 95-23, § 2, 5-22-95) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-23, adopted May 22, 1995, designated § 2 of such ordinance to be codified as § 28-262. To avoid duplication of section numbers, such provisions have been redesignated as § 28-263, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 28-264. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Any home occupation that is subordinate to the principal use of a building as a dwelling shall be permitted so long as it complies with this section. 
(b)  A home occupation is a business profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain entirely within the primary residence of those performing the home occupation. The primary residence is defined as a dwelling unit occupied day and night for domestic purposes (i.e., eating, sleeping, bathing, etc.). 
(c)  In addition to all of the use limitations applicable in the district in which a home occupation is located, no home occupation shall be permitted unless it complies with the following restrictions: 
(1)  No person who is not a member of the immediate family occupying such dwelling unit shall be employed upon the premises in connection with the occupation. 
(2)  No sign on the premises shall advertise the presence or conduct of a home occupation, except for those services, required by the licensing requirements of the State of Illinois, may display a sign; provided that sign meets the following criteria: 
a.  Sign must be no larger than four square feet and may not be located in any yard. 
b.  Sign must be plainly visible from the primary entrance to the dwelling, be professional in appearance and meet all applicable zoning restrictions and applicable restrictive covenants. 
c.  Signs may not be permanently affixed to the exterior of any residential dwelling. 
(3)  No wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be permitted in the home unless sales are conducted entirely by mail or telephone or Internet. 
(4)  Professional persons may use his/her residence for consultation, emergency treatment or performance of religious rites. 
(5)  There shall be no alteration of the principal residential building which changes the character thereof as a dwelling. 
(6)  No more than 25 percent of the area of a dwelling shall be devoted to the home occupation. 
(7)  No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used except such types as are customary for purely domestic, household, or hobby purposes. Furthermore, no equipment which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district shall be used in such home occupation. 
(8)  There shall be no storage outside a principal building of equipment or materials used in the home occupation. 
(9)  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential building. 
(10)  The home occupation shall be conducted in a manner which would not cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use of colors, materials, lighting or the emission of sounds, noises, or vibrations. 
(11)  The home occupation shall not have an adverse affect on the neighborhood through the congestion of village streets. 
(12)  No home occupation shall include the use of hazardous materials. 
(d)  Customary home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following list of occupations; provided, however, that each listed occupation shall be subject to the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors. 
(2)  Private tutoring, but regular instruction shall be limited to one pupil at a time, except for occasional groups. 
(3)  Artists, sculptors, authors and composers. 
(4)  Offices for architects, engineers, lawyers, insurance agents and members of similar professions. 
(5)  Offices of duly ordained leaders of a religious or spiritual community. 
(6)  Real estate services. 
(7)  Salesman, sales representatives, manufacturer's representatives and catalog sales when no retail or wholesale transactions are conducted on the premises. 
(8)  Home crafts, such as model-making, rug-weaving, lapidary work and cabinet making; provided, however, that no machinery or equipment shall be used or employed, other than that which would customarily be incidental to residential occupancy, such machinery or equipment shall include that which would customarily be employed in connection with a hobby or avocation not conducted for gain or profit. 
(9)  Day care for children or adults in accordance with state licensing laws. 
(10)  Data and information processing on a computer, writing of software and computer programs, desktop publishing and similar activities. 
(11)  Catering service/cake preparation and decorating provided the operation is in complete compliance with section 28-3 and the equipment/appliances used in the operation are those existing in the kitchen of the home and any replacement thereof shall be of a same or similar model commonly installed in a residential kitchen. There shall be no separate, additional kitchen dedicated to the home business. Commercial kitchens shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Prohibited home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following list of occupations and other home occupations that cannot meet the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Dancing schools. 
(2)  Funeral homes. 
(3)  Nursery schools and day care centers not in accordance with state licensing law. 
(4)  Restaurants. 
(5)  Stables or animal kennels or animal hospitals. 
(6)  Tourists homes and lodging houses, unless specifically permitted by the zoning district regulations. 
(7)  Renting of trailers. 
(8)  Medical or dental offices, clinics or hospitals. 
(9)  Antique shops or sales. 
(10)  Repair of motorized vehicles. 
(11)  Contractor's yards. 
(12)  Adult uses. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 3, 3-22-04; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Secs. 28-265-28-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESIDENCE AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Residential space requirement, § 6-42. 

Sec. 28-271. - General provisions. 
(a)  The requirements for each district mentioned in this article contain a statement of purpose, detailing the intent and any special requirements for each district. 
(b)  Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in the districts indicated under the conditions specified. Any use not listed as a permitted use may be permitted if the board of trustees, by a two-thirds vote, affirms that the nonlisted use is similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed permitted uses. 
(c)  Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed in the zoning districts indicated, subject to the issuance of a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. An application for a special use permit for a nonlisted use may be made if the board of trustees by a two-thirds vote has affirmed that the nonlisted use is similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed special uses of that district. 
(d)  Lot size requirements shall be expressed in terms of minimum lot area and minimum lot width. A variance from the required lot area and lot width shall only be allowed under the provisions of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(e)  Yard requirements shall be expressed minimum building setback from the front, corner side yard, interior side yard and rear property lines. In the case of more than one principal structure on a single zoning lot a separation of structures shall be required. A variance from the specified yard requirements shall only be allowed under the provisions of division 4 of article II of this chapter. Only those permitted obstructions detailed in section 28-252 shall be allowed in a required yard. 
(f)  Building bulk limitations shall be expressed as maximum building height, maximum floor area ratio, or minimum building size. A variance from any building bulk limitation shall only be allowed under the provisions of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(g)  Points on ingress and egress onto dedicated streets for all uses other than single and two-family units shall be approved by the director of public works prior to the beginning of any grading or earthwork. 
(h)  A performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other guarantee of improvement for an amount determined by the village engineer in a form approved by the village attorney shall be provided to guarantee all improvements required by this chapter not completed at the time of issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(i)  All signs located in residence districts shall be in accordance with the regulations established in article X. 
(j)  Off-street parking and loading facilities, accessory to uses allowed in residence districts shall be in accordance with the regulations established in article IX. 
(k)  Uses already established on May 28, 1982 shall be subject to the provisions of article III. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.0, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-272. - R-E single-family residential district. 
(a)  The R-E single-family residential district is designed to provide for estate-type single-family residential development and is intended to create an environment of homes on lots larger than typical for urban-type residential areas. The permitted uses, lot area, setbacks, and other requirements are designed to encourage a quality residential area in a rural setting. The district will be located where this type of development presently exists and where similar residential development appears likely to occur in the future. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the R-E single-family residential district: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Recreational and social facilities, as follows: 
Golf courses, but not golf driving ranges, pitch and putt, or miniature golf courses. 
Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Recreational buildings and community centers, noncommercial. 
Swimming pools, noncommercial. 
Tennis clubs and courts. 
(3)  Religious institutions, as follows: 
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues. 
Rectories, parsonages, parish houses. 
(4)  School: Elementary and/or secondary schools meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the state, and not providing residential accommodations. 
(5)  Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal uses and subject to the provisions of section 28-246, as follows: 
Athletic fields and playgrounds. 
Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses, and tennis clubs. 
Garages and carports. 
Home occupations. 
Secondary religious facilities servicing a principal religious institution. 
Storage of building materials and equipment, and temporary buildings for construction purposes-for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
Swimming pools and tennis courts, private (noncommercial). 
Temporary real estate tract offices for the purpose of conducting the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract office is located; provided such office is removed within a period not to exceed two years after the date of final plat approval for the subdivision such office is located in. 
Tool houses, sheds, and other similar buildings for the storage of domestic supplies. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the R-E district, subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Cultural institutions, including: 
Public libraries and public art galleries. 
Public museums. 
(3)  Planned developments; residential-in accordance with division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
(4)  Religious institutions, as follows: 
Seminaries, monasteries and convents. 
Religious retreats. 
(5)  Public service uses, as follows: 
Filtration plant, pumping station and water reservoir. 
Sewage treatment plant. 
Police and fire stations, other municipal buildings. 
Telephone exchange repeater stations and other telephone facilities. 
Electric substations. 
Gas regulator station. 
Railroad rights-of-way and trackage, but not including reclassification yards, terminal facilities or maintenance facilities. 
Telephone exchange, telephone transmission equipment buildings and microwave relay towers. 
Other similar public service uses. 
(d)  With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the zoning lot, shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use or special use. 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Single-family detached dwellings 13,500 sq. ft. 90 ft. Recreational and social buildings 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft. Religious institutions 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft. Schools 5 acres 200 ft.  
(2)  Special uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Cemeteries 5.0 acres 200 ft. Cultural institutions 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft. Planned developments 15.0 acres None Religious institutions 3 acres 200 ft. Public utility and service uses 40,000 sq. ft. 150 ft.  
(e)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks (yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed: 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Single-family detached dwellings 35 8 20 30 Recreational and social buildings 40 15 20 35 Religious institutions 40 15 20 35 Schools 40 20 20 50  
(2)  Special uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Cemeteries (including burial sites) 40 30 30 30 Cultural institutions 40 15 20 35 Planned developments, subject to the provisions of division 6, article II of this chapter. Religious institutions 50 25 25 50 Public utility and services uses 40 20 20 35  
(3)  Accessory uses. Except as indicated below, the yard requirements of the principal uses shall apply to their accessory buildings: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Buildings accessory to single-family dwellings, other than those specified herein. 30 8 20 5  
Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses and tennis clubs, shall be located not less than 150 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums in cemeteries, shall be located not less than 150 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
Temporary buildings for construction purposes, shall be located not less than 150 feet from the nearest residential property line with an existing residential building. 
(f)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories. Each single-family detached dwelling shall have at least 1,800 square feet of livable floor area. All other permitted and special uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio as well as absolute height limitations. The maximum floor area ratio for all other permitted uses shall be 0.25, and such ratio for all special uses shall be 0.25. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.1, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12) 
Sec. 28-273. - R-1A single-family residence district. 
(a)  The R-1A single-family residence district is intended to preserve prime single-family areas of the community and to allow further development of similar neighborhoods on undeveloped land suitable for development. This section shall apply to such district. 
(b)  Any permitted use allowed in the R-E district shall be permitted in the R-1A district. 
(c)  Any use allowed as a special use in the R-E district shall be allowed as a special use in the R-IA district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot," shall be designated, provided, and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use or special use. For single-family detached dwellings the minimum lot area shall be 9,500 square feet and the minimum lot width shall be 75 feet. Single-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum of 1,400 square feet of livable floor area. All other lot size requirements for permitted and special uses are the same as the lot size requirements of the R-E district for permitted and special uses respectively. 
(e)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks (yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed: 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Single-family detached dwellings 30 8 20 20 Recreational and social buildings 35 15 20 30 Religious institutions 35 15 20 30 Schools 35 20 20 50  
(2)  Special uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Cemeteries, including burial sites 40 30 30 30 Cultural institutions 35 15 20 30 Planned developments, subject to the provisions of division 7 of article II of this chapter. Religious institutions 50 25 25 50 Public utility and service uses 35 20 20 30  
(3)  Accessory uses. Except as indicated below, the yard requirements of the principal uses in the R-1A district shall apply to their accessory buildings: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Buildings accessory to single-family dwellings other than those specified herein shall be located behind the principal structure by at least 5 feet and outside the yard requirement as follows: 30 8 20 20  
Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses, and tennis clubs, shall be located not less than 125 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
Mausoleums, crematories and columbariums in cemeteries shall be located not less than 150 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
Temporary buildings for construction purposes shall be located not less than 125 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
(f)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories. Each single-family detached dwelling shall have at least 1,500 square feet of livable floor area. All other permitted and special uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio as well as absolute height limitations. The maximum floor area ratio for all other permitted uses shall be 0.35 and such rates for all special uses shall be 0.35. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.2, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 96-05, § 2, 1-22-96) 
Sec. 28-274. - R-1 single-family residence district. 
(a)  The R-1 single-family residence district is intended to preserve and protect moderate density single-family areas of the community. This section shall apply to the R-1 district. These provisions and this zoning district is limited to areas zoned R-1 prior to January 22, 1996 (or subject to annexation agreements executed prior to January 22, 1996). 
(b)  Any use permitted in the R-E district is permitted in the R-1 district. 
(c)  Any use allowed as a special use in the R-E district shall be a permitted special use subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot" shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Single-family, detached dwellings 9,000 sq. ft. 70 ft. Recreational and social buildings 30,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Religious institutions 30,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Schools 5 acres 200 ft.  
(2)  Special uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Cemeteries 5 acres 200 ft. Cultural institutions 30,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Planned developments 15 acres none Religious institutions 3 acres 200 ft. Public utility and service uses 30,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.  
(e)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks (yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed: 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Single-family detached dwellings 30 5 20 20 Recreational and social buildings 35 10 20 20 Religious institutions 35 10 20 25 Schools 35 20 20 25  
(2)  Special uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Cemeteries, including burial sites 40 30 30 30 Cultural institutions 35 15 20 25 Planned developments, subject to the provisions of division 7 of article II of this chapter. Religious institutions 50 25 25 50 Public utility and service uses 35 20 20 25  
(3)  Accessory uses. Except as indicated the yard requirements of the principal uses shall apply to their accessory buildings: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Buildings accessory to single-family dwelling other than those specified herein 25 5 20 5  
Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses and tennis clubs, shall be located not less than 100 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
Mausoleums, crematories, and columbariums in cemeteries shall be located not less than 150 feet from the nearest residential property line. 
Temporary building for construction purposes, shall be located not less than 100 feet from the nearest residential property line with an existing residential structure. 
(f)  Absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories. Each single-family detached dwelling shall have at least 1,250 square feet of livable floor area. All other permitted and special uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio as well as absolute height limitations. The minimum floor area ratio shall be as follows: 
(1)  For schools, 0.40; 
(2)  For all other permitted uses, 0.45; 
(3)  For planned developments, 0.35; 
(4)  For all other special uses, 0.45. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.3, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 96-05, § 2, 1-22-96; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12) 
Sec. 28-275. - R-2 general residence district. 
(a)  The R-2 general residence district is intended to preserve and protect the existing single and two-family residential neighborhoods surrounding the downtown area. The district should be located to include the existing neighborhoods adjacent to the downtown area as well as the remaining small parcels of undeveloped land. This section shall apply to such district. 
(b)  Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Two-family dwellings; 
(3)  Any use permitted in the R-E district. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the R-2 district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter: 
(1)  Any special use allowed in the R-E district. 
(2)  Educational institutions, as follows: 
Colleges, junior colleges and universities, including residential accommodations; 
Vocational schools. 
(3)  Day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers. 
(4)  Health and medical institutions, as follows: 
Nursing home; 
Home for the aged; 
Homes for ill or physically infirm persons; 
Hospital or sanitarium; 
Intermediate care facility; 
Sheltered care house; 
Skilled nursing facility. 
(5)  Philanthropic or charitable institutions, not including businesses sponsored by such institutions, except such as are necessary or incidental to and located in the same building as the institution proper. 
(6)  Nonprofit corporations, service or fraternal organizations. 
(7)  Transitional uses, any of the following transitional uses may be permitted where a portion of a zoning lot with an existing residential structure is located within 100 feet of an area zoned commercial or industrial. Transitional uses shall be principal offices for professional persons for the practice of medicine, dentistry, law, architecture, engineering, accounting, insurance or real estate. The residential character of the exterior of a building used for a transitional use shall be continuously maintained. 
(8)  Planned developments in accordance with division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot" shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Single-family dwellings 7,200 sq. ft. 60 ft. Two-family dwellings 10,000 sq. ft. 75 ft. Recreational and social buildings 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Religious institutions 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Schools 5 acres 200 ft.  
(2)  Special uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Educational institutions 5 acres 200 ft. Day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers 12,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Health and medical institutions 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Philanthropic or charitable institutions 12,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Cultural institutions 12,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Non-profit corporations, service or fraternal organizations 12,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Transitional uses 9,000 sq. ft. 70 ft. Planned development, subject to provisions of division 7 of article II of this chapter.  
For all special uses permitted in the R-E district and not specifically mentioned in this section the minimum lot area and width requirements are the same as the R-E district requirements. 
(e)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks (yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed: 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Single and two-family dwellings 20 5 20 20 Schools 25 20 20 25 All other permitted uses 25 10 20 25  
(2)  Special uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Educational institutions 45 25 25 35 Day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers 25 5 20 20 Health and medical institutions 30 10 20 30 Philanthropic and charitable institutions 25 10 20 20 Cultural institutions 25 10 20 20 Nonprofit corporations, service or fraternal organizations 25 10 20 20 Transitional uses 20 5 20 20 Buildings accessory to single-family dwelling other than those specified herein 15 5 15 5  
Planned development, subject to the provisions of division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
    For all special uses permitted in the R-E district and not specifically mentioned in this section the yard requirements are the same as the R-E district specifications. 
(f)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 40 feet or 31/2 stories. Each single-family detached dwelling and each dwelling unit of a two-family residence shall have at least 1,000 square feet of livable floor area. All other permitted uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio as well as absolute height limitations. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows: 
(1)  For recreational and social buildings, 0.75; 
(2)  For religious institutions, 0.75; 
(3)  For schools, 0.40; 
(4)  For educational institutions, 0.40; 
(5)  For day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers, 0.75; 
(6)  For health and medical institutions, 0.75; 
(7)  For philanthropic or charitable institutions, 0.75; 
(8)  For cultural institutions, 0.75; 
(9)  Nonprofit corporations, service or fraternal organizations, 0.75; 
(10)  Transitional uses, 0.35; 
(11)  Planned developments, 0.40; 
(12)  For all special uses permitted in the R-E district and not specifically mentioned above, the maximum floor area ratio requirements are the same as the R-E district special use maximum floor area ratio requirements. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.4, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-276. - R-3 multiple-family residence district. 
(a)  The R-3 multiple-family residence district is intended to provide moderate density, owner occupied multifamily neighborhoods. The district should be located in close proximity to a collector or arterial road link and essential commercial services. Each independent R-3 district should contain ample open space and recreational lands for the residents of that district. Any request to rezone property to a R-3 district shall be processed as a planned development in accordance with the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. This section shall apply to the R-3 district. 
    The following uses are permitted in the R-3 multiple-family residence district: 
(1)  Townhomes, not to exceed eight units per structure. 
(2)  Condominiums, not to exceed eight units per structure. 
(3)  Recreational and social facilities, as follows: 
Golf courses, but not golf driving ranges, pitch and putt or miniature golf courses. 
Grounds of recreational clubs, noncommercial. 
Parks and playgrounds. 
Recreational buildings and community centers noncommercial and for the primary benefit of residents of the district it is located in. 
Swimming pools, noncommercial. 
Tennis clubs and courts. 
(4)  Religious institutions, as follows: 
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues. 
Seminaries and monasteries. 
Rectories, parsonages, parish houses and convents. 
Religious retreats. 
(5)  Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal uses and subject to the provisions of section 28-246, as follows: 
Athletic fields and playgrounds. 
Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses and tennis clubs. 
Garages and carports. 
Home occupations. 
Secondary religious facilities servicing a principal religious institution. 
Storage of building materials and equipment and temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
Temporary real estate tract offices, for the purpose of conducting the sale of dwelling units upon which such tract office is located, provided such office is removed within a period not to exceed two years after the date of final approval for the development such office is located in. 
(6)  School, elementary and/or secondary meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the state, and not providing residential accommodations. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the R-3 district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article ii of this chapter: 
(1)  Educational institutions, as follows: 
Colleges, junior colleges and universities, including fraternity and sorority houses, dormitories and other structures or facilities necessary to the operation of any such institution. 
Elementary and secondary schools (boarding). 
Vocational schools. 
(2)  Day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers. 
(3)  Cultural institutions, including: 
Public libraries and public art galleries. 
Public museums. 
(4)  Public service uses, as follows: 
Filtration plant, pumping station and water reservoir. 
Sewage treatment plant. 
Police and fire stations, other municipal buildings. 
Telephone exchange repeater stations and other telephone facilities. 
Electric substations. 
Gas regulator station. 
Railroad rights-of-way and trackage, but not including reclassification yards, terminal facilities or maintenance facilities. 
Telephone exchange, telephone transmission equipment buildings and microwave relay towers. 
Other similar public service uses. 
(5)  Health and medical institutions as follows: 
Nursing home. 
Home for aged. 
Homes for ill or physically infirm persons. 
Hospital or sanitarium. 
Intermediate care facilities. 
Sheltered care home. 
Skilled nursing facility. 
(6)  Cemeteries. 
(7)  Planned developments; residential - in accordance with division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
(8)  Private roads. 
(d)  The following lot areas shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each dwelling unit constructed in an R-3 district. The lot area may be provided for either in the form of an individual zoning lot or as a proportional share of a collectively owned complex. 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Townhomes and condominiums as follows: 4 bedroom 7,000 sq. ft. 24 ft. 3 bedroom 6,000 sq. ft. 24 ft. 2 bedroom 5,000 sq. ft. 24 ft. 1 bedroom (not to exceed 15% 
 of total units) 4,000 sq. ft. 24 ft. Recreational and social 
 buildings 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Schools 20,000 sq. ft. 200 ft.  
(2)  Special uses: 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Width Educational institutions 5 acres 200 ft. Day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers 12,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Cultural institutions 12,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Public service uses 12,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. Health and medical institutions 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. Cemeteries 5 acres 200 ft. Planned developments 5 acres  
(e)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks (yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed. 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
_____ 
Front Yard (feet) Interior Side Yard (feet) Corner Side Yard (feet) Rear Yard (feet) Townhouses and condominiums 30 from existing streets 0 
(a 25' separation between separate structures shall be provided) 30 from existing streets 25 30 from proposed streets (public or private) 20 from proposed (public or private) Recreational and social buildings 30 10 20 25 Religious institutions 30 10 20 25 Schools 30 20 20 25  
_____ 
(2)  Special uses: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) Educational institutions 45 25 25 35 Day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers 30 10 20 25 Cultural institutions 30 10 20 25 Public service uses 30 10 20 25 Health and medical institutions 35 10 20 25 Cemeteries, including burial sites 40 30 30 30 Planned developments, subject to the provisions of division 7 of article II of this chapter.  
(f)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 40 feet or 31/2 stories. The minimum livable floor area for townhomes and condominiums shall be as follows: 
Four-bedroom, 1,250 square feet; 
Three-bedroom, 1,100 square feet; 
Two-bedroom, 950 square feet; 
One-bedroom, 800 square feet. 
All other permitted and special uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio as well as absolute height limitations. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows: 
(1)  For recreational and social buildings, 0.75; 
(2)  For religious institutions, 0.75; 
(3)  For schools, 0.40; 
(4)  Educational institutions, 0.40; 
(5)  Day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers, 0.75; 
(6)  Cultural institutions, 0.75; 
(7)  Public service uses, 0.75; 
(8)  Health and medical institutions, 0.75; 
(9)  Planned developments, 0.40. 
(g)  A site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 28-254, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval by the board of trustees prior to the issuance of any building permit for land zoned R-3 on May 28, 1982. Subsequent development on such land shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. Any significant modifications of an approved site plan shall be approved by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.5, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 95-04, § 4, 3-13-95) 
Sec. 28-277. - R-4 multifamily residential district. 
(a)  The R-4 multifamily residential district is intended to provide areas of land ranging in size from one to ten acres to be used to provide multifamily housing. This section shall apply to such district. 
    The R-4 district should be located in various areas of the village in close proximity to collector or arterial roads, recreational facilities and essential commercial services. The R-4 district should be a complimentary or secondary district to the single-family districts. Any request to rezone property to an R-4 district shall be processed as a planned development, in accordance with the provisions of division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
(b)  Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)  Apartments. 
(2)  Any use permitted in the R-3 district. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the R-4 district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter: 
(1)  Any special use permitted in the R-3 district. 
(2)  Mobile home parks, in accordance with the provisions of division 8 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  The following lot areas shall be designated, provided and maintained for each dwelling unit constructed in an R-4 district. The lot area may be provided for either in the form of an individual zoning lot or as a proportional share of an individually or collectively owned complex: 
(1)  Permitted uses: All structures or buildings containing three or more dwelling units shall be located on a lot which provides a minimum lot area per dwelling unit as follows, provided that such lot does not contain less than 15,000 square feet in area and have a lot width of less than 90 feet: 
Type of 
apartment Minimum 
lot area 
(square feet) 4 or more bedroom ..... 5,000 3 bedroom ..... 4,000 2 bedroom ..... 3,000 1 bedroom or efficiency ..... 2,000  
(2)  All other permitted and special use lot size requirements are the same as the lot size requirements for permitted and special uses of the R-3 district. 
(e)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks (yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed: 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Interior 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Corner 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) Rear 
Yard 
(feet) (1) 
Apartments 35 12 20 25  
(2)  When more than one multifamily structure occupies a single zoning lot a minimum 25 feet of separation between the separate structures shall be maintained. 
(3)  All other permitted and special use yard requirements are the same as the yard requirements for permitted and special uses for the R-4 district. 
(f)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 40 feet or 31/2 stories. The minimum livable floor area for apartments shall be as follows: 
Four or more bedrooms, 1,000 square feet; 
Three-bedroom, 850 square feet; 
Two-bedroom, 700 square feet; 
One-bedroom, 550 square feet; 
Efficiency, 400 square feet. 
All other permitted and special uses shall be regulated on the basis of maximum floor area ratio as well as height limitations. The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows: 
(1)  For recreational and social buildings, 0.75; 
(2)  For religious institutions, 0.75; 
(3)  For schools, 0.40; 
(4)  For educational institutions, 0.40; 
(5)  For day care centers, day nurseries and child care centers, 0.75; 
(6)  For cultural institutions, 0.75; 
(7)  For public service uses, 0.75; 
(8)  For health and medical institutions, 0.75; 
(9)  For planned developments, 0.45. 
(g)  A site plan in accordance with the provisions of section 28-254 shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval by the board of trustees prior to the issuance of any building permits for land zoned R-4 on May 28, 1982. Subsequent development on such land shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. Any significant modification of an approved site plan shall be approved by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.6, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-278. - R-EU single-family residential district. 
(a)  The R-EU single-family residential district is designed to provide for upscale single-family residential development of an exclusive fashion and style and is intended to create a spacious living environment utilizing large lots with significantly enhanced development standards. The following regulations are designed to protect the integrity of the resulting residential area and especially to prohibit intrusive uses, which are deemed incompatible with the overall character and style of the district. The regulations are further designed to preserve the natural state and geographical and topographical qualities of the area to the fullest extent possible. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the R-EU single-family residential district: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Recreational and social facilities, as follows: Golf courses (but not including, driving ranges, pitch and putt, or miniature golf courses); grounds of noncommercial recreational clubs; parks and playgrounds; noncommercial recreational buildings and community centers; noncommercial swimming pools; noncommercial tennis clubs and courts. 
(3)  Only those accessory uses and incidentals listed below are allowed within the aforementioned district. All accessory uses shall be subject to the provisions of section 28-246, except as otherwise provided hereinafter: permitted accessory buildings shall include athletic fields and playgrounds; clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of private clubs, golf courses, and tennis clubs; attached garages, provided such garages are at least 500 square feet in floor area but not exceeding 30 percent of the floor area of the principle structure; guesthouse, sized up to a maximum ratio of 50 percent of the square footage of the main floor of the principle structure; shed; private and noncommercial swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(c)  Special uses may be allowed in the R-EU district in accordance with the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  With the exception of planned developments and special uses, separate ground area (hereinafter referred to as the "zoning lot") shall be designated. Such zoning lot shall be maintained for each structure containing a permitted use. The minimum area of such zoning lot shall be 20,000 square feet, with a minimum lot width of 100 feet. The minimum ratio of landscaped area to living floor area shall be four to one. 
(e)  The minimum front yard and corner side yard setback shall be 50 feet. The minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet. The minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
(f)  Building height shall be restricted to three stories and not to exceed 40 feet. The minimum livable floor space is as follows: 
(1)  For single-story dwellings-2,000 square feet; 
(2)  For multi-story dwellings-2,500 square feet. 
(g)  All architectural features attending the principal structure (e.g., the primary home or structure) and accessory buildings, sheds or guesthouse must be reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of section 28-255 (entitled "Appearance review requirements"), and must include the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Forty percent of the front elevation of the house must be face brick or natural stone. 
(2)  The main roof pitch must be six feet of height over 12 feet of horizontal run or greater, except as approved through the required appearance review. 
(3)  The roofing material shall be natural cedar shakes, "minimum-to-heavy weight" fiber glass shingles, or other equivalent approved through the required appearance review. 
(4)  The color scheme to be used on the exterior of the buildings must be approved as part of the appearance review. 
(h)  All development within this district shall be accompanied by a landscaping plan. Such plan must be approved as part of the required appearance review and satisfy the minimum requirements set forth hereinabove. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to store any boat(s), trailer(s), motorized home(s) or recreational vehicle(s) in any open area on such zoning lot. Such equipment and paraphernalia shall be stored only in the attached garage (or garages). 
(Ord. No. 91-12, § 1, 4-22-91; Ord. No. 95-18, § 5, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12) 
Sec. 28-279. - AG agriculture district. 
(a)  The AG agriculture district is intended to preserve and protect those lands within the village which are still used for agricultural purposes. This section shall apply to such district. 
    The land being used for agricultural purposes provides the community with a valuable natural resource, a sound economic base, open space, and is an aid to maintaining the stability on the natural environment, and should be preserved and protected to maintain these benefits to the community as well as allowing those engaged in agricultural pursuits freedom from encroachment of incompatible uses. 
    All agricultural uses established prior to May 28, 1982 shall be allowed to be continued. No use involving the raising, breeding or maintaining of animals, with the exception of domestic animals and those animals specifically mentioned herein shall be established after May 28, 1982. 
    This district has a minimum contiguous acreage requirement of 20 acres. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the AG agriculture district: 
(1)  Agricultural uses: 
Farming, horticulture, forestry, crop and tree farming, truck farming and gardening together with the operation of any machinery or vehicles incidental to above uses. 
Research and/or experimental farm. 
Greenhouses, sale of products produced on-premises. 
Nurseries, sale of products produced on-premises. 
(2)  Residential uses, each of the following shall have at least five acres in lot size: 
Farm homestead and one additional dwelling for immediate family of the farm owner or operator of the same parcel. 
Two-family dwelling. 
Single-family detached dwelling. 
Religious retreats. 
(3)  Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities: 
Apiary. 
Aquarium. 
Arboretum or botanical garden. 
Camps (day or youth). 
Cemeteries. 
Churches. 
Country club. 
Essential services. 
Federal, state, county or village garage or facility. 
Forest preserves. 
Golf course. 
Governmental military reservations. 
Meeting halls and offices for agricultural, horticultural, rural or public conservation groups. 
Public parks, playgrounds and community centers. 
Rod and gun clubs. 
Sewage treatment facilities. 
Waterworks, well sites, reservoir. 
(4)  Commercial uses: 
Agricultural implement sales and service. 
Sale of farm supplies by farmers as agents where elevators or similar commercial facilities are not maintained on the farm premises. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the AG district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter: 
(1)  Commercial recreational uses, such as, but not limited to: 
Polo clubs; 
Race tracks, horse and auto; 
Riding stables or horse farms not nearer than 500 feet from any boundary line of a residence district or 600 feet from an existing dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner or lessee of the site, and not less than 100 feet from any property line of the site; 
Shooting ranges (indoor). 
(2)  Educational institutions. 
(3)  Fairgrounds and exposition grounds. 
(4)  Hospitals, clinics and sanitariums. 
(5)  Utility installation. 
(6)  Bed and breakfast operation, providing the new construction or conversion of existing structure complies with building code minimum room requirements. 
(d)  A separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. The minimum lot area shall be five acres and the minimum lot width shall be 250 feet. 
(e)  Except as hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the following setbacks (yard requirements) shall be open and unobstructed: 
(1)  Front yard, 75 feet; 
(2)  Corner side yard, 75 feet; 
(3)  Interior side yard, 100 feet; 
(4)  Rear yard, 100 feet. 
(f)  Absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 40 feet or 31/2 stories. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.20. Each dwelling unit shall have at least 1,000 square feet of liveable floor area. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4.7, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 1, 11-25-02) 
Secs. 28-280-28-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 28-291. - Generally. 
(a)  The requirements for each business district contain a statement of purpose detailing the intent and any special requirements for each district. 
(b)  Permitted uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in the districts indicated under the conditions of this chapter and other relevant village ordinances. Any use not listed as a permitted use may be provided if the board of trustees affirms that the nonlisted use is similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed permitted uses of that district. 
(c)  Special uses, as herein listed may be allowed in the zoning districts indicated, subject to the issuance of a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. An application for a special use permit for a nonlisted use may be made if the board of trustees has affirmed that the nonlisted use is similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed special uses of that district. 
(d)  Unless specifically permitted otherwise by the board of trustees, all permitted and special uses in all business districts are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All activities shall conform with the performance standards established for the I-1 limited industrial district, (subsection 28-311(i)). 
(2)  A performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, certificate of deposit or other guarantee of improvements for an amount determined by the village engineer in a form approved by the village attorney shall be provided to guarantee all requirements of this chapter not completed at the time of the issuance of an occupancy permit or business license. 
(3)  Any detached accessory buildings shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter applicable to the principal structure. 
(f)  All permitted and special uses shall be subject to the special provisions of the district they are located in. 
(g)  Lot size requirements shall be expressed in terms of minimum lot area and minimum lot width. A variance from the required lot area and lot width shall only be required under the provisions of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(h)  Yard requirements shall be expressed as minimum building setback line from the front, corner side, interior and rear lot lines. A variance from the specified yard requirements shall only be allowed under the provisions of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(i)  Building bulk limitations shall be expressed as maximum building heights and maximum floor area ratio. A variance from any building bulk limitation shall only be allowed under the provisions of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(j)  All signs located in business districts shall be in accordance with the regulations established in article I of this chapter. 
(k)  Off-street parking and loading facilities, accessory to uses allowed in business districts shall be in accordance with the regulations established in article IX of this chapter. 
(l)  Uses already established on May 28, 1982 shall be subject to the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5.0, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-292. - B-1 central business district. 
(a)  The B-1 central business district is intended to maintain the quality and character of the existing central business district while allowing for expansion and redevelopment. This section shall apply to such district. 
    The B-1 district shall be located to include all commercial uses in the downtown area. Future expansion of the district shall be limited to areas located within 200 feet of an exterior boundary line of the B-1 district. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the B-1 district: 
(1)  Retail distribution of goods, such as, but not limited to: 
Antique stores; 
Apparel stores; 
Appliance stores; 
Art and school supply stores; 
Art gallery; 
Bakery; 
Bicycle store, sales, rental and repair; 
Billiard and pool hall; 
Book and stationery store; 
Business supply store; 
Camera stores; 
Candy and confectionery stores; 
China and glassware stores; 
Dairy products store; 
Department stores; 
Drapery store; 
Drug store; 
Dry goods store; 
Floor coverings store; 
Floral shops; 
Furniture store; 
Gift shop; 
Grocery and food store; 
Hardware store; 
Hobby shop; 
Home appliances and furnishing store; 
Ice cream stores; 
Jewelry store; 
Leather goods and luggage stores; 
Locksmith; 
Meat markets; 
Music store; 
Notions store; 
Office supplies and stationery store; 
Paint and wallpaper store; 
Pet shop; 
Radio, television and stereo sales; 
Record store; 
Shoe store; 
Sporting good store; 
Tobacco shop; 
Toy store; 
Variety store. 
(2)  Service establishments, such as, but not limited to: 
Bank or savings and loan; 
Barber or hairstyling shop; 
Beauty parlor; 
Business, music, art, dance or commercial school; 
Cleaner, self-service; 
Cleaning and dyeing, pick-up and delivery store only; 
Clothes pressing and repair shop; 
Currency exchange; 
Detective agency; 
Dressmaking; 
Electrical (TV, radio, appliance) repair; 
Employment agency; 
Financial institution; 
Laundry or dry cleaner, self-service or pickup only; 
Loan company; 
Locksmith; 
Messenger, telegraph; 
Painting and decorating; 
Photographers, commercial studio; 
Plumbing, heating, cooling, roofing, plastering, electrical, general contractor or similar building trade offices; 
Printing shops; 
Sharpening and grinding; 
Shoe repair; 
Tailor; 
Travel agency. 
(3)  Professional, commercial, organizational offices, such as, but not limited to: 
Accounting, auditing or bookkeeping; 
Architect's or planner's offices; 
Artist's studio; 
Attorney and law offices; 
Better business bureau office; 
Business and management consultant; 
Chamber of commerce office; 
Chiropodists office; 
Chiropractor's office; 
Credit agency; 
Dentist's office; 
Doctor's, surgeon's, physician's office; 
Insurance agency; 
Investment company; 
Labor union; 
Land surveyor's or engineer's office; 
Medical or dental clinic; 
Merchant's association; 
Newspaper or other periodical offices; 
Optician's office; 
Osteopath's office; 
Political organizations; 
Psychiatrist's or psychologists office; 
Real estate office; 
Security and commodities broker; 
Trade association. 
(4)  Public, quasi-public or governmental buildings or facilities such as, but not limited to: 
Essential services; 
Federal, state, county facilities; 
Municipal buildings; 
Museum or art gallery; 
Police and fire stations; 
Post office; 
Public library; 
Public utility establishments. 
(5)  Recreational facilities, such as, but not limited to: 
Billiard or pool hall; 
Bowling alley; 
Clubs and lodges; 
Gymnasium or health club or spa; 
Indoor arcade or amusement hall; 
Indoor skating rink; 
Indoor tennis or racquetball club; 
Movie theatre-indoor. 
(6)  Food or beverage serving establishments, such as, but limited to: 
Restaurants, excluding fast-food and drive-in; 
Bar, tavern or lounge; 
Ice cream parlor; 
Catering establishments. 
(7)  Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal uses and subject to the provisions of section 28-246. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the B-1 district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter: 
(1)  Drive-in banking facilities. 
(2)  Fast-food or drive-in restaurants. 
(3)  Package liquor store. 
(4)  Planned development-Business, in accordance with division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
(5)  Residential units subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Buildings intended exclusively for residential purposes are not permitted. 
b.  In buildings containing a business, dwelling units are not permitted below the second floor. 
c.  No floor of any building shall contain both business and residential uses. 
d.  The minimum lot area per apartment unit (contained in section 28-277, subsection (d)) and the building bulk limitations (section 28-277, subsection (f)) of the R-4 district. 
(6)  Brewery or winemaking facility subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No residential use in the structure; 
b.  Proper licensing in accordance with Illinois state statute, currently 235 ILCS 5/Article V; 
c.  Limited to a maximum of 360,000 gallons annual production on site of fermented or malt liquor such as wine, cider or beer, excluding distilled spirits and liquor obtained by distillation; 
d.  Permitted free product sampling (or a cost less than production cost) for consumption on the premises to any one consumer in any one day of no more than three separate two ounce portions; and sale of product sampling for consumption on the premises; 
e.  Retail sale of product produced on the premises for consumption on the premises, or packaged sale for on or off premises consumption; 
f.  Permitted wholesale sales in accordance with the state license obtained. 
(d)  All permitted and special uses in the B-1 district are subject to the following special provisions: 
(1)  All retail and service establishments shall deal directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking and loading shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  With the exception of motor vehicles used regularly by a permitted business no outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
(e)  The minimum lot size shall be 3,750 square feet. The minimum lot width shall be 30 feet. 
(f)  All buildings and structures shall adhere to the following setbacks: 
(1)  A front yard setback of ten feet shall be required for all buildings and structures within the B-1 zoning district. 
(2)  Rear yard, 20 feet. 
(g)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 40 feet or 31/2 stories. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 2.0. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5.1, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 6-22-98; Ord. No. 98-21, § 1, 7-13-98; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 28-293. - B-2 highway service district. 
(a)  The B-2 highway service district is intended to accommodate those commercial activities that rely primarily on auto-orientated consumers. This section shall apply to such district. 
    The district is intended to be located only along major thoroughfares where adequately sized and properly located parcels of land will allow for adequate setbacks, clear vision and safe ingress and egress. 
    Each B-2 district shall have at least one acre of contiguous territory. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the B-2 district: 
(1)  Retail businesses, such as but not limited to: 
Agricultural implement sales and service; 
Automobile accessories store; 
Boat dealer; 
Bicycle sales and service; 
Building trades showroom and shop; 
Camper sales; 
Grocery store; 
Machinery sales; 
Mobile home sales; 
Monument sales; 
Motorcycle sales; 
New and used car dealer; 
Nurseries or greenhouse; 
Recreational vehicle sales; 
Sporting goods or recreational equipment sales; 
Tire, battery or other motor vehicle accessories sales. 
(2)  Service establishments, such as, but not limited to: 
Animal hospital or clinic; 
Auto driving instruction; 
Auto laundry; 
Auto renting; 
Auto undercoating or rustproofing service; 
Auction room; 
Carting or express; 
Equipment rental and leasing service; 
Exterminating service; 
Funeral parlors; 
Landscaping service; 
Motor vehicle repairs and servicing; 
Printing shops; 
Recording or sound studios; 
Repair service; 
Taxicab garage or facility; 
Towing service. 
(3)  Public, quasi-public and governmental uses, such as, but not limited to: 
Public, quasi-public or governmental uses of the B-1 district; 
Ambulance service; 
Bus passenger station; 
Federal, state, county or municipal garage; 
Hospital; 
Transit or transportation facilities. 
(4)  Professional and commercial offices permitted in the B-1 district. 
(5)  Food and beverage serving establishments permitted in the B-1 district. 
(6)  Any permitted use in the B-1 central business district. 
(7)  Accessory uses and building incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal uses and subject to the provisions of section 28-246. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the B-2 district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
Amusement establishments, including archery ranges, shooting galleries, kiddie parks, golf driving ranges, pitch and putt, miniature golf courses, arcades; 
Automobile service station; 
Brewery or winemaking facility subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No residential use in the structure; 
2.  Proper licensing in accordance with Illinois state statute, currently 235 ILCS 5/Article V; 
3.  Limited to a maximum of 360,000 gallons annual production on site of fermented or malt liquor such as wine, cider or beer, excluding distilled spirits and liquor obtained by distillation; 
4.  Permitted free product sampling (or a cost less than production cost) for consumption on the premises to any one consumer in any one day of no more than three separate two ounce portions; and sale of product sampling for consumption on the premises; 
5.  Retail sale of product produced on the premises for consumption on the premises, or packaged sale for on or off premises consumption; 
6.  Permitted wholesale sales in accordance with the state license obtained. 
Building materials and products sales and storage; 
Contractor or construction yards; 
Drive-in banking facilities; 
Fast-food or drive-in restaurant; 
Hotels and motels; 
Model homes and garage displays; 
Package liquor store; 
Planned development, business in accordance with division 7 of article II of this chapter; 
Stadiums or auditoriums; 
Warehousing and storage facilities, excluding junkyards; 
Wholesale establishments. 
(d)  All permitted and special uses are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a permanent durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. 
(2)  All materials not on display for retail sale to the public shall be concealed from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way by an opaque fence, wall, hedge or earth berm not to exceed eight feet in height. 
(3)  With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks, and permitted signs, a 20-foot strip of land adjacent to and running parallel to the front and corner side yard (where applicable) for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of the following materials: Grass, trees, low-living plant materials and defined areas of non-living groundcover materials. 
(e)  With the exception of a planned development, a separate ground area herein called the "zoning lot" shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet. The minimum lot width shall be 90 feet. 
(f)  All buildings and structures shall adhere to the following setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard, 45 feet, with a 20-foot landscaped buffer in accordance with the special provisions of this district. 
(2)  Corner side yard: 
a.  Abutting a major thoroughfare, 45 feet; 
b.  Abutting a secondary arterial street or collector street not designated as a major thoroughfare, 35 feet; 
c.  Abutting any lesser type street, 25 feet; 
d.  All corner side yards shall provide a 20-foot landscaped buffer in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  Interior side yard, 15 feet, 25 feet when abutting a residential district. 
(4)  Rear yard, 30 feet. 
(g)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 40 feet or 31/2 stories. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.5. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5.2, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 28-294. - B-3 office and research district. 
(a)  The B-3 office and research district is intended to provide areas for office and research uses which have only limited contact with the general public and have physical compatibility with the existing uses of the surrounding areas. This section shall apply to such district. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the B-3 district: 
(1)  Professional and business offices, such as, but not limited to: 
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping office; 
Architects, or planner's office; 
Attorney or law office; 
Better business bureau office; 
Business and management consultant; 
Chamber of commerce office; 
Charitable or civic organization, excluding meeting halls or facilities to serve as group gathering facilities for same which require parking in excess of that accommodated on-site; 
Chiropodist's office; 
Chiropractor's office; 
Credit agency; 
Dentist's office; 
Doctor's, surgeon's or physician's office; 
Investment company; 
Insurance offices; 
Labor union offices; 
Land surveyor's or engineer's office; 
Medical or dental clinic; 
Merchant's association; 
Newspaper or other periodical offices; 
Optician's office; 
Osteopath's office; 
Political organization; 
Psychiatrist's or psychologist's office; 
Real estate office; 
Security and commodities broker; 
Trade association. 
(2)  Research establishments engaged in medical, chemical, electronic, electrical, statistical and other similar research uses where products are not manufactured for sale or distribution. 
(3)  Banks, savings and loan and other financial institutions excluding drive-in facilities. 
(4)  Funeral parlors. 
(5)  Public, quasi-public or governmental buildings permitted in the B-1 district. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Residential use; a one-dwelling unit may be allowed when an existing residential structure is converted to a permitted B-3 district use. 
(c)  The following special uses may be permitted in the B-3 district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter: 
Any drive-in facilities. 
Planned developments-office and research in accordance with the provisions of division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
(d)  All permitted and special uses shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(2)  With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks and permitted signs a 20-foot strip of land adjacent to and running parallel to the front and corner side yard (where applicable) for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of the following materials: Grass, trees, low-living plant materials and defined areas of non-living groundcover materials. 
(e)  With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground herein called a "zoning lot" shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. The minimum lot area shall be (15,000) square feet. The minimum lot width shall be 90 feet. 
(f)  All structures shall maintain the following setback: 
(1)  Front yard, 40 feet, with a 20-foot landscape buffer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(2) above. 
(2)  Corner side yard, 25 feet, with a 20-foot landscaped buffer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(2) above. 
(3)  Interior side yard, ten feet; when adjacent to a residential district, 20 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard, 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5.3, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 28-295. - B-4 planned commercial center district. 
(a)  The B-4 planned commercial center district is intended to provide areas of land, for development as planned commercial centers. This district should encourage the development of planned centers with ample off-street parking and loading facilities, safe, well conceived points of ingress and egress, ample setbacks, attractive landscaping and architecture in keeping with the character of the village. Wherever possible future commercial growth should be in the form of planned commercial centers as opposed to the "strip commercial" pattern of development. 
This section shall apply to such district. 
All requests to rezone property to a B-4 district shall be processed as a planned development in accordance with the provisions of section 28-143, subsection (b). A site plan in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be approved by the board of trustees prior to the issuance of any building permits for areas zoned B-4 on May 28, 1982. 
(b)  Any use of the B-1 district shall be a permitted use. 
(c)  The following special uses may be allowed in the B-4 district subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter: 
Any special use allowed in the B-1 district, except residential uses. 
Any permitted use allowed in the B-2 district, except residential uses. 
Any special use allowed in the B-2 district. 
Casino. 
Racetrack. 
Residential use - one dwelling unit per zoning lot and subject to the restrictions in subsection 28-392(c)(5)a-d. 
(d)  The following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All retail and service establishments shall deal directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced. 
(2)  All materials not on display for retail sale to the public shall be concealed from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way by an opaque fence, wall, hedge or earth berm not to exceed eight feet in height. 
(3)  With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks and permitted signs a 20-foot strip of land adjacent to and running parallel to the front and corner side yard (where applicable) for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of the following materials: Grass, trees, low-living plant materials and defined areas of non-living groundcover materials. 
(4)  A traffic impact study conducted by a traffic engineer licensed by the state (mutually agreed on by the board of trustees and the developer), detailing the projected traffic impact of a proposed development shall be prepared if any of the following occur: 
a.  The developer requests points of ingress and egress other than those allowed under subsection 28-291(d)(3); 
b.  The proposed commercial center will require more than 100 parking spaces under the provisions of this chapter; 
c.  If in the opinion of the plan commission the development as proposed would create traffic problems; 
Such study shall be paid for by the developer. 
(e)  Each B-4 district shall have at least three acres of contiguous territory. Each B-4 district shall have at least 150 feet of frontage on arterial or secondary arterial street. 
(f)  For the purpose of this section the entire parcel used for a commercial center shall be considered a single zoning lot. All buildings and structures shall adhere to the following setbacks: 
(1)  Front yard, corner side yard or any portion of a B-4 district abutting a dedicated street, 45 feet, with a 20-foot landscaped buffer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(3) above. 
(2)  Interior side yards and rear yards or any portion of a B-4 district that does not abut a dedicated street, 30 feet. 
(3)  For any planned commercial center to be located on more than 20 acres an additional ten feet shall be added to all setback requirements. 
(g)  The absolute building height of all structures shall not exceed 40 feet or 31/2 stories. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.0. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5.4, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12) 
Sec. 28-296. - Business buffer district, generally. 
(a)  The business buffer district (the phraseology "business buffer district," "buffer zoning," and "business buffer zoning" are sometimes used hereinafter synonymously) is intended to provide a general environment for the location of businesses, which in the village and neighboring communities, have been typically located in buildings and structures having relative close proximity to the "downtown commercial area" and within buildings and structures having architectural or historical significance to the community as a whole. It is the purpose of this zoning classification to preserve the aesthetic beauty and charm commonly associated with residential areas of this nature and to promote the preservation of a "buffer" between areas of intense commercial use and areas of residential use. It is intended that by creating the business buffer district, the village authorities can impart some measure of regulation in relation to buildings and structures located within the general geography mentioned above with emphasis on enhancing the physical compatibility of existing structures with business uses. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the business buffer district: 
(1)  Professional and business offices as listed; 
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping office; 
Architects, or planner's office; 
Attorney or law office; 
Better business bureau office; 
Business and management consultant; 
Chamber of Commerce office; 
Charitable or civic organization; 
Chiropodist's office; 
Chiropractor's office; 
Credit agency; 
Dentist office; 
Doctor's, surgeon's or physician's office; 
Investment company; 
Insurance office; 
Labor union office; 
Land surveyor's or engineer's office; 
Merchant's association; 
Newspaper or other periodical office; 
Optician's office; 
Osteopath's office; 
Psychiatrist's office; 
Psychiatrist's or psychologist's office; 
Real estate or realtor's office; 
Security and commodities broker; 
Trade association; 
(2)  Funeral parlor; 
(3)  Art gallery or museum; 
(4)  Antique store; 
(5)  Apparel store; 
(6)  Floral shop; 
(7)  Gift shop; 
(8)  Jewelry store; 
(9)  Child care nursery; 
(10)  Photography studio; 
(11)  Public, quasi public or governmental building permitted in the B-1 district; 
(12)  Single- or two-family dwelling unit. 
(13)  Bed and breakfast operation, providing the new construction or conversion of existing structure complies with building code minimum room requirements. 
(c)  The following special uses may be permitted in the business buffer district subject to the provisions set forth in division 6 of article II of this chapter: Restaurant or restaurants; and, planned developments (e.g., office and research facilities, as provided in division 7 of article II of this chapter). 
(d)  All permitted and special uses shall be subject to the following provisions, namely: 
(1)  All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except when approved by a temporary use permit. 
(2)  With the exception of ingresses and egresses and sidewalks, a 20-foot strip of land adjacent to and running parallel to the front and corner side yard (where applicable) for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of the following materials: Grass, trees, low-living plant materials and defined areas of non-living groundcover materials. 
(e)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in sections 28-296 through 28-300, shall have the meaning set forth below, except where otherwise specifically indicated: 
Appearance: The outward appearance of a building or structure which is visible to the public. 
Appropriate: That which is in agreement or sympathetic, or fitting within the context of the community as a whole. 
Appurtenances: An accessory building or object, which is visible to the public. 
Architectural concept: The basic aesthetic idea of a building or group of buildings, or structures, including the site and landscape development, or plan, which viewed together produces the overall architectural character of the structure and improved real property. 
Architectural feature: The prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure, or site. 
Architectural style: The characteristic form and detail of a particular building that characterizes the overall design with reference to an historical period (e.g., contemporary, victorian or gothic). 
Attractive: Having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure and are generally accepted as aesthetically pleasing to a broad consensus of observers. 
Berm: A raised form of earth to provide screening, uniqueness of appearance or to improve the overall aesthetic character. 
Code: Crete Municipal Code. 
Cohesiveness: Unity of composition between design elements of a building or a group of buildings and the landscape development. 
Compatibility: Harmony in the appearance of two or more external design features in the same vicinity. 
Conservation: The protection and care that prevents destruction or deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings, or natural resources. 
Exterior building component: An essential and visible part of the exterior of a building. 
External design feature: The general arrangement of any portion of a building, sign, landscaping, or structure and including the kind, color, and texture of the materials of such portion, and the types of roof, windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to such portions as will be open to the public view from any street, place or way. 
Graphic element: A letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof. 
Harmony: A quality that represents an appropriate and congruent arrangement of parts, as in an aesthetically pleasing arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements. 
Landscape: Plant materials, topography, and other natural physical elements combined in relation to one another and to manmade structures. 
Light cut-off angle: An angle from vertical, extending downward from a luminaire, which defines the maximum range of incident illumination outward at the ground plane. 
Logic of design: Accepted principles and criteria of validity in the solution of the problem of design. 
Mechanical equipment: Equipment, devices and accessories, the use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating air conditioning and similar purposes. 
Miscellaneous structures: Structures, other than the primary buildings or structures which are visible from public ways (e.g., memorials, stagings, water tanks, sheds, shelters, fences and walks, kennels, transformers, drive-up facilities). 
Plant materials: Trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, grass, perennials, annuals and bulbs. 
Proportion: Balanced relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole. 
Scale: Proportional relationship of the size of parts to one another and to the human figure. 
Screening: Structure of planting that conceals from view from public ways the area behind such structure or planting. 
Shrub: A multi-stemmed, woody plant other than a tree. 
Site break: A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and create visual interest in a site development. 
Street hardware: Manmade objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape (e.g., lamp posts utility poles, traffic lights, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes, fire hydrants). 
Streetscape: The scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and manmade components, including buildings, paving, planting, street hardware and miscellaneous structures. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground. 
Utilitarian structure: A structure or enclosure relating to mechanical or electrical services to a building or development. 
Utility hardware: Devices such as poles, cross-arms, transformers and vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants and buffalo boxes that are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, and electrical services to a building or a project. 
Utility service: Any device, including wire, pipe and conduit, which carries gas, water, electricity, oil, and communications into a building or development. 
Village: The Village of Crete, Illinois. 
(f)  General provisions incident to business buffer zoning: 
(1)  Signs. The provisions set forth hereinafter in relation to signs are intended to exclusively govern the use and placement of signs within the business buffer district, irrespective to provisions set forth in article 10 of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation constructing, repairing, or operating a business within the village's business buffer district to use more than one sign to identify all businesses within a particular zoning lot. Also, each sign shall be located within the front yard and comply with the following conditions: 
a.  The sign shall be set back one-half of the normally required setback; 
b.  Such sign shall not exceed a height of eight feet, and 32 square feet in size; 
c.  Such sign shall be illuminated only by indirect lighting (and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation erecting, improving or operating a business within the village's buffer zoning to use electrical signs internally lighted); 
d.  Such sign shall be totally enclosed and backed, or supported, by one solid rectangular structure. 
(2)  Waste material storage. Areas designed for use as temporary storage for waste materials shall be located so as to enable convenient access by scavenger services and designed so as to be aesthetically unoffensive to area structures and uses. Access to such waste material storage areas shall be designed so as to promote safety in the removal of waste materials and provide for the general health, safety, and welfare of people residing within the immediate area. No access area shall be located so as to create a hazard to the movement of traffic in the immediate area thereof. Each waste material storage facility shall be directly accessible to each business use that is intended to be served thereby and shall be fully enclosed in a masonry wall not less than five feet in height or more than eight feet in height. It shall be unlawful for any person, or corporation erecting, improving, or operating a business within the village's business buffer to burn any waste materials. The location and storage of waste materials shall be maintained so as to prevent the said storage of waste from being readily visible to the general public or from being offensive or posing noxious odors to adjoining properties or persons residing in the general area thereof. The general architectural plan of such storage facilities shall be screened in accordance with the conditions set forth in the required site plan. 
(g)  Zoning lot requirements. With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground herein called a "zoning lot" shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. The minimum lot area shall be 7,000 square feet. The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet. All structures placed within the aforementioned zoning lot shall comply with the following setback: 
(1)  Front yard, 20 feet, with said yard providing a landscape buffer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(2) above. 
(2)  Corner side yard, 20 feet, with said yard providing a landscaped buffer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(2) above. 
(3)  Interior side yard, five feet. 
(4)  Rear yard, 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 1, 11-25-02) 
Sec. 28-297. - Business buffer appearance. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements set forth in section 28-154 (entitled "Site plans"), the appearance of any new structure or proposed remodeling of an existing structure or structures must be approved by the board of trustees only upon review and recommendation of the village's plan commission. Such proposal shall be approved only in accordance with the appearance criteria set forth hereinafter. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect or remodel a structure or structures, or operate any business, within the village's business buffer district without first making appropriate application for a certificate of approval. Such application shall be submitted in substantially the form of the following: 
_____
APPLICATION
FOR
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
Approval Review 
Project Name: _____ Submittal Date: _____ Address of Site: _____ Zoning District: _____ Name of Owner/Manager's Rep. _____ Title: _____ Address: _____ Phone: _____ Name of Designer's Firm or Studio: _____ Address: _____ Phone: _____ Name of Designer's Rep. _____ Title: _____ Application for: Sign _____ Bldg. _____ Landscaping _____ Lighting _____ Other: _____ _____      FOR OFFICE USE ONLY-DO NOT WRITE BELOW THIS LINE       CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
Appearance Review This certificate that the "exterior design features" related to the above permit(s) for the site listed above have been approved by Appearances Review subject to the conditions stipulated in the minutes shown below. _____
Chairman, Appearance Review _____
Date Excerpt of Minutes from Approval Meeting(s) __________ 
(b)  Appearance criteria. The following criteria shall be used [as] guidelines for determining the acceptability of the proposed appearance of structures to be erected or remodeled within the village's business buffer district. Design of the site, building and structure or structures, together with landscaping, sign placement, the placement of street hardware and miscellaneous objects and architectural features to be observed by the general public are pertinent factors to be considered in the review of and approval of the overall appearance of a particular structure and site. The following criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but are offered to assist in focusing attention on the development of plans and designs that will maintain and achieve development of an aesthetically pleasing nature, preserve taxing values and promote the general public health safety and welfare. The appearance criteria are set forth as follows: 
(1)  In relationship to both buildings and site: 
a.  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement and parking areas. 
b.  Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between buildings. 
c.  Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to screen parking areas from view from public ways. 
d.  Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
e.  Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground. 
(2)  Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining areas: 
a.  Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks and materials. 
b.  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
c.  Harmony in texture, lines and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided. 
(3)  Elements of landscape included in these criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns and all visible construction other than primary and secondary buildings and utilitarian structure. Landscape criteria consists of the following: 
a.  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance. 
b.  Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting. 
c.  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important axes, and provide shade. Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations only. 
d.  Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments. 
e.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used. 
f.  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices. 
g.  Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groupings. 
h.  Where building sites limit plantings, the placement of trees in parkways or paved areas is encouraged. 
i.  Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer. 
j.  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and pavings of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
k.  Exterior lighting when used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. 
(4)  Building design: 
a.  Architectural style is not to be restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surrounding facilities, structures, and area. 
b.  Buildings shall be erected with a view toward scale in relation to other buildings or structures; and, all buildings shall be constructed with a view toward achieving aesthetic harmony with neighboring structures and developments. Construction materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony with relation to adjoining buildings; and, building materials shall be selected for suitability for the type of building and design, which is proposed for a particular use. Buildings shall have the same materials (or those which are architecturally harmonious) used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partially visible to the public. Materials shall be of durable quality and in the event that any design in which the structural frame is exposed to public view, the structural material shall be compatible and harmonious to surrounding structures and buildings. 
c.  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
d.  Colors shall be harmonious and used only in conjunction with compatible accents. 
e.  Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so located so as not to be visible from any public ways. 
f.  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept (fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design). 
g.  Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, using materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening. 
h.  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent monotony. 
(5)  Miscellaneous structures and street hardware: 
a.  Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings. 
b.  Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates. 
c.  The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
d.  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
e.  Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention. 
f.  Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs. 
(6)  Maintenance-Planning and design factors: 
a.  Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep. 
b.  Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage, and abuse. 
c.  Provisions for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures and control of dirt and refuse shall be included in the design. Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt and rubbish shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 28-298. - Business buffer zoning: Application procedure and general requirements for submittals. 
(a)  In order to qualify for approval by appropriate village authorities, the proposed construction and remodeling of both exterior and interior of buildings and structures located within the village's business buffer shall be submitted to the appropriate village authorities in the form of a site plan. The proposed site plan shall include the following information, namely: 
(1)  Scale and north arrow; 
(2)  Address of site; 
(3)  All property and street pavement lines; 
(4)  Existing and proposed contours; 
(5)  Gross area of tract stated in square feet; 
(6)  In the event that parking is involved, such plan must exhibit calculations for the determination of the required number of off-street parking spaces as required by the village's zoning ordinance; 
(7)  The number of spaces actually proposed; 
(8)  The maximum number of employees, customers, and office vehicles that would be at the facility at any one time; 
(9)  Proposed ingress and egress to the site, including on-site parking area(s), parking stalls, and adjacent streets; 
(10)  An explanation as to traffic flow with directional arrows and indication as to the location of direction signs or other motorist's aids (if any); 
(11)  Calculations for determining the required number of trees to be placed within the proposed parking area as well as the designation of required buffer screens (if any), between the parking area and adjacent property; 
(12)  Location of all isolated trees having a diameter of six inches or more (tree masses may be shown with a diagrammatic outline and a written inventory of individual trees included); 
(13)  Existing landscaping that will be retained (proposed landscaping must be differentiated and shown on the plan); 
(14)  The type, size and number and spacing of all plantings; and 
(15)  The location of all existing (to remain) and proposed lighting complete with routing of electrical supply and isofootcandle diagram. 
(b)  Elevations. Complete elevations of all proposed construction and related elevations of existing structure (if any) are required and must contain the following information, namely: 
(1)  Scale; 
(2)  All signs to be mounted on the elevations; and 
(3)  Designation of the kind, color and texture of all primary materials to be used. 
(c)  Section profiles. Two section profiles of the site are required which must contain the following information, namely: 
(1)  Scale; 
(2)  Building(s); 
(3)  Lighting fixtures and standards; and 
(4)  Sign(s). 
(d)  Material samples. Material samples are required for all major materials. 
(e)  Submittal requirements. All exhibits required for the permanent file must be reduced or "reducible" to "legal sized" paper (here referring to paper having dimensions of eight and one-half inches by 14 inches). Materials prepared for the purposes of exhibits need not be limited to the aforementioned size. Three black or blue lined prints (one of which must be colored) of the proposed building and site must be submitted for presentation. An adequate number of colored photographs (polaroid type are permissible) are required to the extent that the same are necessary to illustrate the site, including buildings and other existing features and the compatibility of such features with existing neighboring structures or buildings. Also, photos may be used to illustrate installations on other sites whether in the village or other municipalities, that are similar to the subject proposal. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 28-299. - Business buffer zoning: Submittal required in specific application procedure. 
(a)  Sign plans. A sign plan is required, which shall contain the following information, namely: 
(1)  Scale and north arrow; 
(2)  Address of site; 
(3)  All property and street pavement lines; 
(4)  Proposed ingress and egress to the site, including on-site parking area(s), parking stalls, and adjacent streets (applicant must delineate the traffic flow with directional arrows and indicate the location of direction signs and other motorist's aids if any); 
(5)  Location of existing and proposed landscaping; 
(6)  Location and height of all buildings on the site and all buildings within 50 feet of the site's boundaries; 
(7)  Location and height of all existing (to remain) and proposed signs on the site, complete with route of electrical supply to signs (plan must exhibit required setbacks for sign from property lines); 
(8)  Location of all existing (to remain) routing of electrical supply; 
(9)  The proposed elevation of each face of the proposed sign showing the following information, namely: 
a.  All specifications including size of letters and graphics; 
b.  Description of sign and frame materials and colors including supports; 
c.  Planter box details, if provided (i.e., construction of box, materials, plant types, sizes, number and spacing); 
(10)  A section profile of the proposed site containing the following information, namely: 
a.  Scale; 
b.  Buildings; 
c.  Lighting standards; and 
d.  Landscaping; and 
(11)  Detailed drawings showing the following information: 
a.  Footings; 
b.  Electrical wiring diagram; and 
c.  Wind stress calculations. 
(b)  Wall sign (submittal requirements): 
(1)  Sign drawing. A scaled drawing of each of the proposed wall signs is required showing the following information, namely: 
a.  All size specifications, including the size of the letters and graphics; 
b.  Description of sign and frame materials and colors; 
c.  Wall anchorage details (Note: Anchorage must be interior to the sign or camouflaged). 
(2)  Elevation. An elevation drawn to scale of the entire wall of the building to which the sign is to be fixed correctly locating the sign. 
(3)  Detailed drawings. Detailed drawings showing the following information will be required for technical review, namely: 
a.  Electrical wiring diagram; and 
b.  Wind stress calculations. 
(c)  Lighting (submittal requirements): 
(1)  Site plan. A site plan is required containing the following information: 
a.  Scale and north arrow; 
b.  Address of site; 
c.  All property and street pavement lines; 
d.  Proposed ingress and egress to the site, including on-site parking area(s), parking stalls, and adjacent streets; 
e.  Existing landscaping that will be retained and proposed landscaping that will be retained and proposed landscaping; and 
f.  Location and height of all existing (to remain) and proposed lighting standards, complete with routing of electrical supply and circumference area that will be lighted by each standard. 
(2)  Lighting-standard drawing. A scaled drawing of the proposed lighting standard(s) is required and should contain the following information: 
a.  All size specifications; 
b.  Information on lighting intensity (number of watts, isofootcandle diagram, etc.); 
c.  Materials, colors; and 
d.  Ground or wall anchorage details. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 28-300. - Business buffer zoning: Factors for evaluation of business buffer submittals, in general. 
    The following factors and characteristics will govern the evaluation by the village's authority of the design submission. All such factors affect the aesthetic appearance of the proposed development, namely: 
(1)  Conformance to ordinances and the Appearance Code; 
(2)  Logic of design; 
(3)  Exterior space utilization; 
(4)  Architectural character; 
(5)  Attractiveness; 
(6)  Materials selection; 
(7)  Harmony and compatibility; 
(8)  Circulation, vehicular and pedestrian; and 
(9)  Maintenance aspects. 
(Ord. No. 88-11, § 1, 6-27-88) 
Secs. 28-301-28-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 28-311. - I-1 limited industrial district. 
(a)  The I-1 limited industrial district is intended to provide lands for development by industrial firms that have high standards of performance and that can locate in close proximity to residential and business uses. The district regulations are designed to permit the operations of most manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing activities with adequate protection to adjacent district uses and sufficient control of external effects to protect one industry from another. All industrial operations shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings. 
    This section shall apply to such district. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the I-1 district: 
(1)  Industrial type uses: 
Manufacturing and industrial activities, including fabrication, processing, assembly, disassembly, repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing, packaging, and storage of materials, products and goods that can be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings; 
Laboratories and research firms involved in the research, experimentation or testing of materials or products; 
Printing, publishing or lithography establishments. 
(2)  Wholesale and warehouse uses: 
Direct selling establishments, where products are stored and distributed, but not displayed for retail sales; 
Wholesale and warehouse establishments that deal in commodities which are the product of a use permitted in the I-1 district; 
Establishments that warehouse and distribute beverages; 
(3)  Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities: 
Essential services; 
Hospital; 
Office buildings; 
State, county or municipal garage; 
Public utility establishment; 
Vocational school; 
Water filtration plant; 
Water reservoir. 
(c)  The following special uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II of this chapter. 
Planned development-Industrial, in accordance with division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
Residence of the proprietor, caretaker or watchman, when located on the premises of the permitted or special use. 
Outdoor storage. 
(d)  All permitted and special uses in the I-1 district are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  On all lots with less than 200 feet of frontage on a dedicated street access is limited to one combined point of ingress and egress having a minimum width of 20 feet and a maximum width of 35 feet. On all lots having 200 feet or more of frontage on a dedicated street, access is limited to two separate points of combined ingress and egress, each having a minimum width of 20 feet and a maximum width of 35 feet. Location and construction specifications shall meet all relevant state, county and village requirements. 
(2)  A performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, certificate of deposit or other guarantee of improvements for an amount determined by the village engineer in a form approved by the village attorney shall be provided to guarantee all requirements of this chapter not completed at the time of the issuance of a occupancy permit or business license. 
(3)  With the exception of ingresses and egresses, sidewalks, permitted signs and permitted decorative fences or walls, a 20-foot strip of land abutting and running parallel to the front and corner side (where applicable) yards for the width or depth of the lot shall be landscaped. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of the following materials: Grass, trees, low-living plant materials and defined areas of non-living groundcover materials. 
(4)  A five- to eight-foot high, opaque fence, wall hedge or earth berm in accordance with the provisions of section 28-253 shall be provided in the following instances: 
a.  The industrial use abuts a residential district; screening shall be provided along such lot lines (excluding front and corner side lot lines) that abut the residential district; 
b.  When outdoor storage, occurring under the conditions of this section exists. 
(5)  The outdoor storage of equipment, materials and supplies is allowed provided the following conditions have been met: 
a.  The storage occurs within that portion of the lot located within the setback lines; 
b.  The storage is screened from view from all nearby public streets, rights-of-way and alleys and all adjacent zoning lots that are not within an industrial district; 
c.  No equipment, materials or supplies shall be stored upon the lot in such a manner that they may be transferred off the property by wind or precipitation. 
(6)  The standards contained in subsection (i) shall be adhered to. 
(e)  Accessory uses and buildings incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal uses and subject to the provisions of section 28-246 are permitted. 
(f)  With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot," shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted or special use. The minimum lot area shall be 30,000 square feet. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(g)  All buildings and structures shall adhere to the following setbacks: 
(1)  Front and corner side yards, 45 feet, with a 20-foot landscaped buffer in accordance with subsection (d)(4) above; 
(2)  Interior side yard, 15 feet, when abutting a residential district 25 feet; 
(3)  Rear yard, 25 feet; when abutting a residence district, 35 feet; 
(4)  In planned industrial developments and industrial subdivisions the board of trustees may vary the preceding requirements. 
(h)  The absolute building height of all uses shall not exceed 40 feet or three and one-half stories. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.0. 
(i)  The following performance standards as well as all applicable federal, state and village standards shall be adhered to by all uses: 
(1)  Noise: 
a.  The following provisions of the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) (2000), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in their entirety (including the referenced regulations and rules in 35 Ill. Adm. Code 900.101 et seq.): 
Title VI: NOISE 
Section 5/23 
Section 5/24 
Section 5/25 
35 Ill. Adm. Code 900.101 et. seq 
b.  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations: 
1.  Noises not directly under control of the property user. 
2.  Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Such activities are those which are non-routine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently. 
3.  The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Vibrations: 
a.  Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three-component measuring system approved by the zoning administrator. 
b.  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from vibration level regulations: 
(1)  Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user. 
(2)  Vibrations emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Such activities are those which are non-routine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently. 
(3)  Transient vibrations of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads. 
c.  At no point along the boundary of a "residence district" (column I) or along an "adjacent lot" (column II) shall the earth borne vibrations be in excess of the limits set forth in the following table: 
MAXIMUM PERMITTED EARTH BORNE VIBRATIONS 
Frequency 
(Cycles Per Second) (I) 
Displacement 
(Inches) (II) 
Displacement 
(Inches) 0 to 10 .0008 .0004 10 to 20 .0005 .0002 20 to 30 .0002 .0001 30 to 40 .0002 .0001 40 and over .0001 .0001  
    Steady-state vibrations, for purposes of this chapter, are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute, shall be considered impact vibrations and shall not cause in excess of twice the displacements stipulated. 
(3)  Smoke and particulate matter: 
a.  Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and so forth within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, or other acceptable means. 
    For the purpose of grading the density equivalent opacity of smoke, the Ringelmann Chart, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be employed. 
    The emission of more than 20 smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No. 2. However, once during any six-hour period each stack may emit up to 35 smoke units, not to exceed Ringelmann No. 2, when blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during fire cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than four minutes per period. 
    The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of lot area during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per acre the correction factor set forth in the following table: 
Allowance for Height of Emission* 
Height of 
Emission (Above 
Grade (Feet)) Correction 
(Pounds Per Hour 
per Acre)  50 0.01 100 0.06 150 0.10 200 0.16 300 0.30 400 0.50  
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table. 
b.  Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows: 
1.  Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area-thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre. 
2.  From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in item 1 above, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for height of emission set forth in the table, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission. 
3.  Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in item b above, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. Such total shall not exceed one pound per acre of lot area during any one hour. 
(4)  Toxic matter: The measurement of toxic matter shall be made at ground level or habitable elevation and shall be the average of any 24-hour sampling period. The release of any airborne toxic matter shall not exceed the fractional quantities permitted of those toxic matters currently listed in the threshold limit values adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. If a toxic substance is not contained in this listing, the applicant shall satisfy the village that the proposed levels will be safe and not detrimental to the general population nor injurious to plant and animal life. 
    In the I-1 district, the release of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-thirtieth of the threshold limit values across lot lines. 
(5)  Noxious and odorous matter: In the I-1 district, no activity or operation shall cause at any time the discharge of matter across lot lines in such concentration as to be noxious. The emission of matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable as an odor at any point along lot lines is prohibited. 
(6)  Fire and explosive hazards: 
a.  Flammable solids. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. 
    The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided the materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system. 
b.  Flammable liquids and gases. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids, or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, shall be permitted in accordance with the following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted: 
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE 
MATERIALS PERMITTED 
(in gallons) 
Above-ground Under-ground Industries Engaged in Storage Only Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° F. Prohibited 100,000 From and including 105° F. to and including 187° F. Prohibited 100,000 Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° F. Prohibited 100,000 Industries Engaged in Utilization and Manufacture of Flammable Materials Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° F. 50,000 100,000 From and including 105° F. to and including 187° F. 20,000 100,000 Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° F. 5,000 100,000  
    When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured and measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed 300 times the quantities as listed above. 
    The manufacture of liquid or gaseous oxygen is prohibited. Liquid or gaseous oxygen may be stored or utilized (a) in accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 566, as from time to time in force and effect, herein adopted by reference, and the total quantity stored of gaseous or liquid oxygen shall not exceed 550,000 standard cubic feet. 
c.  Detonable materials. Activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation are prohibited. 
(7)  Glare and heat: Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half footcandle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines. 
Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. 
(8)  Radiation hazards -Release outside property lines: The release of radioactive materials or the emission of ionizing radiation outside of property lines shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state. 
    Unsealed radioactive materials: Unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized, or stored (except when such materials are stored in a fireproof container at or below ground level) in excess of the quantities appearing in the following table: 
Quantities of Radioactive Materials Radioactive Material Unsealed Curies Antimony (Sb 124 ) ..... 1 Arsenic 76 (As 76 ) ..... 10 Arsenic 77 (As 77 ) ..... 10 Barium-Lanthanum 140 (BaLa 140 ) ..... 1 Beryllium (Be 7 ) ..... 50 Cadium-Silver 109 (CdAg 109 ) ..... 10 Calcium 45 (Ca 45 ) ..... 10 Carbon 14 (C 14 ) ..... 50 Cerium-Praseodymium 144 (CePr 144 ) ..... 1 Cesium-Barium 137 (CsBa 137 ) ..... 1 Chlorine 36 (Cl 36 ) ..... 1 Chromium 51 (Cr 51 ) ..... 50 Cobalt 60 (Co 60 ) ..... 1 Copper 64 (Cu 84 ) ..... 50 Europium 154 (Eu 154 ) ..... 1 Fluorine 18 (F 18 ) ..... 50 Gallium 72 (Ga 72 ) ..... 10 Germanium 71 (Ge 71 ) ..... 50 Gold 198 (Au 198 ) ..... 10 Gold 199 (Au 199 ) ..... 10 Hydrogen 3 (tritium) (H 3 ) ..... 250 Indium 114 (In 114 ) ..... 1 Iodine 131 (I 131 ) ..... 10 Iridum 192 (Ir 192 ) ..... 10 Iron 55 (Fe 55 ) ..... 50 Iron 59 (Fe 59 ) ..... 1 Lanthanum 140 (La 140 ) ..... 10 Manganese 52 (Mn 52 ) ..... 1 Manganese 56 (Mn 56 ) ..... 50 Molybdenum 99 (Mo 99 ) ..... 10 Nickel 59 (Ni 59 ) ..... 1 Nickel 63 (Ni 63 ) ..... 1 Niobium 95 (Nb 95 ) ..... 10 Palladium 109 (Pd 109 ) ..... 10 Palladium-Rhodium 103 (PdRh 103 ) ..... 50 Phosphorus 32 (P 32 ) ..... 10 Polonium 210 (Po 210 ) ..... 0.1 Potassium 42 (K 42 ) ..... 10 Praseodyminum 143 (Pr 143 ) ..... 10 Promethium 147 (Pm 147 ) ..... 10 Radium 226 (Ra 226 ) ..... 0.1 Rhenium 186 (Re 186 ) ..... 10 Rhodium 105 (Rh 105 ) ..... 10 Rubidium 86 (Rb 86 ) ..... 10 Ruthenium-Rhodium 106 (RuRh 106 ) ..... 1 Semarium 153 (Sm 153 ) ..... 10 Scandium 46 (Sc 46 ) ..... 1 Silver 105 (Ag 105 ) ..... 1 Silver 111 (Ag 111 ) ..... 10 Sodium 22 (Na 22 ) ..... 10 Sodium 24 (Na 24 ) ..... 10 Strontium 89 (Sr 89 ) ..... 1 Strontium-Yttrium 90 (SrY 90 ) ..... 0.1 Sulfur 35 (S 35 ) ..... 50 Tantalum 182 (Ta 182 ) ..... 10 Technetium 96 (Tc 96 ) ..... 1 Technetium 99 (Tc 99 ) ..... 1 Tellurium 127 (Te 127 ) ..... 10 Tellurium 129 (Te 129 ) ..... 1 Thallium 204 (Tl 204 ) ..... 50 Tin 113 (Sn 113 ) ..... 10 Tungsten 185 (W 185 ) ..... 10 Vanadium 48 (V 48 ) ..... 1 Yttrium 90 (Y 90 ) ..... 1 Yttrium 91 (Y 91 ) ..... 1 Zinc 65 (Zn 65 ) ..... 10  
    Beta and/or gamma emitting radioactive material not listed above. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 6.0, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2001-15, § 1, 3-26-01) 
Sec. 28-312. - I-2 Gateway commerce district. 
(a)  Definition. The regulations set forth in this section are the district regulations in the "I-2 Gateway commerce district". 
(b)  Purpose. The intent of this section is to permit certain administrative, research, light manufacturing and business organizations which do not in any way detract from residential desirability, to locate in an area which lies beside a high visibility transportation road or between an industrial district of intense activity and certain residential districts of passive activity and thereby to act as a transitional district between said areas. The limitations as to uses, heights, ground cover, and offensive characteristics are imposed to protect and foster residential desirability of the community. 
(c)  General restrictions. Any use permitted in the I-2 Gateway commerce district shall comply with provisions contained hereafter and upon request by the zoning administrator petitioners or existing owners shall provide satisfactory proof of compliance during the hearing phase or anytime thereafter. 
(1)  All operations and activities of all uses within this district including the storage of materials shall be conducted wholly inside a building or buildings. 
(2)  No use permitted in this district shall omit odors, gas, dust, smoke, lighting effects or noise, to an extent greater than permitted by the state and federal environmental protection agencies and the following maximum allowable limits: 
a.  Sound level shall not exceed maximum levels as provided in article XIII, section 28-311 (i). 
b.  No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling at any time at the property line shall be permitted. 
c.  No speakers or public address or paging systems shall be permitted which are audible beyond the property lines. 
(3)  No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacturing of materials or products which decompose by detonation or having a closed cup flashpoint of 149 degrees Fahrenheit or less shall be permitted. 
a.  The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning-as determined for liquids by a closed cup flashpoint of not less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit-is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards for this district. 
b.  The storage, utilization of manufacture of materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning-as determined for liquids by a closed cup flashpoint of less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit, but not less than 150 degrees Fahrenheit-is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards for this district and provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls; and 
2.  All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40 feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association, or if the materials, goods or products are liquids, the protection thereof shall be in conformity with those applicable standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association. 
c.  Notwithstanding other provisions of the district, all buildings in excess of 8,000 square feet shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(4)  No activities involving radiation or radioactive elements shall be permitted other than that utilized in hospital or medical clinic or medical office settings. 
(d)  Use regulations. 
(1)  The following uses are permitted in the Gateway commerce district: 
a.  Offices. 
b.  Research laboratories. 
c.  Personnel training centers. 
d.  Storing, cleaning, testing, repairing, assembling, fabricating and servicing establishments as determined by operations conforming with performance standards set forth in this section, but not within a building nearer than 100 feet of any residential use. A variance as to the required yard may be considered where site design factors are found to mitigate a lesser distance. 
e.  Public utility electric distribution centers in buildings. 
f.  Public utility telephone transmission equipment in buildings. 
g.  Radio, television and electronics assembly, but not within a building nearer than 100 feet of any residential district. A variance as to the required yard may be considered where site design factors are found to mitigate a lesser distance. 
h.  Printing, establishments, blueprint and photocopying establishments, but not within a building nearer than 300 feet of any residential district. Where materials having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 100 degrees Fahrenheit are used, fire protection shall comply with the recommendations of the National Fire Protection Association then in effect. A variance as to the required yard may be considered where site design factors are found to mitigate a lesser distance. 
i.  Membership clubs, including recreational uses such as health clubs and indoor skating rinks. 
j.  Medical clinics and physician offices. 
k.  Printing and copying retail services. 
l.  Product showrooms and retail/wholesale uses ancillary to the principal use not exceeding 50 percent of the building. 
m.  Banks and financial institutions, including drive-through. 
n.  Office supply and computer stores. 
o.  Warehousing, wholesale establishments and distribution facilities, not exceeding 200,000 square feet but not including freight terminals or freight forwarding facilities. 
(2)  The following special uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of division 6 of article II in this chapter. 
a.  Planned development-Industrial, in accordance with division 7 of article II of this chapter. 
b.  Service businesses, for the convenience of persons and firms in the district, such as, but not limited to hotels, meeting halls and restaurants, including drive-through. 
c.  Hospitals. 
d.  Warehousing, wholesale establishments and distribution facilities exceeding 200,000 square feet. 
e.  Day care center. 
f.  Brewery or winemaking facility subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No residential use in the structure; 
2.  Proper licensing in accordance with Illinois state statute, currently 235 ILCS 5/Article V; 
3.  Limited to a maximum of 360,000 gallons annual production on site of fermented or malt liquor such as wine, cider or beer, excluding distilled spirits and liquor obtained by distillation; 
4.  Permitted free product sampling (or a cost less than production cost) for consumption on the premises to any one consumer in any one day of no more than three separate two ounce portions; and sale of product sampling for consumption on the premises; 
5.  Retail sale of product produced on the premises for consumption on the premises, or packaged sale for on or off premises consumption; 
6.  Permitted wholesale sales in accordance with the state license obtained. 
(e)  Height. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged to exceed 50 feet in height; provided, however, that no building or structure adjacent to a residential use may exceed 35 feet in height; provided that an exception may be made by the board of trustees for penthouses, enclosed water towers and decorative building projections. 
(f)  Areas and yards. No lot shall be less than 60,000 square feet [in] area and 150 feet in width. Only one permitted use shall occupy one such lot exclusive of offices, training centers and laboratories permitted herein and incidental to the principal use. 
(1)  The maximum ground area occupied by all buildings shall not be more than 40 percent of the area of the lot or tract on which a building permit has been issued, excluding all areas dedicated for public purposes as may be required by the village or other governmental authority. All buildings on a lot shall observe the yard requirements of this section. 
(2)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 50 feet wherein there shall be no building of any kind. Parking of automobiles may be permitted provided there is a 25 foot landscaped buffer along the street and a minimum of five feet landscaped buffer along the side lot lines. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards. 
(3)  Side yard: There shall be a side yard having a width of not less than 25 feet on each side of the building or buildings, except on the side of a lot abutting a residential use, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than 100 feet. The parking of automobiles may be permitted within the side yard areas provided a five foot landscaped buffer is provided, except that where the side yard abuts a residential district, no parking space or access driveway shall be closer than 25 feet to any lot zoned for residential use. 
(4)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet and the parking of automobiles may be permitted provided a five foot landscaped buffer is provided; however, where any lot line abuts or is adjacent to an area zoned for residential use, the rear yard lines abutting such use shall be not less than 100 feet, and no parking shall be allowed within 25 feet of such lot lines. 
(5)  When, due to the shape of the site or site design factors, alterations of the setback requirements is necessary to provide for the reasonable use of the site, these requirements may be reduced by 25 percent of the restrictive dimension by the zoning board of appeals. 
(g)  Lighting, exterior. Illumination of buildings, signs, grounds and parking areas shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  No blinking lights shall be used for the illumination of signs. All primary light sources illuminating the buildings shall be erected and maintained in accordance with standards of the illuminating engineering society and shall be so placed, designed and used that neither the direct nor reflected light therefrom will adversely affect surrounding property or create a traffic hazard. Building faces, if illuminated for advertising purposes, shall be only such faces that do not front upon a residential district. 
(2)  Floodlighting of grounds or parking or loading areas shall be directed from the perimeter toward the middle or be designed with cut offs and be arranged so as not to reflect direct rays of light into adjacent residential districts or into the public way. General lighting of parking or loading area shall, except for emergency and security lighting, cease at or before the hour of midnight when these areas face a residential district where the distance from the nearest light to the nearest residence is less than 1,000 feet. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with provisions set forth in article X of this chapter. 
(i)  Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in article IX of this chapter. 
(j)  Appearance. The appearance of any new structure or proposed remodeling of an existing structure or structures must be approved by the zoning administrator after review by the plan commission. The following appearance criteria are hereby adopted. This criteria shall be used as guidelines for determining the acceptability of the proposed appearance of structures to be erected or remodeled within the village's I-2 district. Design of the site, building and structure or structures, together with landscaping, sign placement, the placement of street hardware and miscellaneous objects and architectural features to be observed by the general public are pertinent factors to be considered in the review of and approval of the overall appearance of a particular structure and site. The following criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but are set forth to assist in focusing attention on the development of plans and designs that will maintain and achieve development of an aesthetically pleasing nature, preserve taxing values and promote the general public health safety and welfare. The appearance criteria are set forth as follows: 
(1)  In relationship to both buildings and site: 
a.  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement and parking areas. 
b.  Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between buildings. 
c.  Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to screen parking areas from view from public ways and adjacent residential areas. 
d.  Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground. 
(2)  Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining areas: 
a.  Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks and materials. 
b.  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
c.  Where any I-2 district is adjacent to a residential zoning district the following shall be required: 
An earthen berm composed of a minimum five feet in height soil foundation utilizing a minimum four to one slope or terraced levels, and a minimum of three feet of plantings atop which shall not be subject to variation due to season which completely screens the adjacent areas to a level of eight feet at the lot line. 
When, due to the shape of the site, topography, or site design factors, alternative methods of equally effective screening is preferred, a variance of the materials may be petitioned. 
(3)  Elements of landscape included in these criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns and all visible construction other than primary and secondary buildings and utilitarian structure. Landscape criteria consists of the following: 
a.  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance. 
b.  Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide, an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting. 
c.  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important views, and provide shade. Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations only. 
d.  Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments. 
e.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used where possible. 
f.  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices. 
g.  Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groupings. 
h.  Wherever feasible existing trees shall be preserved. 
i.  Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combination of these. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer. 
j.  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and pavings or wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
(4)  Building design: 
a.  Architectural style is not to be restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surrounding facilities, structures, and area. 
b.  Architecturally and aesthetically suitable building materials shall be applied to or used on all sides of a building and shall be harmonious and compatible with colors of the natural environment and other adjacent buildings. No metal, wood or E.I.F.S. exteriors are permitted except as accents. Such accents shall not cover more than 15 percent per building side. Exterior materials for principal and accessory structures shall include the following: brick, stone, architectural insulated metal panel, aluminum and glass curtain wall systems, architectural poured-in-place, tilt-up or precast concrete which has been sealed or stained with a method that has a minimum life expectancy of 20 years and architectural concrete masonry units. Exterior materials specifically prohibited: wood, except as provided for above, metal, except as provided for above, standard or plain concrete block, E.I.F.S. materials, except as provided for above and external downspouts shall be specifically prohibited in any improvements constructed in the premises. 
c.  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
d.  Colors shall be harmonious and used only in conjunction with compatible accents. 
e.  Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or buildings shall be screened from the public ways and residential areas with materials harmonious with the building. 
f.  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept (fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design). 
g.  Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, and residential areas using materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening. 
h.  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent monotony. 
(5)  Miscellaneous structures and street hardware: 
a.  Where possible, signs shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates. 
b.  The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
c.  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
d.  Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention. 
e.  Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs. 
(6)  Maintenance-Planning and design factors: 
a.  Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep. 
b.  Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against, the elements, neglect, damage, and abuse. 
c.  Provisions for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures and control of dirt and refuse shall be included in the design. Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt and rubbish shall be avoided. 
d.  Lighting, landscaping, grounds and buildings shall be maintained in good condition. Landscaping shall be maintained and kept clean of debris, dead plants and nuisances as defined in chapter 11.5, Landscaping and trees, and chapter 16, Nuisances. Buildings shall be maintained in good repair with no peeling paint, disrepair or disassembly or deterioration. Grounds shall be kept orderly and maintained to guard against rat or other types of infectious insects or animal infestation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-38, § 3, 9-25-00; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 28-313. - I-T intermodal terminal district/P.U.D. industrial. 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of an intermodal terminal district/P.U.D. industrial (hereafter "I-T District") is to permit: 
1.  Intermodal terminal facilities and other industrial/commercial uses that would not be possible under the strict application of the other sections of this section. 
2.  A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better industrial development and design. 
3.  An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, and other facilities. 
4.  A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and public welfare, while providing land use by heavy and intense industries. 
5.  Developers of large-scale and complex industrial projects to have the flexibility to complete those projects. 
The I-T district is intended to provide for large-scale logistics-oriented developments directly adjacent to a Class 1 railroad right-of-way and intended to be served by either a Class 1 railroad or a short-haul or a terminal railroad serving the rail yard portions of the development. The I-T district may include a variety of industrial, manufacturing, intermodal rail, commercial or business uses which are planned and developed as a unit or in multiple phases. Such development may consist of conventional subdivided lots or provide for development by a special industrial planned development concept plan which establishes the general location and extent of the features of the special industrial planned unit development. 
(b)  Minimum land area and required adjacency: An I-T district shall be approved only on contiguous parcels of 800 acres or more. An I-T district must be adjacent to a Class 1 railroad right-of-way and intended to be served by either a Class 1 railroad or a short-haul or terminal railroad serving the rail yard portions of the development. 
(c)  The following uses are permitted in the I-T district: 
A.  Category A: Intermodal and related usages. 
1.  Intermodal, rail and truck facilities, including freight yards, motor freight terminals, maintenance facilities, buildings customarily accessory to a railroad yard; outdoor overhead cranes and gantries; outdoor and indoor storage of motor vehicles, freight, chassis (including upright storage) and materials; cargo container storage (subject to the requirements hereinafter set forth); cargo container, truck and chassis maintenance facilities; and cargo container staging and operations yards in conjunction with an intermodal rail and truck facility. 
2.  Uses and buildings accessory to the foregoing. 
3.  Governmental offices and facilities; private facilities under government contract usage. 
4.  Public or private utilities, including, but not limited to: water wells, water treatment plants, pumping stations, sewage treatment plants, lift stations, electric power generation plants, substations and facilities necessarily accessory thereto. 
5.  Uses permitted in Category B. 
B.  Category B: Industrial park uses. 
1.  Industrial warehouse and distribution facilities. 
2.  Office uses. 
3.  Light, medium or heavy manufacturing and assembly. 
4.  Uses and buildings accessory to the foregoing. 
5.  Gasoline service stations, including truck stops with sleeping facilities, restaurants and retail uses. 
6.  Banks or other financial institutions with drive-up facilities and automatic teller machines (ATM). 
7.  Governmental offices and facilities; private facilities under government contract usage. 
8.  Public or private recreation facilities, including parks. 
9.  Public or private utilities, including, but not limited to: water wells, water treatment plants, pumping stations, sewage treatment plants, lift stations, electric power generation plants, substations and facilities necessarily accessory thereto. 
10.  Business uses as set forth as permitted or special uses in B-2 highway service districts restricted to lots adjoining a major thoroughfare. 
C.  Category C: Peripheral transition zone. 
1.  Office uses. 
2.  Light manufacturing and assembly. 
3.  Hotels and motels. 
4.  Restaurants, including fast-food restaurants with drive-through facilities. 
5.  Business uses as set forth as permitted or special uses in the B-2 highway service district restricted to lots adjoining a major thoroughfare. 
6.  Industrial uses permitted under I-2 zoning district. 
7.  Banks or other financial institutions with drive-up facilities and automatic teller machines (ATM). 
8.  Government offices and facilities; private facilities under government contract usage. 
9.  Public or private recreation facilities, including parks. 
(d)  Site and structure requirements: 
A.  Minimum lot area: No minimum lot area is established in the I-T district. However, lot dimensions shall be sufficient to meet the remaining density and dimensional regulations. 
B.  Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
C.  Building setback requirements: (See paragraph F. if adjacent to a residential district.) 
Front yard:  Not less than 40 feet, if the maximum building height does not exceed 40 feet (exclusive of towers, lift equipment, HVAC and similar facilities). For buildings with a height in excess of 40 feet, the front yard setback shall be increased by one foot for each additional two feet of building height, to a maximum of 100 feet. 
Interior side yard:  Ten feet. 
Corner side yard:  15 feet. 
Rear yard:  Ten feet. 
Exception:  Building setback requirements described above for side and rear yards adjacent to a railroad siding shall not be applicable. In addition, building setbacks for Category A 1 and A 2 uses shall be governed by paragraph G. below. 
D.  Green space requirement/Category B and Category C: All lots or parcels shall have a front yard green space in which no improvements other than landscaping shall be permitted (driveways, drainage structures, utility pedestals and boxes and underground utilities shall not be prohibited by this requirement). 
Green space setback:  Along public roadways as designated in the concept plan the green space setback shall be 30 feet from the lot line. 
Green space landscaping:  The required front yard green space area shall be landscaped with a mixture of trees or shrubs as approved by the village. The remainder of the required area may be landscaped with turf grass or other ground covers approved by the village. Wherever practical, berms should be used in conjunction with the landscaping. (Planting specifications are found in section 28-258.) 
E.  Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage permitted in the I-T District shall be subject only to compliance with the bulk regulations, green space and building setbacks herein specified. 
F.  Adjacency to a residential district. Where any yard in this district abuts an existing residential zoning district, no building shall be erected within 50 feet of the residential lot line if the building height does not exceed 40 feet (exclusive of towers, lift equipment, HVAC and similar facilities). For buildings with a height in excess of 40 feet, the setback from a residential lot line shall be increased by one foot for each additional two feet of building height, to a maximum setback of 100 feet. 
G.  Green space requirement/Category A uses. For Category A-1 and A-2 uses, green space, setback requirements, berms and required yards shall be shown on the approved concept plan. For all other Category A uses, Category B requirements shall be applied. 
H.  Other regulations and standards. 
1.  Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking for Category A 1, A 2, B 1, B 2, B 3 and B 4 uses shall be two spaces for each three employees on the shift with the greatest number of employees. For all other uses, off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with article IX of the Zoning Ordinance. The use of public streets for the staging of trucks or tractor trailers is not permitted. 
2.  Landscaping requirements. (See section 28-258 for planting specifications.) 
General: The concept plan for each I-T district as approved by the village shall specify those portions of the perimeter of the I-T district that shall be landscaped with a berm. This perimeter area shall be landscaped with a berm, seeded or sodded and improved with trees and shrubs as approved by the village in the concept plan for the I-T district in a minimum ratio of three plantings per 50 feet in berm length. Required berms shall be installed at the time of the stormwater detention facilities. Berm heights shall be dependent upon the difference in elevations of land within the development and outside the development and shall effectively screen permanent and temporary structures within the development from outside adjacent areas utilizing the berm height and plantings herein referred to and required. Berm height is expected to be sufficient to screen structures and operations effectively and shall be a minimum of six feet in height with a minimum four foot level cap area. Where berming is not feasible based upon application of engineering standards of a minimum 3 to 1 ratio rise, dense plantings shall be used. "Dense plantings" are defined as being unable to see through, coniferous and a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting with a reasonable growth rate to reach final growth height to achieve the desired screen effect. All plantings must be maintained to achieve effective screening. Subject to the foregoing requirements, the final design of perimeter berms and berm landscaping shall be subject to the reasonable review and approval of the village zoning administrator. 
Category A: No landscaping required except that the village may reasonably require perimeter berms or landscaping to screen such areas from adjacent property, public rights-of-way, or other roadways as set forth in the concept plan approved by the village. 
Category B: 
(a)  Green space requirement as per paragraph D. above. There shall be a minimum 30-foot landscaped area adjacent to any public road. The landscape buffer provided herein may be included in any calculation of the minimum front yard on any lot. The landscape buffer area shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs or other natural plant material. 
(b)  All building main entryways shall be landscaped with trees or shrubs. 
(c)  All foundations areas shall be landscaped to a minimum of ten feet at appropriate areas using good landscape planning standards and are subject to village approval. 
Category C: All areas within Category C shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements applicable to Category B above. 
Parking: All parking areas within Categories B and C shall be landscaped in accordance with the following: 
Curbed, landscaped islands shall be provided at the end of each parking row intended for automobiles. No more than 20 adjacent parking spaces shall be located in a single parking row for automobile parking without a landscaped island. 
Required islands or medians shall be a minimum of six feet in width as measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
Perimeters of parking areas shall be landscaped to a minimum depth of ten feet from back of curb. 
Islands or medians shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and other ground covers or turf grass. Shrubs and ground covers shall have a maximum height of 30 inches. 
3.  Sidewalks: shall be required as approved by the village in the concept plan. 
4.  Declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
Contemporaneous with the approval of any final plat of subdivision in an I-T district, the owner and developer shall prepare and record a declaration of covenants, conditions, easement and restrictions for that portion of the development, providing, inter alia, for a property owner's association (which may be an addition to an existing association) with authority to impose assessments for maintenance and improvements within the platted area. 
5.  Container handling. 
a.  Containers placarded with hazardous materials shall not be stacked. 
b.  Containers shall not be stacked more than six units high outside of the wide span crane reach and not more than five units high within the wide span crane reach. Excluding operational areas described in subparagraph e below, the total area utilized for stacked containers shall be limited to 20 percent of the phases completed and shall not exceed 100 acres in total at any time for any category location other than in Category A. Excluding operational areas described in subparagraph e. below, the total area utilized for stacked containers shall be limited to 20 percent of the phases completed and shall not exceed 100 acres. 
c.  Thirty-foot drive aisles shall be maintained. 
d.  No fastened signage shall be displayed on any container. 
e.  Temporary container stacking (not to exceed three units high) shall be permitted in and adjacent to lift-track areas of an intermodal rail yard, as reasonably required for efficient operational handling of inbound and outbound containers. 
(e)  Approval process: Procedure: An I-T district shall be considered using the following procedures and may depart from the normal procedures, standards, and other requirements of the zoning ordinance. Applications shall be accompanied by the required plats and documents. 
A.  Prehearing procedure, conference: Prior to the filing of an application for approval of an I-T district, the developer shall request an informal meeting with the zoning administrator to discuss the conceptual development of the land in conjunction with the village land use plan. The prehearing conference is mandatory but does not require formal application, fee, or filing of a concept plan. 
B.  Concept plan: A concept plan for an I-T district shall be submitted to the president and board of trustees, who shall refer same to the plan commission for public hearing, report, and recommendation as to whether or not the president and board of trustees shall grant approval. 
1.  Concept plan requirements: The concept plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information and data: 
a.  Boundaries delineating each use Category (A, B, or C) and the proposed limits of each category on the subject property. 
b.  Primary and secondary roadways, whether public or private, shall be delineated on the concept plan and labeled as "primary" or "secondary". Local roads or access roads need not be shown. 
c.  Any planned permanent open space or conservation areas should be delineated on the concept plan. 
d.  Green spaces, perimeter berm and berm specifications. 
e.  Any other improvements necessary to portray the overall concept and guide the preliminary plans and final plats and plans should be shown on the concept plan. 
2.  Concept plan procedure: 
a.  The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the application, giving notice of the time and place not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before the hearing publishing a notice thereof at least once in [a] newspaper published or having general circulation within the village. 
b.  Copies of the concept plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the village engineer and zoning administrator for certification as to conformity with these regulations, recommendations, and suggestions regarding the overall design, if any. 
c.  Following the public hearing and review of the concept plan and supporting data for conformity to these regulations, the plan commission shall within 30 days, recommend approval, modification, or disapprove and the reasons therefor, to the president and village board. 
d.  As a condition to the approval of the concept plan, the plan commission shall set forth in a separate communication to the president and board of trustees, findings of fact, on which they base the approval. 
e.  The president and board of trustees after receipt of the concept plan from the plan commission, shall approve, modify, or disapprove. In the case of approval, or approval with modification, the village board shall pass an ordinance approving the concept plan and indicate their approval upon the plat, and arrange zoning modifications as necessary. The village board may require such special conditions as they may deem necessary to ensure conformance with the intent of the village comprehensive plan, and the stated purposes of this zoning district. 
f.  Approval of a concept plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the design concept and site submitted on the concept plan and a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the village and subsequent recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and conditions of the preliminary approval, if any. Final plats shall be approved if they conform to the purpose and intent of the concept plan. 
C.  Preliminary plan: 
1.  Preliminary plan requirements: A preliminary plan shall be prepared by the developer and submitted for each individual lot development. The preliminary plan shall conform substantially with the approved concept plan. The preliminary plan requirements shall include individual lot development and include site plan, landscape plan, lighting plan, photometric plan and building elevations. 
2.  Preliminary plan procedure: 
a.  The zoning administrator shall review and decide the compliance of each preliminary plan with these I-T district regulations and the approved concept plan. 
b.  The zoning administrator shall either approve or disapprove (stating the reasons for such disapproval) of a preliminary plan within 30 days after receipt thereof from the developer. 
c.  The president and board of trustees shall hear the appeal of any decision by the zoning administrator to disapprove a preliminary plan. 
D.  Final plat and final engineering plan: 
1.  Final plat and final engineering plan requirements: The final plat and final engineering plan shall conform substantially with the approved concept plan and approved preliminary plan. 
2.  Final plat and final engineering plan procedure: The final plat and final engineering plan procedure for an I-T district shall be the same as those established in chapter 23 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
3.  Construction permits: The developer may apply for and obtain permits for site grading and construction prior to final approval of a final plat for the development site, but an occupancy permit shall not be issued until the final plat is approved. Work done is at the risk of the developer; if such work done is not in compliance with later approved plans or permits, any such work will be required to be removed or replaced. 
(f)  Changes in the I-T district: The I-T district project shall be developed only according to the approved concept plan and final engineering plans. Individual development sites shall be developed only in accordance with the approved preliminary plan and all supporting data for each such site. The concept plan, preliminary plan, final plat and supporting data, together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on applicant, their successors, grantees, and assigns and shall limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in the I-T district. 
A.  Major changes. Changes which materially alter the concept or intent of the development may be approved only by submission of a new concept plan and supporting data and following the "preliminary approval" steps and subsequent amendment of the concept plan and preliminary plan. It is acknowledged that a development of the scale which this zoning district is designed to handle will need to be responsive to changing economic conditions. Changes in the concept plan, preliminary plan and final plan and plat initiated by the developer may be approved or rejected at regular or special meetings of the village board. 
All changes to the final plat shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds as amendments to the final plat or reflected in the recording of a new "corrected final plat." 
B.  Minor changes: The village board may approve minor changes, errors, or omissions, in the development which do not change the concept or intent of the development, without going through the "preliminary approval" steps. Minor changes shall be any changes which are not material changes to the concept or intent of the development. 
(g)  Findings required: The plan commission shall provide findings of fact setting forth the reasons for its recommendation, and the findings shall set forth with particularity in which respect the proposal would serve the public interest including but not limited to findings of fact on the following: 
A.  The extent to which the proposed concept plan is consistent with the stated purpose of the I-T district regulations. 
B.  The extent to which the proposed concept plan meets the requirements and standards of this zoning district. 
C.  The physical design of the proposed concept plan and the manner in which said design makes adequate provision for public services and provides adequate control over vehicular traffic. 
D.  The relationship of the proposed concept plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood. 
E.  The desirability of the proposed concept plan to physical development, tax base and economic well-being of the entire community. 
F.  Conditions and guarantees: Prior to the approval of a concept plan, the plan commission may recommend, and the village board may stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of the I-T district development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest, improvement of the development, protection of the adjacent area, and to secure compliance with the standards specified. In all cases in which an I-T district is granted, the village board shall require such evidence and guarantees as are appropriate to ensure compliance with the conditions set forth in the development approval. 
(h)  Other provisions inapplicable: The sections (or portions thereof) of the zoning ordinance shall be inapplicable to Category A, B and C development in the I-T district: 
Section 28-144 
Section 28-246 
Section 28-249 
Section 28-250(f) 
Section 28-250(g) 
Section 28-250(h) 
Section 28-253(c) 
Section 28-253(d) 
Section 28-253(i) 
Section 28-254 
Section 28-255 
Section 28-258(b) 
Section 28-258(g) 
Section 28-259(1) 
Section 28-259(2) 
Section 28-259(6) 
Section 28-259(7) 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 2, 2-12-07; Ord. No. 2017-33, § 2, 10-23-17) 
Secs. 28-314-28-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 28-326. - Generally. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply in all zoning districts. 
(b)  The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking space shall be the joint and shared responsibility of the operator and owner of the use or uses for which off-street parking is required. 
(c)  For all uses that are lawfully occupied, operated or possessing a valid business license or building permit on May 28, 1982, the provisions of the ordinance effective at the date of their establishment shall apply. 
(d)  If such uses are enlarged, expanded or changed, the owner of such use shall provide the amount of parking, required by the provisions of this section, and such parking shall meet all requirements of this section. If the zoning administrator determines that such compliance is clearly not possible the owner shall only be responsible for providing the amount of parking such increment of expansion would require if it were a separate use. 
(e)  For all uses established or placed into operation after May 28, 1982 there shall be provided and maintained the amount of off-street parking hereinafter set forth. 
(f)  All off-street parking spaces, whether provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or in accordance with the provisions of any previous ordinance, shall be maintained as herein required. 
(g)  Parking and loading spaces for all uses may be provided either in garages or outdoor parking areas conforming with the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Parking may be with or without charge. 
(i)  With the following exceptions no vehicle shall be parked in a required front yard: 
(1)  The parking is accessory to residential uses within a residential district. 
(2)  The board of trustees has approved a front yard parking lot, provided such lot is not located in an area of the front yard that is required to be landscaped or devoted to another specifically required use. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 10.1, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-327. - Off-street parking-Design, development and maintenance. 
    With the exception of parking accessory to single and two-family residences, every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including commercial parking lots and outdoor motor vehicle or recreational vehicle (trailers, mobile home, boats) sales lots shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  A plan detailing the number configuration of parking spaces, points of ingress and egress, areas to be landscaped, and construction specifications shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who will forward such plans to the director of public works for approval. When a site plan has been submitted and approved by the board of trustees in accordance with other provisions of this chapter, a parking plan will not be required. 
(2)  All off-street parking areas and entrances to such areas shall be constructed to the following standards: 
a.  Industrial and heavy commercial uses: 
1.  Eight-inch compacted gravel base. 
2.  One and one-half-inch binder. 
3.  One-inch asphalt or similar impermeable, all weather, dustless surface. 
Heavy commercial uses shall be those uses that have a regular traffic of vehicles in excess of 4,000 pounds. 
b.  All other uses: 
1.  Six-inch compacted gravel base. 
2.  Two-inch asphalt or similar impermeable, all weather, dustless surface. 
(3)  All parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage. 
(4)  All points of ingress and egress to public rights-of-way shall be between 20 and 35 feet wide. Any curb cuts for the purpose of providing ingress and egress are subject to all relevant state, county and village requirements and shall be approved by the director of public works. 
(5)  Off-street parking areas for more than four vehicles that are adjacent to residential districts shall provide an opaque fence, wall hedge, or earth berm of between five and eight feet in height between the parking area and the boundary adjacent residential districts. 
(6)  Each off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway at least 12 feet wide to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. 
(7)  Each required parking space shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access driveways, aisles, ramps or any use other than parking. Each space shall have a vertical clearance of seven feet. For parallel parking the length of the parking space shall be increased to 24 feet. 
(8)  Each parking space shall be defined by the use of painted lines, curbing, wheel or bumper guards, suspended ropes or chains, landscaping or some similar device. 
(9)  Parking areas regularly used during night time hours shall be provided with lighting to enable safe access to parked vehicles. Such lighting shall be so arranged so as not to exceed three footcandles measured at the lot line. 
(10)  No parking area shall have more than one attendant shelter building which must conform to all the yard requirements the district it is located in. 
(11)  When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter results in the requirement of a fractional space, a fraction of less than one-half may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space. 
    Employee parking space requirements shall be based on the average number of employees at work during normal business hours. 
(12)  Each parking surface shall be continuously maintained to be free from potholes or other deterioration of the surface, trash, debris or other waste materials. 
(13)  Except as allowed under the provisions of section 28-328 of this Code all off-street parking shall be located on the same zoning lot or an adjacent zoning lot under common ownership as the lot on which the permitted or special use is located. 
(14)  Off-street parking areas may share spaces provided that there is no conflict in the schedules of those uses sharing any space or spaces. 
(15)  The perimeter of "off-street" parking shall be provided with a continuous concrete curb six inches wide by 18 inches deep with a minimum exposure to the paved parking area of six inches. 
(16)  All unpaved areas of parking lot, which, by application of various provisions of the village's Municipal Code, are required to be landscaped, shall be encased in a perimeter consisting of a concrete curb, having dimensions matching those required in connection with "off-street" parking (See: subsection (15) of section 28-327). 
(17)  Every building, structure and/or private commercial use shall have and maintain means of public access from a public roadway to the required parking. Such building, structure and/or private commercial use shall have minimum public access through either a private road or dedicated rights-of-way, which shall be built to the following standards and specifications: 
a.  With regard to width: The means of access shall be at least 25 feet in width; 
b.  With regard to pavement: The means of access shall be paved with at least three inches of asphalt over a gravel base of at least ten inches; and 
c.  With regard to curb and gutter: The paved areas of the means of access shall be edged with a concrete curb and gutter of the type specified in the village's subdivision ordinance. 
(18)  All parking areas having more than 25 separate parking spaces shall be designed so as to provide appropriate stormwater drainage for storms of a ten-year frequency. 
(19)  All parking areas having more than 50 separate parking spaces shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of section 28-258(g). 
(20)  All free-standing buildings or structures having more than 5,000 square feet of floor area, and intended for general public use, shall be designed to provide access for police and fire protection equipment. All access areas shall be built in accordance with the requirements of section 28-327 (17) of the Crete Municipal Code. No portion of the access area shall be used for parking and (where necessary) shall be so designated and/or posted. All structures and landscaping shall be located in such a manner as not to create an obstruction, impediment or hazard to police and/or fire protection equipment. 
(21)  In the event that a developer of any proposed development (or redevelopment) of property can substantiate through proper engineering and/or economics that the proposed development (or redevelopment) cannot satisfy the various terms and provisions of subsection s (15), (16), (17), (18), (19) or (20) herein above, said developer(s) shall be required to obtain approval of an equivalent alternative. Such approval shall be obtained at the time of the site plan review pursuant to section 28-254 of the Crete Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 10.2, 5-24-82; Ord. No. 91-21, § 5, 6-24-91) 
Sec. 28-328. - Same-Special location plan. 
    Wherever all or part of the required off-street parking is to be located on a lot other than the lot containing a permitted or special use or an adjacent lot under the same ownership, the owner or operator shall submit a special location plan subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The special location plan shall include the following items: 
a.  Number and configuration of parking spaces. 
b.  Points of ingress and egress to the parking area. 
c.  Any uses being conducted on the zoning lot the parking is to be located on. 
d.  The distance from the lot the permitted or special use will be conducted on. 
e.  Construction standards, if the lot is not in existence. 
(2)  Off-street parking shall be located as hereinafter specified, where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such parking facilities are required to serve: 
a.  Residential Districts: All single- and two-family parking areas shall be on the same lot as the dwelling unit such parking areas are accessory to. All multifamily parking areas shall be on the same lot or a commonly owned lot of the multifamily buildings such parking areas are accessory to. The parking areas for all other uses shall be located within 100 feet of the building they are required to serve. 
b.  Commercial Districts and Industrial Districts: All parking facilities shall be located within 300 feet of the building they are required to serve. 
(3)  There shall be a clear, safe route of pedestrian access between any special location parking and the building to be served. 
(4)  The following steps shall be followed prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate for the permitted or special use requiring the off-site parking: 
a.  A plan in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. 
b.  The plan commission shall be responsible for review and approval of all special location plans. Any approval may establish necessary conditions and limitations. 
c.  Upon approval of a special location plan a copy of such plan shall be registered and recorded among the records of the county recorder of deeds by the village clerk. 
d.  All special plans registered and recorded hereunder shall limit and control the issuance of zoning certificates, building permits and business licenses and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land included within such special plans to all conditions and limitations specified in such plans and the approvals thereof. 
e.  All special plans registered and recorded hereunder may be amended pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which such plans were approved, registered and recorded. 
f.  Upon application to the board of trustees by the owner or owners of the entire area included within any special location plan registered and recorded hereunder, the board of trustees may permit any such plan to be withdrawn either partially or completely from registration and released from recording if arrangements have been made to bring all uses into full compliance with the terms of this chapter without the use of such facilities provided by the special location plan. 
g.  If other provisions of this chapter require that a site plan be approved by the board of trustees for the permitted or special use requiring a special location plan, the special location plan can be included as a part of the site plan. In such case the board of trustees would review and approve the site plan instead of the plan commission. All other requirements of a special location plan shall be adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 10.3, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-329. - Same-Space required for parking and queues. 
    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following table (effective 3/19/2012): 
Land Uses Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Residential Uses Congregate elderly housing 0.5 per resident + 1 per staff person Dwellings - detached 2 per dwelling unit Dwellings - multifamily, including condominiums and apartments 2.5 per dwelling unit Dwellings - townhouses and rowhouses 2 per dwelling unit Residential units above retail or commercial establishments 2 per dwelling unit + retail spaces as required by ordinance Commercial Uses Animal hospitals, pounds, and boarding 1 per 300 sq. ft. Automobile/car wash 3 stacking spaces per stall + 1 per employee Automobile repair with outside storage (max. of 10 vehicles) 1 per 300 sq. ft. Automobile sales and rentals 1 per 300 sq. ft. Automobile service stations 1 per pump +1 stacking space per pump + 1 per 500 sq. ft. of commercial space Cemeteries 1 per each full-time employee + required spaces for offices Commercial retail building footprint up to 5,000 sq. ft. in floor area 1 per 200 sq. ft. Commercial retail building footprint 5,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. in floor area 1 per 200 sq. ft. Commercial retail building footprint exceeding 50,000 sq. ft. in floor area 1 per 250 sq. ft. Conference centers 1 per 4 seats Day care centers 1 per 300 feet Drycleaning and laundry processing stations 1 per 500 feet Banks and financial institutions 1 per 300 square feet + 3 stacking spaces per drive-thru lane. Funeral parlors 1 per 200 sq. ft. Golf courses 6 per green + 1 per employee on the peak shift Health clubs and fitness center 1 per 200 sq. ft. + 1 per employee Hotels, motels and extended stay 1 per sleeping room plus required parking spaces for bar, restaurant or affiliated use Indoor recreational facilities 1 per 200 sq. ft. Nurseries and greenhouses 1 per 400 sq. ft. Nursing home 0.25 per resident + 1 staff person Offices (general) 1 per 250 sq. ft. Offices (medical or dental clinics with no overnight stay) 1 per 200 sq. ft. Personal service establishment 1 per 200 sq. ft. Restaurant and banquet halls 1 per 3 seats + 1 per each employee at peak time Restaurant, fast-food 1 space per 3 seats + 1 per each employee at peak time plus 8 car stacking per drive-thru lane Stadiums or arenas Parking spaces equal in number to 33% of the capacity in persons Swimming pools 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of water area. Tennis or racquet court 3 spaces per court Theaters 1 space per 3 seats Wholesale establishments 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. Civic and Institutional Uses Boarding schools, seminaries and convents 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. Community centers, clubs and lodges 1 space per 300 sq. ft. Colleges and universities 1 space per classroom + 1 space per 3 students + spaces required for other uses Government uses, including offices, and incubator and research facilities Fire/police - 1 space per 500 sq. ft. 
Libraries - 1 space per 400 sq. ft. 
Post offices - 2 per station + 4 per service bay 
Offices - 1 space per 250 sq. ft. Hospitals 1 space per 2 hospital bed + 1 space per each full-time employee Medical/institutional uses incl. surgery centers, out-patient centers, testing facilities and research laboratories 1 per 200 sq. ft. Museums, civic and cultural centers 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. Parks (public) Ballfields and picnic areas - 10 spaces per acre 
Swimming 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of water area 
Tennis or racquet court - 3 per court Places of worship 1 space per 3 sanctuary seats or 1 space per 90 inches of lineal seating Private schools and instructional facilities for arts, athletics and vocational training 2 spaces per classroom + 1 space per 2 students per building design capacity Schools - elementary, middle, junior high 1.5 spaces per classroom Schools - high 1 space per classroom + 1 space per 5 students per building design capacity Industrial, Manufacturing and Storage Uses Excavating and recycling services 1 per employee Food processing plant 1 per employee Light industry and assembly 2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. - OR -1 space per each employee on the largest shift (whichever is greatest) Office warehouse and flex space 1 per 250 sq. ft. of office + 1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. of warehouse space + 1 space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the business Manufacturing 1.25 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. - OR - 1 per each 0.75 employees on the largest shift (whichever is greatest) Petroleum storage facilities 1 per employee Warehouses or distribution establishments 1 per 1,500 sq. ft. + 1 space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the business Uses Not Specifically Mentioned in this Table Spaces as required by the zoning administrator after review by the plan commission All Uses in the Central Business District Spaces as required by the zoning administrator after review by the plan commission  
    The zoning administrator and plan commission shall make the space number determination as required above after consideration of the provisions found in sections 28-327, 28-328, and 28-329, and determinations of what subsections therein shall apply or not apply; further, the consideration and weight of the effect on a vibrant and fully occupied central business district, if applicable, and economic feasibility in relation to the project and resulting effect to the immediate area involved shall be duly reviewed and taken into account. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-03, adopted Feb. 13, 2012, enacted provisions to be designated as § 28-329.1. Said provisions have been as § 28-329 at the direction of the village. 
Sec. 28-330. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in this section. 
(b)  All required loading berths shall be located on the same lots as the use to be served and no portion of the vehicles shall project into a street or alley. In an industrial district, no loading berth for vehicles of more than two-ton capacity shall be located less than 50 feet from any residence district. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 30 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets, nor shall it be located in a required front yard or side yard. All loading berths shall be screened from abutting residential districts, except when exempted from this provision by the board of trustees upon recommendation by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  A required off-street loading berth shall be at least 12 feet in width by at least 50 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
(d)  Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements, and shall be subject to approval of the zoning administrator. 
(e)  All open off-street loading berths shall be improved in accordance with the standards contained in section 28-327 of this Code. 
(f)  No storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind, shall be permitted within any required loading berth except emergency repair service. 
(g)  Space allocated to any off-street loading shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof. 
(h)  Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on the individual zoning lots provided the following conditions are fulfilled: 
(1)  Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade. 
(2)  Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum of the several types of uses served. (Area of types of uses may be totaled before computing number of loading berths.) 
(3)  No zoning lot served shall be more than 500 feet removed from the central loading area. 
(4)  The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the zoning lot served shall be not less than seven feet in width and have a clearance of not less than seven feet. 
(i)  Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on the same zoning lot. 
(j)  Loading berths shall be provided on the basis of the required berths for each individual use. 
(k)  For uses herein listed and other similar uses loading berths shall be provided as specified below: 
(1)  For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof: 
Airports; 
Amusement and recreational facilities; 
Banks and other financial institutions; 
Business and other professional offices; 
Convention and exhibition halls; 
Health and medical institutions; 
Hotels and motels containing retail shops, business or professional offices, convention or exhibition halls or auditoriums; 
Public and administration buildings; 
Radio and television studios; 
Recording studios; 
Theaters (indoor); 
Undertaking establishments. 
(2)  For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof: 
Apartment hotels; 
Auditoriums; 
Charitable institutions; 
Clubs and lodges; 
Hotels and motels containing no retail shops, business or professional offices, convention or exhibition halls or auditoriums; 
Meeting halls; 
Multiple-family dwellings; 
Religious institutions; 
Research or testing institutions; 
Schools and educational facilities. 
(3)  For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 5,000 to 40,000 square feet of gross floor area. For buildings containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, two loading berths shall be provided plus one additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof: 
Assembly, manufacturing and fabricating establishments; 
Cartage, express and motor freight facilities; 
Cleaning, repairing, servicing and testing establishments; 
Laundries and dry cleaning facilities; 
Mail-order houses; 
Printing and publishing; 
Warehousing, storage, and wholesale establishments. 
(4)  For all other uses, including but not limited to, furniture and appliance stores, retail stores and restaurants and other establishments handling the sale or consumption of food or beverages on the premises, loading berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Square Feet of 
Floor Area Minimum 
Number  5,000 to  20,000 1 20,000 to  60,000 2 60,000 to 100,000 3  
    For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof, one additional loading berth. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 10.5, 5-24-82) 
Secs. 28-331-28-345. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, adopted Aug. 27, 2012, amended art. X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. X, §§ 28-346-28-352, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 850, §§ 11.1-11.8, adopted May 24, 1982; Ord. No. 83-2, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 1983; Ord. No. 86-13A, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 1987; Ord. No. 90-25, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 1990; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, adopted July 22, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-38, § 1, adopted Nov. 22, 2004; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 3, adopted Mar. 27, 2006; and Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, adopted Feb. 13, 2012. 
Cross reference- Signs and billboards, ch. 21. 

Sec. 28-346. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to facilitate and promote the reasonable display of signs. The standards used in displaying signs can significantly affect the public safety as well as the value and economic stability of adjoining properties. The standards in this article are minimum standards and are intended to reduce distractions which may increase traffic accidents, and, may relieve traffic congestion, and encourage a more attractive environment. A reasonable display of signs is necessary for conducting competitive commerce and industry as well as providing motorists and pedestrians with needed information. 
(Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 28-347. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are situated or from any public thoroughfare or right-of-way. 
(2)  Miscellaneous traffic or other official signs of any public or governmental agency, including, but not by way of limitation, railroad crossing signs, danger signs, signs displaying the speed limit, road conditions and similar cautionary advertisements. 
(3)  Signs, flags or monuments identifying governmental or public uses (e.g., police and fire stations, governmental offices or garage facilities, parks or forest preserves, public schools and other similar uses). 
(4)  Any sign or signs which are located completely within an enclosed building. 
(5)  Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary or monuments providing a remembrance of persons or events of an noncommercial nature. 
(6)  Works of art when not displayed in conjunction with commercial enterprise that may benefit therefrom. 
(7)  Decorations or displays of a temporary nature, which celebrate the occasion of a traditionally accepted patriotic or religious holiday, provided such items are removed within 15 days of such occasion, weather permitting. 
(8)  Signs on a truck, bus, trailer, or other vehicle while operated in the normal course of business provided said normal course of business is not primarily the display of such sign. 
(9)  Religious symbols, monuments, icons and name identification signs displayed by a church, temple, chapel or synagogue or private school, provided such display is located on the private property of said religious facility. 
(10)  Bulletin boards for public, charitable, or religious institutions, excluding private schools, when the same are located on the premises of said institution and do not exceed 15 square feet in area. 
(11)  Signs which are carved into stone, concrete or similar material and are made an integral part of the structure. 
(12)  Temporary signs which are placed in windows and the total window coverage does not exceed 50 percent; such signs exempt under this provision may not be erected on doors. 
(13)  Political signs regulated by 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 which are not exceeding 16 square feet on each face and are positioned so as not to obstruct the vision of drivers operating vehicles on a public right-of-way or adjacent drives. 
(14)  Signs of a legal notice requirement such as "no trespassing" or alerting to dangers located on a property which are required by law. 
(15)  Signs erected in connection with new construction, which are of a temporary nature and non-illuminated, provided that such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area on each face and are displayed only during the period of time that construction is in progress (any such signs shall be located on the site where such construction is being done and which identify architects, engineers, contractors and other firms engaged in such construction). 
(16)  Residential or commercial nameplate identification signs or combination nameplate and street address identification signs, provided that such signs do not exceed two square feet in surface area. 
(17)  Tablets (e.g., memorials and cornerstones providing the name of a particular building, the date of its construction and similar information) which are less than four square feet and located at least five feet from the property line and are constructed of a noncombustible material. 
(18)  Non-illuminated temporary signs posted by licensed contractors at residential jobsites for which a building permit has been issued during the time of active construction. Such signs shall comply with the size restrictions for the zoning district and comply with location restrictions as set forth below in section 28-350 as well as general requirements in section 28-349 and with the permission of the property owner. 
(19)  Notwithstanding the above exceptions, no signs so excepted may be digital with changing light intensities and/or colors. 
(Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 28-348. - Permits. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected, altered, relocated or changed without a permit issued by the zoning administrator or his designee. In those instances where an electrical permit is required, it shall be obtained at the same time as the sign permit. 
(1)  Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the zoning administrator or his designee and shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.  Location of the building, structure, or parcel of property to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or erected; 
c.  Position of sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, streets, street grade, easements, and overhead utilities; 
d.  Two copies of plans and specification showing method of construction, location and support, sealed by a registered architect or structural engineer; 
e.  Sketch showing sign faces, exposed surfaces, type of material, and characters thereon accurately represented in scale as to size, proportion, and color; 
f.  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign; 
g.  Written consent of the owners of the building, structure, or land on or to which the sign is to be erected; 
h.  Such other information as the zoning administrator or his designee shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the village. 
(2)  Issuance of permits. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator or his designee, who shall be the enforcing officer, upon the filing of an application for a permit, to examine such plans and specifications, the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure, and other data; and if it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this article, and all other ordinances of the village, he or she shall then issue the permit. If the work authorized under the permit has not been completed within six months after date of issuance, the said permit shall become null and void. 
(3)  Permit fees. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay the standing permit fee for each sign to the village clerk: 
Permanent sign permit $1.00 per sq. ft. of sign surface with a minimum fee of $25.00 Temporary sign permit $1.00 per day permitted with a minimum fee of $25.00 Electronic sign permit 
(including digital signs) $2.00 per sq. ft. of sign surface with a minimum fee of $100.00  
(4)  Indemnity agreement required. Each person maintaining a projecting sign into a public right-of-way prior to and/or after October 1, 2012, shall file with the village clerk an indemnification agreement to the village for any loss, damage, or liability which may result from the construction, maintenance or use of such a sign. 
(5)  Interpretation and construction. Where there is a conflict between provisions of this article and other Municipal Code provisions, the zoning administrator shall determine which provisions shall apply by taking into consideration the intent or purposes of the conflicting provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 28-349. - General requirements for all districts. 
(a)  No sign, not satisfying an exception in accordance with section 28-347, shall be permitted on a lot unless: 
(1)  The sign is accessory to a lawfully established use; and 
(2)  The sign is erected, constructed and maintained in conformance with this article; and 
(3)  Written authorization to erect the sign has been received from the property owner or his agent. 
(b)  The following requirements apply to all zoning districts subject to the exceptions therein contained: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to attach or mount any sign above the roofline of any building. It shall be unlawful to display any sign which contains flashing, moving or blinking lights, with the exception that signs, which alternately display current time and temperature with no less than seven seconds between changes are permissible. No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or other illuminating device, which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color; rotating beams, beacon or flashing illumination resembling an emergency light shall not be used in connection with any sign display. For the purposes of this section, "roofline" shall mean the top line of the face of the building. 
(2)  The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness will not be directed to surrounding areas in excess of one-half footcandle when measured at the lot line. Where illumination of signs is permitted, such light shall not be projected toward or onto adjacent properties located in a residential district and shall be kept to a minimum during non-business hours. Further, the shielding shall be designed such that the light source is not visible from within any residential dwelling unit, nor deemed by the zoning administrator, with consultation by the chief of police or his designee, to be directly visible by any driver on or turning onto a public right-of-way or, if indirectly visible, be a distraction or interference to any driver on or turning onto a public right-of-way. 
a.  Signs which utilize digital operational technology must include the following: 
1.  All such signs shall incorporate a fail safe system such that if malfunction occurs, the sign must display black. 
2.  During any brownouts, the sign must be automatically shut down. 
3.  The dynamic sequence must be shut off from 11:00 p.m., or one-half hour after close of business, whichever is later, until 6:00 a.m., unless the business operates 24 hours. 
4.  The greatest brightness measurement maximum candlepower may not exceed three footcandle if white light measured at a distance of 15 feet. 
5.  The digital technology portion of any sign may not exceed 30 percent of the total sign face. 
6.  The minimum distance between adjacent digital signs along rights-of-way with a speed limit of 55 MPH or greater must be not less than 1,000 feet. 
7.  No digital sign may be erected in proximity to a hill or curve on the adjacent roadway which is deemed a traffic hazard by the zoning administrator after a review by the chief of police or his designee. 
8.  The brightness adjustment must be tied to ambient light levels. 
9.  Dynamic signs must be limited to animated motion not to exceed seven seconds, intermittent with static period of a minimum of seven seconds; no strobes or flashing is permitted. 
10.  Adjacent digital signs bearing messages which are tied together resulting in one continuous message are not permitted. 
11.  No digital or electronic viable message sign may be mounted on a moving vehicle driving on any roadway with a speed limit greater than 30 MPH. 
12.  No digital or dynamic sign may be operated in the heritage preservation district. 
13.  No interactive signs are permitted, that is, incorporating any potential for interactivity with any driver. 
b.  Manual changeable message board signs shall be permitted when incorporated into a ground sign subject to all applicable standards herein, and the following conditions: 
1.  No more than 50 percent of the ground sign area provided shall be used as a message board sign. 
c.  A-frame signs will be allowed for businesses located within the B-1 central business district and subject to the following provisions: 
1.  An annually renewable no fee permit is required for A-frame signs. The sign owner shall provide the Village of Crete with an appropriately worded indemnity and the minimum acceptable liability insurance coverage, whether or not it is located on a public right-of-way, prior to the issuance of a permit. The village accepts no liability for any injury or damage caused by a sign. One A-frame sign per business is permitted. 
2.  The maximum allowed size for an A-frame sign shall be six square feet (approximately three feet by two feet). 
3.  The A-frame shall not obstruct the view of motor vehicles or pedestrians in such a fashion as to create a safety hazard. 
4.  The messages placed on A-frame signs must relate to the business for which the permit was issued and must be located adjacent to the business for which the permit was issued. 
5.  The permit holder is responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the sign. 
6.  Signs shall be displayed during normal business hours and shall be removed after the business has closed. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to post any sign which shall in any way obstruct the clear view by any driver of any street, intersection, traffic control signal or device, driveway or walkway. In addition, in order to obtain and secure traffic safety, no sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any other authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign, marquee, canopy, or awning shall make use of the words "Stop", "Go", "Look", "Slow", "Danger", or a similar word, phrase, symbol, or character, or employ any red, yellow, orange, green, or other colored lamp in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. The determination of adverse effect on traffic safety shall be the sole discretion of the zoning administrator with the advice of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  All signs shall be securely anchored so as not to endanger or imperil public safety. Wind pressure and dead load requirements are as follows. Any sign or advertising structure, as defined in this article, shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of net surface area and to receive dead loads as required in the building code or other ordinances of the Village of Crete. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to permit any sign to be placed within the public right-of-way (unless erected by the state, county or village for traffic control.) "Signs at elevations between two feet and six feet above the roadway located on corner lots within the triangle formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines (or in the case of a rounded property corner the intersection of the street lines extended) are deemed to be a prohibited sight obstruction; for interior lots the same prohibition applies to a triangle formed by the street property line and edge of any driveway and the line connecting them at points ten feet from the intersection of the street property line and the driveway." 
(6)  All signs shall be subject to inspection by the zoning administrator or building inspector or code enforcement officer; moreover, such officer may condemn any sign which does not conform to this chapter or poses a threat to public safety and order the removal thereof. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to post any sign on a street right-of-way or other public property or traffic control device or utility pole unless permission to do so has been granted by the board of trustees. It shall be unlawful to post or attach any sign to a tree, utility standpipe, gutter drain or fire escape. 
(8)  Every sign shall be maintained in a safe, and structurally sound condition and free of peeling paint or peeling adhesive covering, rust, rot or damaged components. The sign and sign supports must be kept painted to prevent rust, rot or deterioration. If they become rusted, rotted or deteriorated, they must be immediately repaired or replaced. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to post and maintain any sign, which advertises a use or service which is no longer in existence or provided; the zoning administrator or building inspector shall apply to the circuit court of the county for an order authorizing the removal of a particular sign and any supports if the owners thereof, including the lien holders of record, after at least 15 days written notice by mail to do so, have failed to remove the sign. Any costs and expenses including attorney fees incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner of the property to which such sign is attached and shall be a lien against the property. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful to post any sign or billboard which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than in and upon the premises where the sign is located or the building to which it is affixed unless specifically permitted by the board of trustees. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful to permit the display by vehicle, whether by truck, bus, trailer or other such vehicle of any sign or display having as its primary purpose the advertisement of the particular business or businesses unless a permit has been secured in subsection 28-348(a). 
(12)  Conformance with electrical code. All signs in which electrical wiring and connections are required shall conform to the applicable provisions of the village electrical code, as amended and incorporated by reference by the Village of Crete, including but not limited to obtaining an electrical permit. 
(13)  Any glass forming a part of a sign shall be safety glass. In case any single pane of glass has an area exceeding three square feet, it shall be wired glass. 
(14)  No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. Also, no sign shall be placed so as to obstruct the view by a police officer or other public safety designate of cash registers or other valuable items accessible to the public. 
(c)  If the zoning administrator shall find that any sign is unsafe, not secure, or a danger to the public, or has been constructed erected, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, he/she shall give written notice to the permittee thereof. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after such notice, then the president and board of trustees on the recommendation of the zoning administrator, may declare such sign to be a public nuisance and direct the removal of such sign as required by law. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to post or maintain any sign which identifies or advertises a use, business, product or service, which is no longer in existence or is no longer provided; such signs shall be removed immediately upon termination of business or change in use or business by the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the building, structure or property. This removal shall include all portions of the sign including sign supports; provided further, the zoning administrator may issue a written permit to allow masonry bases or decorative supports to remain intact for future use or modification. Failure to comply with this provision and after written notice to comply is mailed to the address in question, the president and board of trustees, on the recommendation of the zoning administrator, may, after seven days have passed after mailing, declare such sign to be a public nuisance and direct the removal as required by law. Any costs and expenses including attorney fees incidental thereto to said nuisance removal shall be paid by the owner of the property upon which said sign is located and shall be a lien upon said property until paid in full. 
(e)  Any existing sign regulated under this chapter rendered nonconforming by the adoption of this 2012 amendment to the sign ordinance shall be permitted to remain in use, subject to the following provision: 
(1)  Any sign not in conformance with the allowable area (square feet) or allowable heights (lineal feet) provisions of this chapter by an amount less than 20 percent in excess of the allowable area or allowable heights, shall be permitted to remain as a legal nonconforming use throughout the useful life of the sign as long as it is maintained in conformance with all other provisions of this article. 
(2)  Any sign not in conformance with the allowable area or allowable height provisions of this chapter by an amount greater than or equal to 20 percent in excess of the allowable area or allowable height, or is nonconforming with any other provision of this chapter, must be brought into conformance by modification, replacement or removal when: 
a.  More than 50 percent of the nonconforming sign must be replaced due to physical deterioration or damage; or 
b.  The business to which the sign pertains is sold, provided the compliance is stayed for 24 months from the date of sale as long a business identified or advertised is continued on the property. 
Notwithstanding the above, all nonconforming signs must be brought into full compliance with all applicable village requirements within 60 months of the effective date of this ordinance, that is, October 1, 2017. 
(f)  Revocation of permits. The building inspector may revoke any permit issued by the building department if the holder thereof fails to comply with any provision of this article. 
(1)  Nonconforming signs are signs which were lawful when constructed and become nonconforming at the time of enactment of this amendment to article X, or any future amendments thereto, or the annexation of the property on which they are located to the village and such signs shall be subject to amortization in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(2)  Any signs which when erected and installed, were not in full compliance with the terms of this article X, as amended, or any applicable laws or ordinances of the legal entity having jurisdiction thereof if erected and installed prior to annexation to the village of the property on which they are located, including those signs prohibited under subsection 28-349(a) hereof, shall be considered unlawful or illegal nonconforming signs which shall be required to be removed immediately upon enactment of this article X, or any amendment thereto, or annexation of the property on which they are located to the village. 
(3)  All lawful nonconforming signs, other than signs which are prohibited under the provisions of subsection 28-349(a) hereof, may be continued for a period of time not exceeding the remaining, or undepreciated, useful life of such signs, based on the formula used in the depreciation schedule on the income tax returns of the owner of such sign, or any other reasonable formula which will provide an adequate period for the depreciation of the sign, not exceeding 60 months beyond the effective date of this ordinance, that is, October 1, 2017. 
(4)  Any change to an existing legal nonconforming sign, including a sign face change, shall require such sign to comply in its entirety immediately with all the provisions of this zoning ordinance, including this article X. 
(Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Sec. 28-350. - Development standards. 
    The following development standards are effective for all signs installed, or repaired or replaced to an extent greater than 50 percent of the sign area on or after October 1, 2012. The determination of whether 50 percent or greater of the sign area is involved is solely that of the zoning administrator and said decision may be appealed in accordance with division 9 of this chapter. 
(1)  Number and location (except as otherwise provided in the IL-394 Corridor). 
a.  All signs shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use they identify. 
b.  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-E and RE-U zoning districts. One sign shall be allowed for each residential lot which shall conform with the provisions established in this article X. 
c.  B-1, B-2, B-3 zoning districts. One primary sign conforming to the provisions herein established shall be allowed for each principal building. Corner properties may have two signs, the total area which shall not exceed the allowable primary sign area. 
No sign shall project into the public right-of-way unless it has a vertical clearance of nine feet if suspended over pedestrian traveled areas, nor shall a sign attached parallel to a building exceed more than 12 inches from the face of the building. 
d.  B-4, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts. The number and location of signs in these districts shall be recommended as part of the site plan review process and approved by the village board through the site plan approval process. 
(2)  Sign face area. 
a.  R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RE and RE-U zoning districts. For single-family detached and attached dwellings, one sign not exceeding six square feet in area; and for multiple-family dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding five square feet in area. Such signs may be illuminated by non-flashing direct or indirect illumination from a source of artificial lighting customarily accessory to residential uses. 
b.  B-1 zoning district. One sign with a surface area no greater than 36 square feet per business establishment or two sided, 18 square feet per side, provided each such sign shall have a vertical clearance of at least nine feet if suspended over pedestrian traveled areas. 
c.  B-2, B-3 and B-4 zoning districts. The total sign area allowed in the business districts shall be based on the following schedule: 
Business/Tenant/
Lot Frontage Total Sign Area Up to 100 feet One 1.5 square foot per frontage foot of tenant frontage facing the main public street serving such business Over 100 feet .25 square foot per frontage foot in excess of 100 feet of frontage, but in no event more than 180 square feet of facing.  
Exception: In a shopping center over 100,000 square feet under single ownership or control, one sign not affixed to a building may be erected for the shopping center, and this sign shall not exceed 120 square feet in area per side. The overall height of the sign shall not exceed 20 feet above the centerline of the street at a point nearest the sign. Such sign shall not project over a public right-of-way. Structural supports shall be fully enclosed and not exposed to view. Structural support coverings shall be designed to be an architectural enhancement to the shopping center. 
d.  I-1 and I-2 zoning districts. The allowable sign face area permitted in the I-1 and I-2 districts shall be one-half (0.5) square foot for each lineal foot of site frontage; however, in no case shall a sign exceed 120 square feet in area unless reviewed by the plan commission and approved by the village board. 
e.  Properties abutting IL-394. For properties that directly abut the right-of-way of IL-394, additional signage may be allowed according to the following formula: the amount of additional signage shall be no more than four percent of one building face area which most directly faces the limited access highway and said signage shall be mounted wholly within the perimeters of said building face area utilized in the calculation. 
(3)  Height limitations. 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  Residential districts. No sign shall be mounted at a height which causes the top of the sign to exceed six feet more than the elevation of the centerline of the street. 
2.  All other zoning districts. No sign within a business or industrial area shall be erected at a height which causes the top of the sign to exceed ten feet. Notwithstanding this limit, shopping center signs may be constructed in accordance with subsection 28-350(2)c., of this article. Structural supports shall be fully enclosed and not exposed to view. Structural supports are those supports which are necessary to stabilize or otherwise brace the sign. Architectural supports are those supports which are not essential in stabilizing the sign and which add a distinctive feature to the overall appearance of the sign. Structural support coverings shall be designed to be an architectural enhancement to the building associated with the sign. 
b.  Building mounted signs. No building-mounted sign shall extend above the top line of the face of the building. 
c.  Properties abutting IL-394. If a nonresidential zoning lot line directly abuts the right-of-way of IL-394, such freestanding sign shall be located no closer than 75 feet from the side lot lines or within 150 feet of an existing sign or area within which a future freestanding sign on an adjacent property may be located. 
(4)  Architectural land landscape requirements. 
a.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  Any permanent freestanding sign constructed in any business or industrial district shall be architecturally compatible with the building(s) it identifies. Such architectural compatibility shall be determined through the site plan approval process for construction. Architectural compatibility for permanent freestanding signs constructed by an existing business source shall be determined by the zoning administrator through the permit approval process. Structural supports shall be fully enclosed and not exposed to view. Structural support coverings shall be designed to be an architectural enhancement to the building associated with the sign. 
2.  Any permanent freestanding sign constructed in any business or industrial district shall include extensive landscaping around the base of the sign so as to screen the base of the sign from view from the adjoining street and adjoining properties. The type and amount of landscaping shall be determined through the site plan approval process. Landscaping requirements for permanent freestanding sign constructed by an existing business or use shall be determined by the zoning administrator through the permit approval process. 
Decisions made by the zoning administrator in this article may be appealed in accordance with division 9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-13-12; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 8-27-12) 
Sec. 28-351. - Temporary signs. 
    The board of trustees may upon request permit the use of signs having an obviously temporary use and nature and which are not allowed under other provisions of this article. The regulations under this section shall also cover the use of banners, pennants, flags, streamers, inflatable items or other similar attention grabbing paraphernalia or advertising system. The board of trustees shall establish any and all locations, special restrictions as applicable to the situation, length and height limitations and duration of posting as part of its grant of approval. For temporary signs not exceeding a 30-day posting period and not deviating from the general requirements (section 28-349) or district regulation (section 28-350) as to size, the board of trustees may delegate to the village administrator the authority to approve said permits upon receipt of the required fee. Any permit issued under this delegated authority shall establish location(s), special restrictions, length and height limitations and duration of posting. Appeals from decisions made pursuant to this grant of authority may be made in accordance with article II, division 9 of this Code; however said appeal shall be directly to the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2012-22, § 2, 8-27-12; Ord. No. 2013-23, § 2, 12-9-13) 
Secs. 28-352-28-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HERITAGE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 28-371. - Title. 
    This article shall be known, referred to, and cited as the Crete Heritage Preservation. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 1, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-372. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the economic, educational, cultural and general welfare of the community as follows: 
(1)  To provide a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive historic and architectural characteristics of the village which represent the village's cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history and character; 
(2)  To strengthen commercial business within the downtown area of the village by assuring that any improvements are performed in a manner that is harmonious with the village's heritage and architectural character; 
(3)  To protect the past and future investments by business people and property owners, and to improve property values within the Crete Heritage Preservation District and in other areas adjacent to the district; 
(4)  To create an atmosphere and character for the village that will stimulate tourism and shopping; 
(5)  To create a mechanism for future consideration of other buildings, structures, and areas within the village that may be appropriate for future designation as landmarks or landmark areas; 
(6)  To foster pride in the village's history and architecture; and 
(7)  To foster and encourage preservation, restoration and rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 2, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-373. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
    Area. A specific geographic division of the village. 
    Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate issued by the commission indicating its approval of plans for significant alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within the heritage preservation district or a landmark area. 
    Certificate of economic hardship. A certificate issued by the commission authorizing a significant alteration, minor modification, construction, removal, or demolition even though a certificate of appropriateness has previously been declined. 
    Commission. The village heritage and architecture commission. 
    Commissioners. Members of the village heritage and architecture commission. 
    Construction. The act of building a new structure or adding an addition to a structure that requires a building permit. This term specifically shall include the building of a new principal or detached accessory structure on a lot or property. 
    Demolition. Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a structure or improvement within the heritage preservation district or a landmark area. This term specifically shall include the demolition of the principal or detached accessory structure on a lot or property. 
    Design criteria. A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic and architectural character of a landmark, a landmark area, or the heritage preservation district. 
    Exterior architectural appearance. The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the type and texture of the building material and the type, design, and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, ornamental details, signs, and other fixtures. 
    Heritage preservation district. The area designated as the heritage preservation district as shown on the map attached to and made a part of this article. The village board may amend the boundaries of the district. 
Editor's note- The heritage preservation district map is not set out herein, but is available for inspection in the office of the village clerk. 
    Improvement. Any visible built feature on a property, such as, but not limited to, landscaping or fencing, that is not a structure. 
    Landmark. A property or structure recommended by the commission and thereafter designated as a "landmark" by ordinance of the village board, according to criteria and pursuant to procedures adopted by the village board and implemented by the commission. 
    Minor modification. Any act or process that does not require a building permit but changes the character of an exterior architectural feature. 
    Owner. Any person, corporation or other legal entity holding legal or equitable title to real estate within the village including, but not limited to, contract purchasers and beneficiaries of a land trust. 
    Property. Land and improvements identified as a separate lot for purposes of the subdivision and zoning regulations of the village. 
    Rehabilitation. The process of improving a property through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values. 
    Removal. Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site. 
    Repair. Any change that is not construction, removal, significant alteration, or minor modification. 
    Significant alteration. Any act or process requiring a building permit that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure, addition or removal of siding, replacement of window trim or window units, door trim, and other decorative architectural elements. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, garages, sheds, fences, advertising signs, billboards, radio and television antennas, including supporting towers, satellite receiving dishes, and swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 3, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-374. - Crete Heritage and Architecture Commission. 
(a)  Establishment. 
(1)  There is hereby created the village heritage and architecture commission, consisting of seven voting members appointed by the village president with the concurrence of the village board of trustees, and two ex officio, nonvoting members, namely the village administrator and a person from the village building department. A member or representative of the following organizations or groups should have one member on the commission: 
a.  Crete Chamber of Commerce; 
b.  Crete Area Historical Society; 
c.  An owner or manager of a business located in the central business district; 
d.  Member-at-large; 
e.  Member-at-large. 
(2)  Every reasonable effort shall be made by each organization and in the selection of members-at-large, to nominate persons with knowledge and experience in historic preservation or rehabilitation of historic structures including an architect, a historian, and an engineer. 
(b)  Term. Commissioners shall serve terms of three years. Initially, commissioners shall serve staggered terms of three persons for three years, three persons for two years, and one person for one year. The first at-large member shall be appointed to a one-year term, and the second at-large member shall be appointed to a two-year term. Subsequent nominations and appointments shall be made so as to replace any member representing an organization, board or commission with another such member. A member may be removed by the mayor upon recommendation of the chairperson for unexcused absence at three successive commission meetings or for otherwise failing to perform the duties and responsibilities of a commission member. All members shall hold office until their successor shall have been appointed. Vacancies after selection of the members of the first commission shall be filled through appointment by the village president with the concurrence of the village board of trustees. 
(c)  Chairperson and vice chairperson. Officers shall consist of a chairperson, a vice chairperson and a secretary. The chairperson of the commission shall be designated by the village president with the concurrence of the village board of trustees. The chairperson shall be so appointed for two years or until his or her membership term expires, whichever is less. The chairperson of the commission shall appoint a vice chairperson from the membership of the commission. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the commission and shall otherwise supervise the affairs of the commission. The vice chairperson, in the absence of the chairperson, shall perform all the duties and exercise all the powers of the chairperson. 
(d)  Secretary. The secretary of the commission shall be the village administrator who is an ex officio member of the commission. The secretary shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for preparation of minutes of each commission meeting; 
(2)  Provide administrative and technical assistance to the commission to assist it in making the decisions and findings as provided hereunder; 
(3)  Distribute to the commissioners copies of the minutes, reports and decisions of the commission; and 
(4)  Advise the mayor of vacancies on the commission and expiring terms of commissioners. 
(e)  Meetings. A meeting of the commission may be called by the chairperson or upon the request of three commission members provided three days' notice is given each member of the commission. A quorum shall consist of four members of the commission present and voting, and no official meeting shall be held without a quorum of the members present. Time and place for meetings shall be at the discretion of the commission but a meeting shall be held at least once every 60 days. All resolutions shall be passed by a majority of the quorum present at the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 4, 9-26-94; Ord. No. 97-45, § 2, 9-22-97; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 2, 8-24-15) 
Sec. 28-375. - Powers and duties of the heritage and architecture commission. 
    The heritage and architecture commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To advise and assist owners of property and structures on the physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, reuse, and new construction in or adjacent to the heritage preservation district; 
(2)  To inform and educate the citizens of the village concerning the historic and architectural heritage of the village by publishing appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars; 
(3)  To develop and adopt specific criteria and design guidelines for modifications to architectural features and construction of structures or improvements within the heritage preservation district. The criteria and design guidelines shall be approved by the village board, printed or typed and be available to the public. 
(4)  To consult with persons proposing minor modifications to structures or improvements within the heritage preservation district and to advise them concerning proper methods for renovation or rehabilitation of historic structures. 
(5)  To prepare application forms for certificates of appropriateness and certificates of economic hardships. 
(6)  To hold meetings and to review applications for the demolition or significant alteration of structures within the heritage preservation district and to deny or issue certificates of appropriateness. 
(7)  To hold meetings and to review applications for permits to construct or replace structures within the heritage preservation district with new or replaced structures should comply with the approved design guidelines and blend with the district's historic 1880 to 1920 structure. 
(8)  To hold meetings and to review plans for new construction on projects for which a demolition permit is required and to recommend to the building department and the village board the issuance or denial of a demolition permit based on such plans. 
(9)  To issue or deny certificates of appropriateness. 
(10)  To consider and hold hearings on applications for certificates of economic hardship that would allow the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been denied, and to issue or deny such certificates of economic hardships. 
(11)  To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically, architecturally, or culturally significant buildings and structures in the village and to recommend to the village board the designation of other historically, architecturally or culturally significant structures and areas for addition to the district or as landmarks. 
(12)  To prepare an appearance, architectural, and beautification plan for the heritage preservation district and to make recommendations with other appropriate bodies to the village board on the adoption and implementation of an appearance, architectural beautification plan, and on any other matter affecting property, structures, or improvements within or adjacent to the heritage preservation district. 
(13)  To confer recognition upon the owners of property, structures, or improvements within the heritage preservation district for outstanding preservation or rehabilitation efforts. 
(14)  To undertake other actions or activities necessary or appropriate for the implementation of its powers and duties or for the implementation of the purpose of this article or as directed by the village board. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 5, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-376. - Review of applications for construction, removal, significant alteration, or demolition. 
(a)  Permits for construction, removal, significant alteration or demolition within the heritage preservation district shall not be issued by the village building department without the applicant first having obtained a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic hardship from the heritage and architectural commission, or from the village board after an appeal. 
(b)  The building department shall, within two days following the receipt of an application for a permit for construction, removal, significant alteration or demolition within the heritage preservation district, send the application to the commission chairman and secretary and notify the applicant of the commission's jurisdiction regarding applications for permits and the process to be followed, including the date and place of any meeting to consider the application. Any applicant may and is encouraged to request a meeting with the commission before the building permit application is sent by the building department to the commission for review and may consult with the commission during its review of the application. 
(c)  Review criteria. In making a determination whether to issue or deny a certificate of appropriateness, the review subcommittee, the commission or the village board shall consider, among other things, the effect of the proposed construction, alteration, removal or demolition upon the historic, aesthetic or architectural value and characteristics of the property and the compatibility with the general characteristics of the district as set forth in the printed criteria and design guidelines. 
(d)  Review process for applicants for construction, removal, significant alteration, or demolition. 
(1)  All applications shall be sent by the building department to the review subcommittee of the commission which shall consist of three commission members designated for each application by the chairperson plus the chairperson and the secretary. The subcommittee shall review the application within seven days from its receipt from the building department. The quorum for the subcommittee shall be three commission members including the chairperson or acting chairperson. If the subcommittee unanimously finds that the work proposed in the application will not adversely affect any historically or architecturally significant features of the structure or property within the heritage preservation district and is appropriate or consistent with the spirit and purposes of this article and the design guidelines, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness and forward copies to the owner and the building department. The subcommittee shall forward all applications given less than unanimous approval to the full commission for further action. 
(2)  If the commission, upon referral from the subcommittee, finds that the work proposed in the application will not adversely affect any historically or architecturally significant features of the structure or property within the heritage preservation district and is appropriate or consistent with the spirit and purposes of this article, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness and forward copies to the owner and the building department. 
(3)  If the commission finds that the proposed work will adversely affect or destroy any significant historic, aesthetic, or architectural feature or value of the structure or property within the heritage preservation district or is inappropriate or inconsistent with the spirit and purposes of this article, it shall disapprove the application in writing within 30 days after the village receives the complete application. If the commission does not state its decision in writing within the 30-day time period, the application is deemed approved. 
a.  The commission shall briefly state its reasons in writing and it may make recommendations to the applicant to assure appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, scale, material, location, or other elements of appearance of the building or structure involved. 
b.  In cases of disapproval accompanied by recommendation of the commission, the applicant may again be heard before the commission if the applicant amends the application to conform with the recommendations or makes application for a certificate of economic hardship. The applicant shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the commission after receipt of the amended application for a certificate of appropriateness or economic hardship. The commission shall review the application for a certificate of economic hardship according to article VII of this chapter. 
c.  Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the commission meeting on an application for certificate of appropriateness or economic hardship shall be given to the applicant and shall be posted at the village hall. The applicant shall give notice to adjoining property owners by regular mail or by hand delivery of a notice at least three days prior to the date of the commission meeting. Applicants are encouraged to notify adjacent property owners of the subcommittee meeting. The notice shall state the location including the common street address of the property, and include a brief description of the proposed alteration, construction, demolition, or removal for which an application has been made. 
d.  All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and the owner, any interested persons and the public shall have an opportunity to speak. 
e.  Within seven days following completion of consideration of an amended application, the commission shall issue or deny the certificate of appropriateness and transmit copies of its decision, and a summary of the reasons for it, to the applicant and to the building department. 
f.  All denials of the commission may be appealed to the village board. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 6, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-377. - Certificate of economic hardship. 
(a)  A property owner may apply for a certificate of economic hardship which shall be issued by the heritage and architecture commission upon a finding by it that all reasonable use of or economic return from a property within the heritage preservation district would be denied a property owner as a result of the disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  The commission may solicit testimony, and the applicant shall submit evidence, concerning any of the following items: 
(1)  Any substantial decrease in the fair market value of the denial of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Any substantial decrease in the pre-tax or aftertax return to owners of record or other investors in the property as a result of the denial of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  Any additional cost of work necessary to comply with the standards and criteria for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(4)  In the case of a proposed demolition, the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure or improvement on the property. 
(5)  The commission may adopt procedural rules concerning the types of information, evidence or expert testimony that it considers necessary to make a determination on an application for a certificate of economic hardship. 
(c)  If the commission has found that without approval of the proposed work, the property cannot be put to a reasonable use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the commission shall issue a certificate of economic hardship approving the proposed work. The commission shall notify the applicant of its decision within seven days, by mail or by hand delivery, after completion of consideration of the application for a certificate of economic hardship. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 7, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-378. - Appeals. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a final denial of a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship by the heritage and architecture commission for a property or structure within the heritage preservation district, the applicant may, within 30 days, appeal the commission's decision to the village board. The village board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision within 60 days after receiving notice of the appeal, after due consideration of comments and any report submitted to the board by the commission. 
(b)  Upon a decision by the board that a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship shall or shall not be issued, the clerk shall notify the commission, the applicant and the building department within ten days following the decision. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 8, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-379. - Issuance of permits. 
    Upon receipt of notice of a final decision of the heritage and architecture commission or the village board to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship and any other approvals required by village ordinances, the building department shall issue the permit. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 9, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-380. - Review of acquisitions for public use. 
    The village administrator shall notify the heritage and architecture commission 30 days prior to the date of submission to the village board of any proposal to acquire property within or adjacent to the heritage preservation district for public use by the village. The commission shall review the proposal for consistency with the purposes and spirit of this article and make recommendations to the village administrator and to the village board. The village board may also solicit the recommendation of the heritage and architecture commission on any other matter. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 10, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-381. - Enforcement and penalties for violation. 
    Any person who causes the alteration, demolition or removal of any property or structure in the heritage preservation district without a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic hardship shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. Every day each such violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 94-21, § 11, 9-26-94) 
Sec. 28-382. - Landmark/historic district designation. 
(a)  Nomination of landmark or historic district. 
(1)  Nomination. The Crete Heritage and Architecture Commission welcomes applications from individuals or groups for the designation of structures or sites as local landmarks or historic districts. In addition, the commission may nominate potential landmarks or historic districts upon completion of a comprehensive survey and search effort to identify areas, sites, and structures that have historic, community, architectural, or aesthetic importance or value. 
(2)  Forms. Nominations shall be made to the heritage and architecture commission on a form provided by the commission. A filing fee of $125.00 shall be required to be paid at the time the application is filed by an individual or group. 
(b)  Criteria. The commission shall, upon investigation as it deems necessary, make a preliminary determination as to whether a property, structure, or area possesses the integrity of design, workmanship, materials, location, setting and feeling meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Significant value as part of the historic, heritage or cultural characteristics of Crete, Will County, Illinois, or the U.S.A.; 
(2)  Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of Crete, Will County, Illinois, or the U.S.A.; 
(3)  Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of architecture inherently valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials; 
(4)  Notable work of a mater builder, designer, architect or artist whose individual work has influenced the development of Crete, Will County, Illinois, or the U.S.A.; 
(5)  Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an established or familiar visual feature; 
(6)  Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure, including but not limited to farmhouses, or public buildings, with a high level of integrity or architectural significance; 
(7)  Area that has yielded or may be likely to yield, information important in history or prehistory; 
(8)  District that contains one or more landmarks along with such other buildings, places, or areas within definable geographic boundaries which, while not of such significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark(s) located in the district; 
(9)  District that establishes a sense of time and place unique to the village. 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  Any person, group of persons, or association or the Crete Heritage and Architecture Commission may request a historic landmark or district designation for any structure, site or defined geographic area within the boundaries of the village which may have historic or architectural significance by submitting a completed application form to the village clerk or village administrator at the village hall. The application form shall be forwarded to the commission for their consideration. 
(2)  A preliminary determination as to whether a property, structure, or area meets one or more of the criteria shall be made by the commission within 60 days of the filing of a nomination. 
(3)  The village clerk shall schedule a public hearing to be held within 30 days after preliminary approval of the application by the commission. 
(4)  The nominator, or if none, the commission shall give notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing and the notice shall be sent by certified mail return receipt requested to owner(s) of record as well as to the adjoining property owners, not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. A public notice also shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the village. The notice shall state the location of the property and a statement summarizing how the proposed landmark or district meets the criteria set forth herein. 
(5)  During the public hearing, the commission shall review and evaluate the application according to the criteria. 
(6)  If the commission finds at the time that the application merits further consideration, then the commission may table the request until its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(7)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for alteration construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark or structure within a district from the date when the nomination form is presented to the village until the final disposition of the request. 
(d)  Decisions. 
(1)  A decision by the commission shall be made within 30 days following the date of the closing of the public hearing. 
(2)  Following the public hearing the commission shall prepare the commission's evaluation, recommendation and all available information for submission to the village board within 30 days. 
(3)  If the commission decides that the landmark or historic district should be designated, it shall do so by a resolution passed by a majority of the commission. 
(4)  The owner(s) of record shall be notified promptly by a letter containing information of the commission's decision. 
(5)  A simple majority vote by the village board is necessary for passage of an ordinance approving a landmark designation. However, all the owners of record must approve, in writing, the landmark designation before the village board approves a landmark designation. If the village board approves the application for the designation, a notice will be sent to the property owners and recorded with the will county recorder of deeds. If the village board denies the petition, no petitioner or applicant may file a nomination for the same structure or property for 180 days to the village. 
(6)  A simple majority vote by the village board is necessary for passage of an ordinance approving an historic district designation. However, all the owners of record must approve, in writing, district designation before the village board approves a district designation. If the village board approves the designation, a notice will be sent to the property owners, and recorded with the Will County Recorder of Deeds. If the village board denies the petition, no petitioner or applicant, may file a nomination for the same structures or properties for 180 days to the village. 
(7)  Buildings and sites designated as landmarks or within historic districts shall be subject to issuance of certificates of appropriateness for significant alteration to the structures or property and for construction, removal or demolition of structures. 
(e)  Supporting documentation. 
(1)  Persons wishing guidance or advice prior to completing an application may contact the Crete Heritage and Architecture Commission. 
(2)  At minimum, the application for designation shall include the following: 
a.  For a landmark. 
1.  Name and address of property owner. 
2.  Legal description and common street address of the property. 
3.  Written statement describing the property and setting forth the reasons in support of the proposed designation. 
4.  Documentation that the property owner has been notified or consents to the application for designation. 
5.  List of significant exterior architectural features that should be protected. 
6.  An overall site plan showing the location of all improvements and photographs of the landmark. 
b.  For an historic district. 
1.  Names and addresses of all property owners. 
2.  Map delineating the boundaries or the area to be designated and the location of major structures. 
3.  Written statement describing the area and properties within the proposed historic district and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed designation. 
4.  List and photographs of significant exterior architectural features of all properties in the district that should be protected. 
(f)  Requirements for sites designated as historic districts or historic landmarks. 
(1)  All sites, structures and districts designated as historic districts or historic landmarks shall comply with, follow and submit to the procedures, criteria and requirements set forth in the sections of this article on heritage preservation. 
(2)  All sites, structures and districts designated as historic districts or historic landmarks shall submit to the enforcement and penalties under sections of this article on heritage preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-13, § 2, 2-26-01) 
Secs. 28-383-28-391. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ADULT USES 

Sec. 28-392. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
    Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale, rental or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities," or "specified anatomical areas;" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material. 
    Adult entertainment cabaret: A public or private establishment which (i) features or permits topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or female impersonators; (ii) features or permits entertainers or exhibitors who display "specified anatomical areas"; or (iii) features or permits entertainers or exhibitors who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in explicit simulations of, "specified sexual activities". 
    Adult motion picture theater: A building or area used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult novelty store: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing "novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for "specialized sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material. 
    Adult use: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses. 
    Specified anatomical areas: For the purpose of this article, "specified anatomical areas" means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals, (ii) pubic region, (iii) buttock; (iv) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola 
    Specified sexual activities: For the purpose of this article "specified sexual activities" means: (i) human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (ii) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and (iii) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region, buttock or female breasts. 
(Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 28-393. - Liquor license prohibited. 
    No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or permitted to be consumed on the premises of any adult use. 
(Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 28-394. - Location. 
    Adult uses are permitted in a business B-4 planned commercial center district or industrial I-1 limited industrial district, including planned unit development business or industrial areas provided: 
(1)  No adult use shall be located within 800 feet of any property which is zoned or used for residences, churches, schools, parks or other adult use. 
(2)  No adult use shall be permitted to operate within 500 feet of the centerline of Steger Road, IL Route 394 Calumet Expressway, Richton Road, Exchange Street, Crete Road, Burville Road or Main Street (IL Route 1). 
(Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, 6-14-99; Ord. No. 2001-29, § 2, 8-13-01) 
Sec. 28-395. - Site plan review required. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit for the construction or occupancy of an adult use, the applicant for said permit(s) must first proceed through the site development and plan review procedure set forth in sections 28-295, 28-298 and 28-299. However, site plan review for an adult use shall be considered by the plan commission within 60 days of filing. After consideration by the plan commission, findings shall be forwarded to the village board and considered within 60 days of the plan commission's consideration. The plan commission and village board may place conditions on the development and operation of the adult use related to site plan, floor plan, construction materials, lighting, parking and circulation, ingress and egress, landscaping and screening, and signage in order to assure that the design and operation of the adult use is in conformance with all village ordinances and is compatible with surrounding uses. 
(Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, 6-14-99) 
Sec. 28-396. - Exterior display. 
    No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
(Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, 6-14-99) 
ARTICLES XIII-XIX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 28-397-28-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - ILLUSTRATIONS 

Sec. 28-501. - Legal effect. 
    This article is established solely as a reference guide and shall not be construed to be binding or a part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8.1-5, 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-502. - Lot types. 

Example of Lot Types 
(Ord. No. 850, App., 5-24-82) 
Sec. 23-503. - Lot width and lot depth. 

Lot Width and Lot Depth Illustration 
(Ord. No. 850, App., 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-504. - Floor area measurement. 

Floor area measurement illustration 
(Ord. No. 850, App., 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-505. - Floor area ratio. 

Floor Area Ratio Illustrated 
(Ord. No. 850, App., 5-24-82) 
Sec. 28-506. - Required yards. 

Required Yards Illustrated 
(Ord. No. 850, App., 5-24-82; Ord. No. 2017-33, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 28-507. - Building height. 

Building Height Illustrations 
(Ord. No. 850, App., 5-24-82) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1965 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1965 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1965 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code 1.1.3 2-86 1.1.4 2-21 1.1.5 2-21.1 1.2.3 2-22 2-23 1.2.4 2-24 1.4.1 2-151 1.4.3 2-153 1.4.4 2-152 1.5.1 2-166 1.5.3 2-167 1.5.4 2-168 1.6.2 2-138 1.6.3 2-137 1.6.4 2-136 1.6.5 2-139 1.6.6 2-140 1.7.1 2-216 1.7.2 2-217 1.8.1 2-181 1.8.3 2-182 1.8.4 2-183 1.8.5 2-184 1.8.6 2-185 1.8.7 2-186 1.9.1 2-201 1.9.2 2-202 1.10.1-1.10.5 6-1 1.11.1-1.11.4 6-3 1.12.1-1.12.5 6-4 1.15.1 9-30 1.15.2 9-30 1.16.1 20-1 1.16.2 20-2 1.16.3 20-3 1.16.4-1.16.7 20-4 1.16.8 20-6 1.16.9 20-7 1.16.10 20-8 1.17.1 9-26 9-27 1.17.2 9-30 1.17.3 9-31 9-32 1.17.4 9-27 9-28 1.17.5 9-29 1.17.6 9-33 1.17.7 9-37 1.17.8 9-35 9-36 1.17.10 9-38 1.18.3 2-87 1.18.4 2-89 1.18.8 2-90 1.18.10 13-17 1.19.1 20-10 1.19.3 20-10 1.19.5 13-18 1.19.6 13-20 1.23.1-1.23.5 6-28 1.24.3 2-3 1.24.7 2-4 1.24.9 2-107 1.24.10 2-106 2-108 1.24.11 2-109 1.24.21 2-91 2.1.1 12-2 2.1.2 12-3 2.1.3 12-4 2.1.4 12-5 2.1.6 12-6 2.1.7 12-7 2.1.8 12-8 2.1.9 12-11 2.1.10 12-5 2.1.11 12-9 2.2.1.1 12-26 2.2.1.2 12-28 2.2.1.5-2.2.1.7 12-29-12-31 2.2.1.11-2.2.1.13 12-32-12-33 2.2.1.14 12-27 2.2.2.1 12-181, 12-182 2.2.2.2 12-181 2.2.2.3-2.2.2.5 12-183-12-185 2.2.3.1 12-566, 12-567 2.2.3.2 12-567 2.2.3.3 12-569 2.2.3.4 12-567 2.2.3.5 12-571 2.2.3.6 12-568 2.2.3.7 12-570 2.2.3.8 12-572 2.2.4.1 12-223 2.2.4.2 12-221 2.2.4.3 12-222 2.2.4.4 12-225 2.2.4.5-2.2.4.9 12-227 2.2.4.10-2.2.4.15 12-228-12-233 2.2.4.17 12-235 2.2.4.18 12-234 2.2.4.19 12-226 2.2.4A.1-2.2.4A.3 9-71-9-73 2.2.4A.4-2.2.4A.11 9-78-9-85 2.2.4A.12-2.2.4A.14 9-87 2.2.4A.19-2.2.4A.19 9-88 2.2.4A.20-2.2.4A.26 9-90 2.2.4A.27-2.2.4A.30 9-89 2.2.4A.31 9-76 2.2.4A.32 9-91 2.2.4A.33-2.2.4A.35 9-93-9-95 2.2.4A.36 9-95 2.2.4A.37-2.2.4A.42 9-96-9-101 2.2.4A.43 9-103 2.2.4A.44 9-92 2.2.4A.45 9-75 2.2.4A.46 9-77 2.2.4A.47 9-86 2.2.4A.48 9-102 2.2.4A.49-2.2.4A.51 9-74 2.2.4B.1, 2.2.4B.2 9-123 2.2.4B.3 9-125 2.2.4B.4 9-123 2.2.4B.5B 9-124 2.2.4B.6 9-126 2.2.4B.7 9-127 2.2.4B.8 9-128 2.2.4B.9 9-122 2.2.4B.10 9-129 2.2.4B.11 9-130 2.2.5.1-2.2.5.3 12-251 2.2.5.4, 2.2.5.5 12-253 2.2.5.6 12-252 2.2.6.1 12-46 2.2.6.2 12-46 2.2.6.3 12-47 2.2.7.1 12-61 2.2.7.2 12-61 2.2.7.3 12-62 2.2.9.1-2.2.9.4 12-81 2.2.9.5 12-82 2.2.9.7 12-83 2.2.11.4 12-163 2.2.13.1 12-331 2.2.13.2, 2.2.13.3 12-332 2.2.13.4 12-334 2.2.13.6 12-333 2.2.14.1 12-351 2.2.14.1-2.2.14.3 12-352 2.2.14.4 12-353 2.2.15.1 12-371 2.2.15.4 12-371 2.2.15.8, 2.2.15.9 12-371 2.2.16.1-2.2.16.3 12-372 2.2.16.6 12-372 2.2.17.1-2.2.17.3 12-376 2.2.17.9 12-376 2.2.18.1 12-411 2.2.18.3 12-412 2.2.19.1 12-431 2.2.19.2 12-432 2.2.20.1 18-1 2.2.20.2 18-21 2.2.20.3 18-22 2.2.20.4 18-23, 18-25 2.2.20.6 18-26 2.2.20.8 18-3, 18-4 18-23 2.2.20.9 18-5 2.2.20.11 18-21 2.2.20.12 18-2 2.2.21.1, 2.2.21.2 12-451 2.2.21.3-2.2.21.6 12-453-12-456 2.2.21.7 12-452 2.2.22.2 6-34 2.2.22.6 6-34 2.2.23.1, 2.2.23.2 12-373 2.2.23.4 12-373 2.2.24.3-2.2.24.5 12-471-12-473 2.2.25 5-13 2.2.26.2-2.2.26.4 12-491-12-493 2.2.28.1 12-511 2.2.28.2 12-512 2.2.28.3 12-512 2.2.28.4 12-514 2.2.28.5 12-515 2.2.28.6 12-513 2.2.29.1 12-531 2.2.29.2 12-532 2.2.29.3 12-534 2.2.29.4 12-535 2.2.29.5 12-533 2.2.30.1-2.2.30.3 12-375 2.2.31.4 12-111 2.2.31.6 12-113 2.2.31.7 12-114 2.2.31.8 12-116 2.2.31.9 12-115 2.2.32.1 12-590 2.2.32.2 12-591 2.2.32.3 12-591 2.2.32.5 12-591 2.2.33.1 21-16 2.2.33.2-2.2.33.4 21-18 2.2.33.7-2.2.33.11 21-19-21-23 2.2.33.12 21-17 2.2.34.1 12-606 2.2.34.2 12-607 2.2.35.1 12-621 2.2.35.2 12-622 2.2.35.3 12-630 2.2.35.4-2.2.35.6 12-623-12-625 2.2.35.7 12-630 2.2.35.8-2.2.35.11 12-626-12-629 2.2.36.1-2.2.36.3 12-646 2.2.36.4-2.2.36.8 12-647-12-651 2.2.37.1 12-671 2.2.37.2 12-672 2.2.38.1-2.2.38.4 12-131 2.2.38.5 12-132 2.2.39.2 12-691 2.2.39.3 12-694 2.2.39.4 12-695 2.2.39.5 12-693 2.2.39.6 12-696 2.2.41.1-2.2.41.3 12-374 2.2.41.5 12-374 2.2.43.1, 2.2.43.2 12-731 2.2.43.3 12-732 2.2.43.4 12-733 2.2.44.1-2.2.44.3 12-146 2.2.44.4 12-147 2.2.44.5 12-148 2.2.44B.1 6-218 2.2.44B.2 6-216 2.2.44B.3 6-219 2.2.44B.5-2.2.44B.11 6-220-6-226 2.2.44B.12 6-217 2.2.44B.13 6-227 2.2.45.1 26-22 2.2.45.2 26-21, 26-22 2.2.45.3-2.2.45.5 26-22 2.2.45.5 26-23 2.2.45.7 26-24 2.2.45.8 26-25 2.2.45.10 26-26 2.2.45.11 26-27 2.2.46.1 12-776 2.2.46.2 12-777 2.2.47.1 12-791 2.2.47.2 12-791 2.2.47.3 12-792, 12-793 2.2.47.4 12-794 2.2.47.5 12-791 2.2.48.1 14-1 2.2.48.2 14-2 2.2.48.4, 2.2.48.5 14-2 2.2.48.6 14-3, 14-4 2.2.48.7-2.2.48.11 14-5-14-9 2.2.49.1 12-811 2.2.50.1(a) 12-826 12-829 2.2.50.1-2.2.50.6 12-827 2.2.50.12 12-827 2.2.50.13 12-83.1 2.2.50.16 12-827 2.2.50.18 12-827 2.2.50.27 12-282 2.2.51.1 12-846 2.2.51.2 12-847 2.2.51.20 12-830 2.2.52.1 24-21 2.2.52.2 24-24, 24-25 2.2.52.3 24-24 2.2.52.5 24-25 2.2.52.7 24-25 2.2.52.8 24-22 2.2.53.1 12-271, 12-272 2.2.53.3 12-273 2.2.54.1 12-711, 12-712 2.2.54.3-2.2.54.5 12-713-12-715 3.1.2-3.1.4 22-7 3.1.9 22-3 3.1.10 22-3 3.1.11 22-2 3.1.13 22-4 3.1.16 22-5 3.1.17 22-8 3.1.18 9-7 3.1.19 22-7 3.2.1 10-16 22-21 3.2.2 22-22 3.2.3 22-23 3.2.4 22-24 3.2.5 22-25 3.2.6 22-26 3.2.7 22-27 3.2.8 22-28 3.3.2 21-37 3.3.4 21-38 3.3.6 21-39 3.3.7 21-36 3.4.2 22-42 3.4.3 22-43 5.2.1 9-1 5.2.2 10-1 5.2.4 10-16 5.2.6 10-17 5.2.7 10-17 5.3.3 13-13 5.3.4 16-3 5.3.5 16-4 5.3.8 16-1 5.3.11 16-1 16-2 5.3.12 11-1 5.3.13 11-2 6.1.1 5-5 6.1.2 5-8 6.1.3 5-9 6.1.4 5-10 6.1.5 5-8 6.1.6 5-11 6.1.10 5-4 6.2.1 5-51 6.2.2 5-32 5-52 5-53 6.2.3 5-54 6.2.4 5-55 5-56 6.2.5 5-53 6.2.6 5-33 6.2.11 5-34 6.2.12 5-7 6.2.13 5-35 6.2.14 5-7 7.1.1-7.1.3 27-1 7.2.1 27-5 27-22 27-25 27-26 7.2.2 27-23 7.2.3 27-21 27-24 27-26 7.2.4 22-27 7.2.5 22-28 7.2.6-7.2.9 27-7 7.2.10 27-3 7.2.11 27-3 7.2.12 27-5 27-6 7.2.13 27-2 7.2.15 27-4 7.2.16 27-4 9.1.1-9.1.6 4-1 9.2 4-16 9.3 4-17 9.4 4-19 4-22 9.5 4-25 9.6 4-18 4-23 4-24 9.6.6 4-22 4-48 9.7 4-23 9.8 4-29 9.9 4-26 4-27 9.10 4-28 9.12 4-46 9.13 4-47 9.14 4-20 9.15 4-48 9.18.1-9.18.4 4-2 9.19 4-30 10.1.1 13-6 10.1.2 9-8 10.1.3 9-8 10.2.1 16-22 10.2.2 16-23 10.2.3 16-24 10.2.4 16-25 10.2.5 16-21 10.2.6 16-21 10.4.1-10.4.6 13-15 10.5.1 9-51 10.5.2 9-52 10.5.3 9-53 10.5.4 9-54 10.5.5 9-53 10.5.6 9-55 10.5.7 9-56 10.6.1 15-16 10.6.2-10.6.5 15-16 10.6.5 15-17 10.7.1-10.7.4 13-16 10.11.2 2-2 10.11.6 2-4 10.12.3.12 22-1 13-14 10.4.1(a) 22-1 10.4.1(b) 22-1 11.1.1 2-246 11.1.2 2-247 11.1.3 2-248 12.2 1-2 12.3 1-2 12.4 1-10 12.5 1-2 1-10 12.6 1-2 12.7 1-6 12.13 1-3  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1965 Code. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1965 Code. This table contains some ordinances which precede the 1965 Code, but which were never included in the 1965 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section  Section 
this Code 571 5-24-65 Art. 1, § A 23-1 Art. 1, § B 23-2 Art. 1, § C 23-4 Art. 1, § D, E 23-8 Art. 1, § I 23-6 Art. 1, § J 23-9 Art. 1, § K 23-10 Art. 2 23-3 Art. 2, § 5 23-5 Art. 3, § A 23-36 Art. 3, § B 23-37 Art. 3, § C 23-38, 23-44 Art. 3, § C(1) 23-41 Art. 3, § C(2) 23-42 Art. 3, § C(3) 23-43 Art. 4, § A 23-41 Art. 4, § B 23-42 Art. 4, § C 23-40, 23-44 Art. 4, § C(5) 23-39 Art. 4, § D 23-42, 23-43 Art. 4, § E 23-45 Art. 4, § F 23-11 Art. 5, § A 23-61 Art. 5, § B 23-62 Art. 5, § C 23-63 Art. 5, § D 23-64 Art. 5, § E 23-65 Art. 6, § A(1) 23-82 Art. 6, § A(2) 23-83 Art. 6, § A(3) 23-84 Art. 6, § A(4) 23-85 Art. 6, § A(5) 23-86 Art. 6, § B 23-87 Art. 6, § C 23-88 Art. 6, § D 23-89 Art. 6, § E 23-90 Art. 6, § F(1) 23-106 Art. 6, § F(2), (3) 23-107 Art. 6, § F(4) 23-108 Art. 6, § F(5) 23-109 Art. 6, § F(6) 23-110 Art. 6, § F(7) 23-111 Art. 6, § F(8) 23-112 Art. 6, § F(10) 23-114 Art. 6, § F(11) 23-115 Art. 6, § F(12) 23-116 Art. 6, § F(a) 23-113 Art. 6, § G 23-93 Art. 6, § H(1)-(4) 23-91 Art. 6, § H(5) 23-92 Art. 7, § A 23-131 Art. 7, § B 23-132 Art. 7, § C 23-133 Art. 7, § D 23-134 Art. 7, § E 23-135 Art. 8, § A 23-152 Art. 8, § B 23-153 Art. 8, § C 23-151, 23-154 Art. 9, § A, B 23-7 576 9-17-65 1 4-48 4-10-67 1(2.2.4B.1) 12-201 1(2.2.4B.2) 12-202 1(2.2.4B.3) 12-203 582 1-10-66 23-62 583 1-10-66 13-14 10.12.1.4 13-4 10.12.3.213-8 10.12.3.8 13-2 10.12.3.9 13-3 10.12.3.11 9-6 10.12.3.13 13-4 10.12.3.15 9-2 10.12.3.16 13-5 10.12.3.17 13-9 10.12.3.18 13-12 10.12.3.19 13-10 10.12.3.22 9-2 10.12.3.29 13-11 594 3-27-67 I-IV 2-1 600 5-8-67 1 13-16 601 5-22-67 1 6-219 2 6-220 3 6-224 4 6-226 607 7-17-67 1 12-621 612 10-12-67 2 16-1 614 10-17-67 1 27-5 618 2-26-68 1 12-826 12-829 622 5-13-68 1-3 24-2 626 8-12-68 1 12-224 628 10-7-68 22-1 629 10-28-68 1 24-24 24-25 638 5-26-69 1 20-21 2 20-21 3 20-23 4 20-24 5 20-25 6 20-22 645 6-28-69 1(7.2.1(a)) 27-22 647 9-10-69 1-3 24-1 649 12-22-69 2.2.48.16 12-551 2.2.48.17-2.2.48.19 12-552 2.2.48.20 12-553 651 1-26-70 1 2-107 656 5-24-70 1(2.2.1.4(a)) 12-291 657 6-22-60 1(2.2.25B) 5-12 668 11-9-70 1 9-1 676 4-12-71 1 2-23 682 12-27-71 1 24-24 685 3-27-72 1 2-91 2-106-2-109 704 8-27-73 1 2-109 705 8-27-83 1 24-23 8-27-73 1 24-24 24-25 711 2-25-74 1 6-21, 6-22 6-26 6-29 6-30 2 6-26 2G(c) 6-146 4 6-26 6-27 5 6-23 6 6-33 7-13 6-35-6-41 14 6-24 15 6-25 17 6-42 6-43 18 6-31 6-44 19-24 6-45-6-50 25 6-32 26(A) 6-71 26(B) 6-72 26(C) 6-73 26(D) 6-74 26(E) 6-75 26(F) 6-76 26(G) 6-77 26(H) 6-78 26(I)n 6-79 26(J)(a) 6-80 26(J)(b) 6-81 26(J)(c) 6-82 26(J)(d) 6-83 26(J)(e) 6-84 26(J)(f) 6-85 26(J)(g) 6-86 26(J)(h) 6-87 26(J)(i) 6-88 26(J)(j) 6-89 26(J)(k) 6-90 26(J)(l) 6-91 27 6-92 28 6-51 29 6-52 30 6-53 31 6-106 6-108 31(2) 6-112 31(a) 6-111 31(b) 6-107 31(c) 6-111 31(f) 6-109, 6-115 31(g) 6-115 31(h) 6-116 31(i) 6-117 31(j) 6-118 31(k) 6-113 31(l) 6-110 31(m) 6-119 31(m-1) 6-120 31(n) 6-121 31(o) 6-115 6-122 31(p) 6-123 31(q) 6-124 6-147 31(r) 6-124 6-148 31(s) 6-124 6-149 31(t) 6-125 31(u) 6-126 31(v) 6-127 31(w) 6-128 31(x) 6-129 6-151 31(y) 6-114 32 6-54 33 6-55 34 6-56 36 6-22 712 2.2.17A.1, 2.2.17A.2 12-96 717 6-10-74 1 6-122 723 8-5-74 1 5-7 5-31 5-33 1(6.2.15) 5-1, 5-2 724 11-11-74 1, 2 24-3 738 9-22-75 1 6-58 2 6-60 3 6-59 4 6-58 6-59 5 6-58 6-60 740 9-22-75 6.2.16 5-6 746 5-10-76 7.2.15a 27-4 756 1-10-77 1(7.2.1(b)-7.2.1(d)) 27-22 761 6-27-77 1(10.13) 13-7 763 6-27-77 1 17-18 2(A) 17-24 2(B) 17-19 2(C) 17-20 2(D) 17-21 2(E) 17-22 2(F) 17-23 2(G) 17-24 2(H) 17-25 2(I) 17-26 2(J) 17-27 2(K) 17-29 2(L) 17-28 2(M) 17-29 2(N) 17-30 2(O) 17-31 2(P) 17-32 2(Q) 17-33 2(R) 17-34 2(S) 17-35 2(T) 17-36 2(U) 17-37 2(V) 17-38 4 17-17 764 7-11-77 1 12-182 765 7-11-77 1(2.2.55) 12-391 1(2.2.55.1-2.2.55.4) 12-392 1(2.2.55.2) 12-393 1(2.2.55.5) 12-394 768 10-10-77 1-6 2-88 769 10-24-77 20-9 770 11-28-77 1 4-18 4-23 4-24 772 12-27-77 1 6-27 778 4-10-78 1 2-107 785 9-11-78 1 4-18 4-23 4-24 3 4-22 4-48 787 10-23-78 1-3 12-161 3 12-162 788 11-13-78 1 20-1 790 11-27-78 1 6-58 791 12-18-78 1 24-1 24-2 798 4-30-79 1(1.14A.1-1.14A.6) 20-5 801 4-28-80 1 26-22 803 1-9-79 1.25.1 19-36 1.25.2 19-37 1.25.3 19-38 1.25.4 19-39 1.25.5 19-40 805 9-24-79 1 10-19 2 10-18 3 10-19 10-20 4 10-20 808 9-10-79 Art. 10.14 3-16 809 10-22-79 1 6-30 812 11-26-79 Art. II, § 2 24-24 25-69 Art. III, §§ 2, 3 24-23 Art. III, §§ 2, 5 24-25 Art. V, § 4 25-74 Art. V, § 5 25-75 Art. V, § 6 25-76 Art. V, § 7 25-77 Art. V, § 8 25-78 Art. V, § 9 25-79 Art. V, § 10 25-80 Art. V, §§ 11-13 25-81 Art. V, § 14, 15 25-82 Art. V, § 16 25-83 Art. V, § 17 25-84 Art. V, § 18 25-85 Art. V, § 20 25-86 Art. V, § 22 25-75 Art. V, § 23 25-87 Art. V, § 24 25-88 814 12-10-79 1 24-24 817 2-25-80 Arts. I-VII 27-41-27-47 818 3-10-80 Art. I, §§ 1-5 27-36, 27-41-27-55 Art. III, §§ 1-9 27-36, 27-61-27-69 820 4-28-80 1 5-12 6-34 12-46 12-61 12-81 12-96 12-111 12-131 12-146 12-161 12-181 12-202 12-223 12-251 12-272 12-291 12-332 12-352 12-372 12-373 12-375 12-412 12-431 12-451 12-41 12-491 12-512 12-532 12-567 12-591 12-606 12-622 12-646 12-671 12-691 12-712 12-731 12-776 12-791 12-811 12-827 12-846 14-2 21-18 24-24 3 12-10 821 4-28-80 1 4-18 4-23 4-24 828 12-22-80 1(8.2.2) 8-21 1(8.2.3) 8-17 1(8.2.4) 8-18 1(8.2.5) 8-22 1(8.2.6) 8-26 1(8.2.7) 8-27 1(8.2.8) 8-28 1(8.2.9) 8-23 1(8.2.11) 8-24, 8-25 1(8.2.12) 8-20 1(8.2.13) 8-19 1(8.21) 8-16 830 1-26-81 1 20-5 833 4-13-81 6-121 839 8-24-81 1 7-2 2 7-1 3 7-3 4 7-4 5 7-4 6 7-6 7 7-7 8 7-8 9 7-9 10 7-10 11 7-11 12 7-12 13 7-13 14 7-14 15 7-15 16 7-16 7-17 840 10-12-81 Art. 10.15 9-3 842 12-14-81 1(1.3.10) 2-67 844 1-11-82 1-3 24-4 845 1-11-82 1-4 24-5 848 5-10-82 1(2.2.56.1, 2.2.56.2) 12-311 1(2.2.56.3) 12-312 1(2.2.56.4) 12-313 1(2.2.56.5) 12-314 1(2.2.56.6) 12-311 849 5-10-82 1(2.2.4C.1) 12-753 1(2.2.4C.2) 12-751 1(2.2.4C.3(a)) 12-754 1(2.2.4C.3(c)) 12-757, 12-758 1(2.2.4C.3(g)) 12-756 1(2.2.4C.3(h)) 12-759 1(2.2.4C.3(i)) 12-758 1(2.2.4C.3(j)) 12-761 1(2.2.4C.3(k)) 12-762 1(2.2.4C.3(l)) 12-760 1(2.2.4C.3(m)) 12-763 1(2.2.4C.4) 12-752 1(2.2.4C.5) 12-753 1(2.2.4C.6) 12-752, 12-753 850 5-24-82 2 28-4 3.1 28-226 3.2 28-227 3.3 28-228 4.0 28-271 4.1 28-272 4.2 28-273 4.3 28-274 4.4 28-275 4.5 28-276 4.6 28-277 4.7 28-278 5.0 28-291 5.1 28-292 5.2 28-293 5.3 28-294 5.4 28-295 6.0 28-311 7.1 28-46 7.2 28-47 7.3 28-48 7.4 28-49 7.5 28-50 7.6 28-61 7.6-1 28-63 7.6-2 28-64 7.6-3 28-65 7.6-4 28-66 7.6-5 28-62 7.7-1 28-81 7.7-2 28-82 7.7-3 28-83 7.7-4 28-84 7.7-6 28-81, 28-85 7.7-7 28-86 7.8-1 28-101 7.8-2 28-102 7.8-3 28-103 7.8-4 28-104 7.8-5 28-105 7.8-6 28-106 7.9-1 28-121 7.9-2 28-122 7.9-3 28-123 7.9-4 28-124 7.9-5 28-125 7.9-6 28-126 7.10 28-141 7.10-1 28-142 7.10-2 28-143 7.10-4 28-144 7.10-5 28-145 7.10-6 28-146 7.10-7 28-147 7.10-8 28-148 7.10-9 28-149 7.10-10 28-151 7.11 28-166 7.12-1, 7.12-2 28-181 7.12-3 28-182 7.12-4 28-183 7.12-5 28-184 7.13 28-34 7.14 28-33 8.1-1 28-5 8.1-2 28-6 8.1-3 28-7 8.1-4 28-8 8.1-5 28-501 8.3.1-8.3.5 28-11 8.3-6 28-9 8.3-7 28-10 8.3-8 28-121 8.4 28-246 8.5 28-247 8.6 28-248 8.7 28-249 8.8 28-12 8.9 28-250 8.10 28-251 8.11 28-252 8.12 28-253 8.13 28-254 8.14 28-229 8.15-1 28-230 8.15-2 28-231 9.1 28-208 9.2 28-202 9.3 28-203 9.4 28-204 9.5 28-205 9.6 28-206 9.7 28-207 9.8 28-208 9.9 28-8 9.10 28-209 10.1 28-326 10.2 28-327 10.3 28-328 10.4 28-329 10.5 28-330 11.1 28-346 11.2 28-349 11.3 28-347 11.4 28-348 11.5 28-350 11.6 28-351 11.7 28-352 11.8 28-353 12.0 28-2 12.2 28-3 Art. 1 28-1 850(App.) 5-24-82 28-502-28-507 858 9-27-82 1 25-2 1(Art. 4.1) 25-1 1(Art. 4.3) 25-3 1(4.4.1) 25-8 1(4.4.2) 25-9 1(4.5.1) 25-11 1(4.5.2) 25-12 1(4.6.1) 25-39 1(4.6.2) 25-40 1(4.6.3) 25-41 1(4.6.4) 25-38 1(4.6.5) 25-42 1(4.6.7) 25-43 1(4.6.8) 25-44 1(4.6.9) 25-45 1(4.6.10) 25-46 1(4.6.11) 25-47 1(4.6.12) 25-48 1(4.6.13) 25-49 1(4.6.14) 25-37 1(4.6.15) 25-36, 25-50 1(4.7.1) 25-13 1(4.7.2) 25-14 1(4.7.3) 25-15 1(4.7.4) 25-16 1(4.7.5) 25-17 1(4.8.1-4.8.6) 25-18 1(4.9.1) 25-19 1(4.9.2) 25-20 1(4.9.3) 25-21 1(4.9.4) 25-22 1(4.9.5) 25-23 1(4.10.1, 4.10.2) 25-24 1(4.11.1-4.11.2) 25-10 1(4.12.1) 25-4 1(4.12.2) 25-5 1(4.12.3) 25-6 1(4.12.4) 25-7 1(4.13.1) 25-66 1(4.13.2) 25-71 1(4.13.3) 25-67 1(4.13.4) 25-68, 25-72, 25-73, 25-75, 25-89, 25-90 83-2 2-14-83 1 28-346 28-347 28-348 28-349 28-350 28-351 28-352 28-353 83-3 6-13-83 1 9-122 9-123 9-124 9-125 9-126 9-127 9-128 9-129 9-130 83-4 6-13-83 1 4-2 83-7 7-25-83 1(6.1.11) 5-3 83-11 8-22-83 1 27-5 27-22 27-25 27-26 120(Res.) 10-24-83 20-1(b) 83-17 12-12-83 1 6-119 83-18 12-27-83 1 6-120 84-1 2-13-84 1(1.25.1) 2-121 1(1.25.2) 2-122 1(1.25.3) 2-123 1(1.25.4) 2-124 1(1.25.5) 2-125 84-2 2-13-84 1(1.17.12, 1.17.13) 9-34 84-3 2-13-84 1 25-3 84-5 3-28-84 1 4-18 4-23 4-24 84-8 5-27-84 1 25-42 84-10 5-14-84 1(10.16.1) 6-171 1(10.16.2) 6-172 1(10.16.3) 6-173 1(10.16.3.26) 6-174 1(10.16.3.44) 6-176 1(10.16.5) 6-177 1(10.16.6) 6-178 1(10.16.7) 6-179 1(10.16.8) 6-180 1(10.16.9) 6-181 1(10.16.11) 6-197 1(10.16.11-116) 6-182 1(10.16.11.1) 6-196 1(10.16.12.1-10.16.12.4) 6-198 1(10.16.12.5-10.16.12.9) 6-199 1(10.16.12.10) 6-202 1(10.16.12.11-10.16.12.16) 6-200 1(10.16.13) 6-201 1(10.16.14) 6-176, 6-202 1(10.16.15) 6-175 84-11 5-24-84 1 10-18 84-21 11-12-84 1-5 25-11.1 84-22 11-26-84 1(7.2.21) 27-8 85-1 1-28-85 1 2-21 2-21.1 2-151 85-3 3-11-85 1(4.11.1) 25-101 1(4.11.2) 25-103 1(4.11.3) 25-104 1(4.11.4) 25-105 1(4.11.5) 25-106 1(4.11.6.1-4.11.6.6) 25-107 1(4.11.6.7) 25-102 1(4.11.7.1) 25-108 1(4.11.7.2) 25-109 1(4.11.8) 25-110 1(4.11.9) 25-111 1(4.11.10) 25-112 85-4 3-25-85 1 2-122 2-125 85-6 7-10-85 1 2-122, 2-125 85-8 8-12-85 2 25-102(b) 85-10 8-26-85 Adopting ordinance p. ix 1-3(14), (15) 2-107(b) 13-1(a) 24-24(b) 24-24(c) 27-22(a)(1) 28-49(a) 28-208(c) 85-11 8-26-85 1 4-18(6), 4-22 85-12 8-26-85 1 4-48(d) 85-14 10-14-85 1 27-3(b) 85-15 11-11-85 1 6-28(a) 85-16 11-11-85 1       Added 6-2 2       Rnbd 6-2, 6-3       as 6-3, 6-4 85-17 12-23-85 1 2-88(a), (b), (d) 85-19 12-23-85 1       Rpld 2-106-2-109 2       Added 2-100-2-110 86-2 6-9-86 1 4-18(5) 2-23 86-6 6-23-86 1 2-23 86-8 7-21-86 1 10-11-10-18 2 10-26-10-37 86-13A 1-5-87 1 3-16, 4-23(a), 5-6(b), (e), 5-7(b), 5-12(b), 5-13(b), 5-31, 5-51, 6-27(g)[2-231], 6-29(c), 6-27(q), 6-29(c), 6-30(c), 6-33(a), 6-37(b), 6-109, 9-34(a), 9-74(c), 10-33(a), 12-10, 12-13, 12-28(b), 12-29(a), 12-46(b), 12-61(b), 12-81, 12-111(c), 12-131(d), 12-146(c), 12-161(b), 12-181, 12-202, 12-223, 12-251, 12-272, 12-291(a), 12-311(c), 12-332(b), 12-352, 12-371(b), 12-372(b), 12-373, 12-374(b), 12-375, 12-376(b), 12-392(b), 12-412, 12-431, 12-451, 12-471, 12-491, 12-512, 12-532, 12-552, 12-567, 12-591, 12-606, 12-622, 12-646, 12-671, 12-691, 12-712, 12-731, 12-753(a), 12-776, 12-791, 12-811, 12-827(d), 12-846, 13-7(d)(1), 14-2(b), 15-16(a), 18-24, 21-18(c), 23-40(a), 24-24(a), (b), 25-3(d), 25-4, 25-7, 25-11.1(e), 25-12(a), (c), 25-36, 26-22(c), 27-3(b), 27-8(c), 27-22(a), (c), 27-28, 28-31, 28-33(a), 28-352(4) 2 2-301 87-14 3-18-87 1 8-17, 8-26, 8-27(b)(1)g, h 87-15 3-18-87 1       Rpld 12-47 87-16 4-6-87 1 25-4 87-17 5-4-87 1 10-28 2, 3 10-29(c), (d) 87-20 5-18-87 1 28-257 87-24 6-15-87 1 10-13 87-38 10-5-87 1       Rpld 12-163 87-39 10-5-87 1 Ch. 9(note) 3-19 9-141-9-157 87-40 11-16-87 1 2-23 87-41 11-16-87 1 2-301 87-42 12-28-87 2 13-20 88-1 1-25-88 1 4-3, 4-17-4-20       Rnbd 4-19-4-30       as 4-21-4-32 4-48, 4-49 88-2 2-8-88 1 2-301 88-3 3-14-88 1 28-246(a) 88-7 4-11-88 1 12-855, 12-856 88-8 4-11-88 1 2-301 88-11 6-27-88 1 28-296-28-300 2 28-49(g)(1), 28-50(2), 28-103(a), 28-143(b) (1), (2), 28-226 88-12 6-13-88 1 12-471(b), 12-712(b) 88-15 6-27-88 1 27-86, 27-87 88-17 8-8-88 1 12-394 88-18 8-8-88 1 10-28 88-22 9-12-88 1 2-21.1 88-25 10-24-88 1 5-36 89-1 1-23-89 1 2-21, 2-21.1 2-151 89-2 2-13-89 1 28-226 89-3 2-13-89 1 2-301 89-4 1-13-89 1 10-33(a) 89-5 2-27-89 1 6-27(i) 2 2-301 89-10 4-10-89 1 2-301 89-12 5-8-89 1 2-88(a) 89-13 5-8-89 1 20-1(b) 89-14 6-12-89 1 23-132(3) 89-18 7-11-89 1 16-23 89-19 7-11-89 1(200) 8-16 (300) 8-17 (400) 8-26 (500) 8-27 (600) 8-28 (700) 8-37 (800) 8-38 (900) 8-39 (1000) 8-36 (1100) 8-40 (1200) 8-29 (1300) 8-19 (1400) 8-30 (1500) 8-18       Rpld 8-16-8-28 (1600) Ch. 8, Art. II(note) 2 2-301 89-25 9-11-89 1 27-1 89-31 12-11-89 1 28-210 2 28-246(d), (e) 3 28-247 4 28-250(g)-(j) 89-32 12-11-89 1 28-255, 28-256 89-33 12-11-89 1 6-26(a) 90-4 2-26-90 1 2-108 90-9 3-26-90 1 25-20 90-10 3-26-90 1-10 25-25 23-161-23-170 90-11 3-26-90 1 24-24(d) 2 24-25(b) 3 2-301 90-13 4-9-90 1 20-1(b) 90-24  8-27-90 1, 2 27-9 2-301(27-9) 90-25  8-27-90 1       Rpld 28-353 90-27  9-24-90 1, 3 6-26, 6-27 2       Rpld 6-1-6-4, 6-21-6-60, 6-71-6-92, 6-106-6-129, 6-146-6-151, 6-171-6-182, 6-196-6-202 90-28  9-24-90 1 6-51 3, 4 6-52, 6-53 90-29  9-24-90 1, 3 6-76, 6-77 90-30  9-24-90 1 6-126 3, 4 6-127, 6-128 90-31  9-24-90 1 6-101 3, 4 6-102, 6-103 90-32  9-24-90 1 2-311 90-33  9-24-90 1 13-21 91-4  1-28-91 1 20-1(b) 91-12  4-22-91 1 28-226, 28-278 91-13  4-22-91 1 23-107(5) 91-14  5-28-91 1, 3 6-241, 6-242 91-15  5-28-91 1 20-1(b) 91-17  6-10-91 1 23-6 91-18  6-24-91 1 8-51-8-56 91-21  6-24-91 1-4 28-258-28-261 5 28-327(15)-(21) 91-31  9- 9-91 1 9-158--9-167 91-33  9- 9-91 1 24-21 2 24-23(a) 91-35 10-14-91 1 6-54 91-39 11-11-91 1 25-39 91-40 10-28-91 1 25-41 91-41 11-25-91 1 28-246(a) 92-2  1-27-92 1 2-301(8-54) 92-6  4-27-92 1 24-23(d) 92-7  5-11-92 1 6-55 92-14  7-27-92 2 20-1(b) 92-23 12-28-92 1 9-3 93-3  2- 8-93 2 2-321(2) 93-4  2- 8-93 1 2-301(27-9) 93-6  3- 8-93 1 2-301(27-3) 93-7  3- 8-93 1 6-28 93-8  3- 8-93 1 22-2 93-9  3-22-93 1 10-28 2 10-35(d) 93-10  3-22-93 3 22-9 93-11  3-22-93 1 25-44 93-21  7-12-93 1 2-301 93-24  8- 9-93 1 2-301 2 2-311 93-25  9- 9-93 1 2-311 94-9  6-27-94 1 2-121-2-125 94-12  8- 8-94 2 28-329 94-15  8-22-94 2 2-301 94-19  9-26-94 6       Added 13-7(b)(3), (c)(3) 7       Added 13-22 8 2-301 9 16-1 94-21  9-26-94 Exh. B,       Added 28-371-28-381 §§ 1-11 94-22  9-26-94 2-322(3) 94-30 11-28-94 1 24-21(b) 95-4  3-13-95 2 28-246(b) 4 28-276(e)(1) 95-9  2-13-95 1 2-322(2) 95-10  2-27-95 4       Added 6-28(d) 95-17  4-10-95 1 11.5-1 3-10 11.5-2-11.5-9 Rpld 22-21-22-28 95-18  4-24-95 5 2-311(2)(a) 6-27 6-52 Added 28-262 28-278(f) 95-20  4-24-95 3       Added 5-70-5-72 4 2-301 95-23  5-22-95 2 28-263 3       Added 12-857 4 2-301 95-26  6-12-95 3-15       Added 23-171-23-183 95-37  8-14-95 1 2-301 95-45  9-11-95 1 8-17 8-27(3), (9)-(11) 8-28 8-38 8-39(2)a.1-4 95-52 10-23-95 2 27-86(c) 95-58 12-18-95 1 2-301 96-04  1- 8-96 2 4-20(1.1) 2 4-25(a)(1.1), 2-301 3 4-26(1.1) 4 4-48(a) 96-05  1-22-96 2 28-274(a) 3 28-273 96-08  1-22-96 2 20-1(b) 96-15  4- 8-96 2 20-1(b) 96-44  9- 9-96 1 2-21 2 2-21.1 3 2-151 96-47 10-14-96 2 28-49 96-50 10-28-96 1 25-50 96-57 12- 9-96 1 2-301(10-33) 96-58 12- 9-96 1 2-301(10-30) 96-61 12- 9-96 1 6-52 97-08  1-27-97 1 2-102(a)(2) 97-10  3-24-97 2 4-20(1.1) 3 4-48(a) 97-12  4-14-97 2 28-47(10) 3 28-82(3), (4) 4 28-103(a)(4), (5) 5 28-143(a)(2)d, e 97-13  4-14-97 1 28-84 97-35  6-23-97 2 6-27 97-36  5-23-97 1 2-301(27-22) 97-45  9-22-97 2 28-374(a) 97-48 10-13-97 2 6-52 97-50 11-24-97 1 2-301(27-3) 98-02  1-12-98 1 25-51 98-07  4-27-98 2 10-38, 10-39 3 10-16 4       Rpld 10-17 98-08  4-27-98 1 2-301(10-33) 98-13  6-22-98 1 23-172 2 23-173(b) 3 23-174 98-14  5-22-98 1 28-292(f)(1) 98-21  7-13-98 1 28-292(f)(1) 98-28  8-10-98 2 3-1 2-301(3-1) 98-31 10-26-98 1 2-262 99-10  4-26-99 1 2-301(10-33) 99-17  6-14-99 28-392-28-396 2 12-871-12-874 99-26  8- 9-99 1 2-301(27-22) 2000-33  8-28-00 2 20-1(b) 20-2 20-3.1 20-4(b), (d) 20-8       Rpld 20-5 2000-34  9-25-00 2 23-85 2000-35  9-25-00 1 8-17 8-28(1), (2) 2000-38  9-25-00 2 28-226 3 28-312 2000-49 12-11-00 2 20-1(b) 2001-01  1- 8-01 1 13 2       Rpld 13-3 3       Rpld 13-18 4-7 13-23-13-26 8 13-60 9 13-70 2001-02  1- 8-01 1 25-3, 25-4 2 25-7 3 25-10 4       Rpld 25-9, 25-11, 25-11.1(e), 25-24, 25-36, 25-38, 25-45, 25-46, 25-48, 25-67-25-69, 25-71, 25-73, 25-75-25-89, 25-101-25-112 2001-04  1-22-01 2 28-246(a) 2001-08  2-12-01 2 20-1(b) 2001-12  2-12-01 1 13-1(e)-(g) 2001-13  2-26-01 2 28-382 2001-15  3-26-01 1 28-311(i)(1) 2001-29  8-13-02 2 28-394 2001-33  9-10-01 2 2-108(b)(2) 2001-40 10-22-01 2 20-1(b) 2001-50 12-10-01 2       Added 5-1(e) 3       Added 11-3 4 2-301(10-33) 2001-51 12-10-01 2 9-26-9-32 2001-52 12-10-01 1 2-301(9-34) 2002-04 2-11-02 2       Added 2-108(b)(10) 2002-22 7-22-02 1 28-350(2)a.3,(2)b.2       Added 28-350(2)b.2.iii, (2)b.4 2002-23 7-22-02 1 28-348 2002-25 8-12-02 2 24-24(a) 3 2-301(24-24) 2002-36 11-25-02 1 28-329 2002-37 11-25-02 1 28-3, 28-329       Added 28-296(b)(13), 28-279(c)(6) 2 12-451(b) 3 2-301(12-451) 2003-03 2-10-03 2 20-1(b) 2003-04 3-10-03 2       Added 28-259(7)a 2003-08 3-10-03 1 2-301(12-291) 2003-14 5-27-03 2 28-82(3), 28-103(a)(4), 
28-143(a)(2)d 2003-17 5-27-03 2 2-100(c) 2003-18 5-27-03 2       Added 2-100(d) 3 2-102(c)(1) 4 2-103(b), (g)(1) 4       Added 2-103(c)(2)e 2003-21 6-23-03 1 2-301(27-22) 2003-26 8-11-03 2 20-1(b), 20-2, 
20-4(b), (d), 20-8       Dltd 20-3.1 2003-30 8-25-03 2 27-1(a)(2) 2003-34 9-22-03 1, 2 1-10(a) 3       Added 1-10(c) 2003-35 9-22-03 2 25-7(b), 27-68, 28-31       Dltd 5-7(b), 5-31, 
5-70, 24-23(f), 
27-8(c), 27-87       Added 5-1001, 11-1001, 
11.5-8(b), (c), 12-1001 
16-1001, 17-1001, 
18-1001, 21-1001, 
22-1001, 24-23(f), (g) 
27-8(c), (d), 27-1001 2003-36 10-13-03 2       Added 2-223, 2-224 2003-48 11-10-03 2 28-239 2003-49 11-24-03 2 28-246(a) 2003-52 12-8-03 2       Dltd 6-28(a) 6-26.1, 6-27.1, 6-29       Rnbd 6-28(b)-(d)       as 6-28(a)-(c) 3 6-76, 6-77 4 6-101, 6-102(6), 6-103 4       Added 6.101.1, 6-102(8), (9) 5 6-241, 6-242 6       Added 6-901 7       Added 6-1001 8       Added 6-1101 9       Added 6-1201 10       Dltd 2-311       Added 6-1501, 6-1502 2003-53 12-8-03 2 6-51, 6-52 2003-54 12-8-03 2 6-126, 6-128 2003-55 12-8-03 2 9-123 3       Dltd 9-167 4       Added 9-1001 2003-56 12-8-03 2 23-114 2003-57 12-8-03 2       Added 28-348(8) 2003-58 12-8-03 1 27-26, 27-28 2004-06 2-9-04 2 2-301(12-13) 2004-09 2-23-04 2 20-1(b) 2004-11 3-22-04 2 28-3 3       Added 28-264 2004-13 4-12-04 2 2-301(12-855) 2004-14 4-26-04 2       Added 25-52 2004-15 4-26-04 1 13-16 2004-19 5-11-04 1       Added 2-801-2-810 2004-22 6-28-04 2       Added 23-133(d), 23-136 2004-34 9-27-04 2 2-21.1 3 2-151 2004-36 10-11-04 2 15-17(a) 2004-37 11-22-04 2       Added 28-259(7)b 2004-38 11-22-04 1 28-351 2004-39 11-22-04 1 6-101       Added 6-101.1 2 6-27.1 2004-40 11-22-04 2 6-126, 6-127 2004-48 12-13-04 2 28-329 2005-04 2-14-05 2 24-21(a), (b) 3 24-24(a)-(c) 4 24-25(a)-(c) 2005-06 2-28-05 2       Added 13-27 2005-07 3-14-05 2 4-20(1.1) 3 4-26(1.1) 2005-08 3-14-05 1 18-1, 18-3-18-5 2       Dltd 18-21-18-26 3       Added 18-31-18-35 2005-20 6-27-05 2 16-23 2005-21 8-22-05 2 25-50(a), (b) 2005-29 7-25-05 1 2-301(27-22(a)) 2005-30 7-25-05 2 2-301(27-9) 3       Added 27-9(c) 2005-35 9-12-05 2       Added 9-104 2005-36  9-26-05 2 28-81(b)(10)       Added 28-84(6) 3 28-255 2005-38 10-10-05 1 6-28(c) 2006-01 1-9-06 2       Added 6-28(d) 4       Added 6-56 2006-03 2-13-06 1 2-301(27-22(a)) 2006-07 3-13-06 3       Dltd 12-412, 12-856       Amded ch. 12, art. XXXV (title) 12-826-12-829, 
12-831, 12-855 4 2-301(12-13, 
12-46, 12-61, 
12-96, 12-161, 
12-202, 12-251, 
12-272, 12-332, 
12-352, 12-371, 
12-373, 12-431, 
12-451, 12-512, 
12-532, 12-552, 
12-567, 12-591, 
12-606, 12-712, 
12-731, 12-776, 
12-791, 12-827, 
12-846) 2006-09 3-27-06 2 ch. 3, art. II (title) 3 3-16 5       Added 3-17 2006-10 3-27-06 3       Added 28-352(1), (6)       Rnbd 28-352(1)-(4)       as 28-352(2)-(5) 2006-12  3-27-06 1 8-53(8) 2       Dltd 23-110 3       Added 23-117 4       Added 28-258(e)(2) 2006-18 5-22-06 2       Added 27-47(d) 2006-31 8-14-06 2       Added 25-53 2006-33 8-28-06 2 20-1(b) 2006-43 12-11-06 2 1-10(a) 3 2-301 4 5-1001(a) 5 6-1502(a) 6 9-1001(a) 7 10-39 8 11-1001(a) 9 12-1001(a) 10 13-70(a) 11 16-1001(a) 12 17-1001(a) 13 18-1001(a) 14 21-1001(a) 15 22-1001(a) 16 25-4 17 27-68, 27-1001(a) 18 28-31(a) 2007-05  2-12-07 2       Added 28-313 3 28-81(b)(10) 2007-06  2-26-07 2 20-1(b) 2007-17  4-23-07 2 2-87 3 6-27.1 2007-21  6-25-07 1 2-301 2007-30  9-24-07 2       Dltd 2-107 2007-32 10- 8-07 2, 3 4-48 2007-38 11-26-07 2       Added 19-50-19-52, 
19-1001 3       Added 13-28 2007-46 12-10-07 2(22-201-  22-224)       Added 22-15-22-38 2007-47 12-10-07 2       Added 7-20-7-26 2007-48 12-10-07 2       Added 7-1-7-4 2008-01 1-2-08 2 9-27 3 9-30 4, 5       Added 9-30.5, 9-30.6 6 9-40 2008-04 1-14-08 4       Rnbd 13-1(e)-(h)       as 13-1(f)-(i)       Added 13-1(e) 5 13-70(c) 2008-05  1-28-08 1-9       Added 9-39 2008-14 2-25-08 2 10-28 10-30(g) 10-34(a), (b)(5), (g) 10-35(g), (h) 2008-15 3-24-08 2 20-1(b) 2008-27  6-23-08 2 20-1(b) 2008-36 9-8-08 2       Added 13-29 2008-44 12-22-08 2 20-1(b) 2009-08 2-23-09 3       Added 6-1300-6-1303 2009-09 2-23-09 2 5-33 2009-16 3-9-09 2 20-1(b) 2009-17 3-3-09 3       Added 16-6 2009-51 7-27-09 2       Added ch. 1, art. I       Added 1-31-1-42 2009-52 7-27-09 2       Added 6-1502(d)       Added 6-1601-6-1615 3       Added 28-31(c) 2009-53 7-27-09 2       Added 25-4(c)       Added 25-100-25-112 2009-54 8-10-09 2 20-1(b) 2009-68 11-23-09 2 18-4 2009-76 12-14-09 2 20-1(b) 2010-02 2-8-10 1 25-4(b) 2 13-70(a) 2010-04 2-22-10 2 20-1(b) 2010-05 3-8-10 1 2-301 2010-07 3-8-10 2 12-9(b) 2010-10 3-22-10 2 6-1501 2010-11 3-22-10 1-10       Added 24-51-24-58 2010-12 3-22-10 1-6       Added 24-81-24-87 2010-13 3-22-10 2 2-301 2010-14 3-22-10 2 24-21(a) 24-23(e), (f) 24-24(a), (b)       Dltd 24-24(d) 2010-21 4-26-10 2       Added 24-24(d) 3 2-301 2010-23 6-14-10 2 20-1(b) 2010-24 7-12-10 2       Added 4-4-4-7 2011-06 2-28-11 2 4-16 4-18(a), (d) 4-20, 4-21(1) 4-21(18)-(21)       Added 4-21(22), (23) 4-25(a) 4-26 4-27(a)       Added 4-33 2011-09 5-9-11 2       Rnbd ch. 12, art. XL       as ch. 12, art. XLI       Added 12-880-12-890 2011-10 5-9-11 3 12-647 12-650 2-301 2011-17 6-13-11 2 2-45 2011-18  6-13-11 1 2-301 2011-24  8- 8-11 2       Added 22-10, 22-11 2012-03  2-13-12 2 28-3 28-246(e), (f) 28-272(b)(5) 28-274(a) 28-278(b)(3), (g) 28-292(b)(3), (4) 28-293(b)(6), (c) 28-295(c)       Added 28-329.1 28-349(7) 28-350 2012-08  4-23-12 2       Added 27-8(a)(1) 2012-09  5-14-12 2 20-1(b) 20-2, 20-3 3       Added 20-30-20-33 2012-21  7- 9-12 3 16-6 2012-22  8-27-12 2       Dltd 28-346-28-352       Added 28-346-28-351 2012-27 11-26-12 3       Added Ch. 8.5, §§ 
8.5-1-8.5-31 5       Added 2-25 2013-01  1-14-13 2 12-392(a), (c) 12-393, 12-394 2013-06  5-13-13 2 4-25(a)(3) 2013-11  6-10-13 2 20-1(b) 3 20-2 4       Added 20-5 2013-12  6-24-13 2 24-24(a) 3 2-301 2013-13  6-24-13 2 24-24(a) 2013-23 12- 9-13 2 28-82(3) 28-103(a)(4) 28-143(a)(2)d. 28-264(d)(9), (e)(3) 28-292(b)(3) 28-294(b)(1)       Dltd 28-294(b)(6) 28-349(d) 28-351 2014-12  6-23-14 2 24-24(d) 2014-16  7-14-14 2 2-301       Added 12-292 2015-12  7-13-15 2       Added 28-292(c)(6) 28-293(c)       Added 28-312(d)(2)f. 2015-19  8-10-15 2 11.5-3(a), 11.5-4(a), 11.5-5       Added 11.5-5.1, 11.5-5.2 11.5-6(a)(1), (5)       Added 11.5-6(a)(6), (7) 11.5-6(c)(2)a.       Added 11.5-6(d), (e) 11.5-7 2015-20  8-10-15 1 2-301 2015-22  8-24-15 2 28-374(a)(1) 2015-25  9-28-15 2       Added 4-20(8)       Rnbd 4-20(8), (9)       as 4-20(9), (10) 3       Added 4-25(a)(8)       Rnbd 4-25(a)(8), (9)       as 4-25(a)(9), (10) 4       Added 4-26(8)       Rnbd 4-26(8), (9)       as 4-26(9), (10) 2016-05  5- 9-16 1 2-301 2016-14  7-25-16 3       Added 16-7 2016-16  8-22-16 1 2-301 3 27-22(b) 2016-20 10-24-16 1 2-21 2 2-21.1 3 2-151 2016-22 11-28-16 3 4-17 4       Added 4-20(8), (9)       Rnbd 4-20(8)-(10)       as 4-20(10)-(12) 5       Added 4-25(a)(8), (9)       Rnbd 4-25(a)(8)-(10)       as 4-25(a)(10)-(12) 6       Added 4-26(8), (9)       Rnbd 4-26(8)-(10)       as 4-26(10)-(12) 2016-23 11-28-16 2 2-301 2017-01  1-23-17 2 2-102(c), (d) 3 2-103(b) 2017-07  3-18-17 2 20-1(b) 2017-09  3-27-17 2 9-27 3 9-28 4 9-29 5 9-30 6 9-30.5 7       Dltd 9-30.6 2017-15  6-12-17 2 4-26(9) 2017-33 10-23-17 2 28-313(b), (c)A.1., B.10., C.5., (d)H.2., H.5.(b), 28-506 2018-08  6-11-18 2 2-102(f), (g), 2-103(d)(2), (4) 2018-09  6-11-18 2 2-301 3 9-34 2018-13  7- 9-18 1       Added 19-71-19-82 2018-15  8-13-18 1       Added 12-163-12-169 2018-18  9-24-18 2 4-26(1) 2018-22 11-12-18 2 9-27(a) 3 9-30(a) 4 9-30.5 5       Added 9-30.7 2018-24 11-12-18 2 20-1(b) 2018-30 12-10-18 2 2-23 2018-33 12-10-18 2 20-1(b), 20-5 2019-03  1-28-19 1       Added 8-20 23-133(d)       Dltd 23-136  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Code, either in text or notes following the text, of references to the Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS). 
Illinois Compiled Statutes 
Chapter Section  Section 
this Code 5 275/1 et seq. 2-25 20 3305/10(c) 8.5-6 3305/15 8.5-6 50 45/1 et seq. 7-25 7-26 705/1 et seq. 20-31 65 Ch. 2 5/1-1-2 2-2 5/1-2.2 1-40 5/1-2.2-1 et seq. 1-31 5/1-2-1 5-7 5-31 13-7 25-24 25-36 5/1-2-1.1 5-7 5-31 13-7 25-24 25-36 5/1-3-1 2-261 5/3-5-9 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5 5/3-8-1 2-166 2-181 5/3-10-1 2-183 5/3-10-7 2-152 5/8-8-1 2-217 5/8-11-2 24-81-24-83 5/8-11-4 Ch. 24, Art. II 5/9-2-7 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 5/10-2.1-1 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 2-261 5/10-2.1-4 20-4 5/11-1-5 13-16 5/11-5-3 13-8 5/11-5-6 5-5 5/11-6-1 Ch. 9, Art. II 5/11-12-4 28-49 5/11-12-7 Ch. 23 5/11-13-1 Ch. 28 28-347 5/11-15.1-1 23-173(c)(1) 5/11-20-5 Ch. 11 5/11-20-9 Ch. 5 5/11-31.1 et seq. 1-32, 1-33 6-1601 6-1603 5/11-42-8 5-12 5/11-60-1 12-1 5/11-60-2 Ch. 16 205 510 et seq. 12-883 12-886 220 5/21-40 22-16 5/21-201(v) 22-16 5/21-301(c) 7-21 7-22 5/21-401 7-20 7-21 22-16 5/21-401(b)(6) 7-21 5/21-801 7-20 5/21-801(b) 7-20 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi) 7-20 5/21-801(d) 7-20 5/70-501 7-1 5/70-501(r)(1) 7-3 7-63 5/70-501(s) 7-4 50/1 et seq. 22-30 65/4 22-19 225 605/1 5-13 235 5/1-1 et seq. 4-20 5/Art. V 28-292 28-293 28-312 5/6-21 4-21 5/7-5 4-33 410 82/1 et seq. 13-1 13-70 430 65/0.01 et seq. 16-7 510 5/1 Ch. 5 5/8 5-32 5/12 5-7 5/13 5-7 70/1 5-5 605 5/1-101 et seq. 22-16 625 5/2-121 Ch. 24, Art. II 5/6-101 16-6 5/6-303 16-6 5/6-306.5 25-100 25-103 5/11-204 16-6 5/11-204.1 16-6 5/11-208 Ch. 25, Art. II 5/11-208.3 25-100 25-102 25-112 5/11-208.3(f) 25-103 5/11-208.7 16-6 5/11-501 16-6 5/11-503 16-6 5/11-504 16-6 5/11-601.5 16-6 5/11-1301 Ch. 25, Art. II 5/11-1306 25-102 5/11-1413 16-6 5/13 et seq. 16-6 5/24-1 16-6 720 5/1-1 et seq. 13-1 5/11-6 16-6 5/12-2 16-6 5/12-4 16-6 5/12-4.2 16-6 5/12-4.3 16-6 5/12-4.6 16-6 5/16A-3 16-6 5/18-1 16-6 5/18-2 16-6 5/19-1 16-6 5/19-3 16-6 5/20-1 16-6 5/20-1.1 16-6 5/20-2 16-6 5/21-1 16-6 art. 24 13-29 5/25-1 16-6 600/3.5 16-6 650/1 9-8 725 150/1 et seq. 16-6 735 5/3-101 et seq. 6-1613 25-109 5/301 et seq. 25-110 5/2-203 25-112 745 10/5-101 Ch. 9, Art. II 765 Ch. 23  
