6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 1/923
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Carbondale, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2019-03,
passed February 12, 2019. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City
Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether
any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE REVISED CODE OF THE CITY OF CARBONDALE, ILLINOIS, 1998.
WHEREAS, the City of Carbondale, Illinois, is a home rule unit of local government under the Illinois Constitution,
1970, Article VII, Section 6; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to Article VII, Section 6(a), of the Illinois Constitution, 1970, the City of Carbondale may
exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs including, but not limited to, the
power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; and
WHEREAS, the City of Carbondale is considering a revision and codification of the general ordinances of the City of
Carbondale; and
WHEREAS, the Revised Code of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, 1998, has previously been submitted to the City
Council for consideration and review, thereby ready for action at this time; and
WHEREAS, Exhibit "A" herein attached1 shall be used to represent the Revised Code of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois, 1998; and
WHEREAS, the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Carbondale require that this ordinance, and
the Code adopted thereby, take effect immediately upon its passage.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CARBONDALE, ILLINOIS, AS
FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1 . That the printed pamphlet attached to this ordinance as Exhibit "A", shall represent the proposed
Revised Code of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, 1998, in its entirety, and is hereby made a part of this ordinance by
reference;
SECTION 2. That the Revised Code of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, 1998, consists of Title 1, Agencies, Officers
and Employees; Title 2, Alcoholic Liquor; Title 3, Animals; Title 4, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Housing
Regulations; Title 5, Business and Occupations; Title 6, Cemeteries; Title 7, Finance, Taxation and Business Affairs of
the City; Title8, Fire Prevention and Regulations; Title 9, Transportation; Title 10, Garbage and Other Refuse; Title 11,
Health and Safety; Title 12, Library; Title 13, Nuisances; Title 14, Offenses and Penalties; Title 15, Planning, Zoning and
Subdivisions; Title 16, Public Utilities and Other Enterprises; Title 17, Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Property; Title
18, Traffic Regulations; Title 19, Cable Communications; Title 20, General and Miscellaneous Provisions; Title 21,
Boundaries of the City of Carbondale, Illinois; and Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I. The entirety of the Code, as
represented by Exhibit "A", shall hereinafter be referred to the as the Revised Code of the City of Carbondale, Illinois,
1998.
SECTION 3. That all ordinances approved by the Carbondale City Council on or after the date of publication of the
Revised Code of Carbondale, Illinois, 1998, shall be amendments to the Revised Code of the City of Carbondale, 1998.
SECTION 4. That the action taken by the Council in this Ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or
done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or occurring before the effective date of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 2/923
ordinance; nor shall such action affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for
the City or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract
or obligations assumed by the City; nor shall such action affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City
Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such codes; nor shall it affect any ordinance or resolution
imposing taxes not in conflict with such code; nor shall it affect any ordinance relative to salaries and wages of City
officers and employees, nor shall it affect any right of a franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the City on any
person, firm, or corporation, not in conflict with said Code; nor shall it affect the annual appropriation ordinance; nor shall
it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on, before, or prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall it affect ordinances or prior to the effective date of this ordinance; and
SECTION 5 . That the City Clerk of the City of Carbondale is hereby authorized to publish this ordinance in pamphlet
form, immediately.
SECTION 6 . That all ordinances and parts thereof in conflict herewith are expressly repealed and are of no other
force and effect.
SECTION 7. That the adoption of the 1998 Revised Code of Carbondale shall not affect any rights accrued or liability
incurred by the City to the effective date hereof.
SECTION 8. That it is the intention of the City Council of the City of Carbondale that this Ordinance and every
provision thereof shall be considered separable, and the invalidity of any section, clause, or provision of this Ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this Ordinance.
SECTION 9. The provisions of this Ordinance insofar as they are the same or substantially the same as those of any
prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of said prior ordinances.
SECTION 10. That the City Council of the City of Carbondale finds that the subject matter of this Ordinance pertains
to the government and affairs of the City of Carbondale and is passed pursuant to authorities granted it by State statutes
and the Home Rule powers of the City of Carbondale pursuant to the provisions of Article VII, Section 6(a) of the Illinois
Constitution.
SECTION 11. This ordinance, including Exhibit "A", representing the Revised Code of the City of Carbondale, Illinois,
1998, attached hereto which is a part hereof, having been approved by a vote of 2/3 of all members holding office on this
Council, and its adoption being a matter of urgency for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of
the City of Carbondale, shall take effect immediately upon its passage.
SECTION 12. That this Ordinance shall be known as Ordinance No. 99-02 of the Ordinances of the City of
Carbondale, Illinois, and is of great public importance and urgency and that the terms of the Ordinance shall be in full
force and effect immediately upon its passage and approval.
Footnote 1: Exhibit "A" is attached to Ordinance 99-02 on file in the City Clerk's office.
Title 1
AGENCIES, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Chapter 1
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
1-1-1: OATH OF OFFICE:
A. Requirement: The mayor, council members, and all officers, elected or appointed, shall, before entering upon the
duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the oath or affirmation prescribed by the constitution. Such oath
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 3/923
or affirmation, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The oath of office shall, in all cases, be
administered by the city clerk, except his own oath, which shall be administered by the mayor.
B. Time Of Administering: The oath of office shall be administered to the mayor and council members at the first regular
council meeting in the month of May following the certification of results by the county clerk for the election at which
the mayor and council members were elected. (Ord. 2007-05)
1-1-2: HOLDING OTHER OFFICE DURING TERM PROHIBITED:
No mayor, council member, or city clerk shall hold any other office under the city government during his term of office.
(R.O. 1929 Ch. XIV § 6; Ord. 1680 § 1)
1-1-3: AUDIT:
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than six (6) months thereafter, there shall be an audit
of all accounts of the city made by a competent person, authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of Illinois, to be
designated by the city council. Copies of such audit report shall be filed with the city clerk and with the director of the
state department of revenue and in such other places as may be required by law. (Ord. 1504 Art. XII § 1)
1-1-4: SALARIES:
A. Provided In Budget: All officers and employees of the city shall receive the salaries provided for such officers and
employees by the city's annual budget for the fiscal year.
B. Compensation Eligibility: No person shall receive or be entitled to the salary or compensation established for more
than one office, regardless of any additional duties that may be performed, in the absence of specific provisions from
the city council. Any salary or compensation of any appointed official or employee whose term of office is not set and
made definite by statute may be changed at any time by ordinance. (Ord. 1504 Art. XII § 2)
1-1-5: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
Any officer or employee assigned to any department or division thereof may be required to perform work in any other
department or division by the city manager. (Ord. 1504 Art. XII § 3)
1-1-6: CITY EMPLOYEE INDEMNIFICATION PLAN:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this chapter and indemnification plan, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: The city of Carbondale.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Carbondale.
EMPLOYEE: Includes the mayor and members of the city council and all persons working directly for the city who
are working under the direction and control of the council, the city manager or one of its designated officials or
subordinates, and who are receiving their remuneration for such work from the city of Carbondale. The term
"employee" shall not include any person or organization who is employed by the city as an independent contractor.
The term "employee" shall include all elected officials of the city and any person serving on a board, commission or
task force duly established by ordinance of the city council.
PERFORMANCE OF DUTY: Does not include any act or omission constituting deliberate and intentional tortious
conduct or criminal conduct.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 4/923
B. Liability Rests With City: The city council hereby declares that the city will defend, save harmless, and indemnify any
employee against any tort or professional liability claim or demand, whether groundless or otherwise, arising out of an
alleged act or omission to act occurring in the performance of duty; that the city may comprise and settle any such
claim or suit and pay the amount of any settlement or judgment rendered thereon. The city shall designate an
attorney who will represent the city or official in such litigations.
C. Liability Denied: Defense or indemnification may be withheld by the city to any employee in any of the following
circumstances:
1. If an employee fails to use due care in reporting to the city insurance officer and to the employee's department
head any incident which might reasonably expect to result in a claim of liability against him or the city.
2. If any employee fails to notify the city of any notice of claim or summons and complaint served upon him
commencing a suit for damage reimbursable under this plan. Such notice shall be given to the city attorney or city
clerk within five (5) business days of its service upon the employee.
3. If any employee refuses to cooperate with an investigation or defense of any lawsuit by the city attorney's office or
any attorney retained by or for the city to furnish defense to said employee, or to investigate such tort or
professional liability claim. (Ord. 77-99)
D. Adherence To Terms Of Policy: In construing and administering the provisions of this section, the city shall utilize its
insurance coverage to the fullest extent. The city is under no obligation to indemnify any employee for an act
concerning that for which the city has no insurance coverage and any indemnification on the part of the city is
specifically limited to the extent of said insurance coverage. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to add any
additional insurance coverage, and shall not be used by any insurance carrier or any third party as a waiver of any
defense which the city or employee might have at law. (Ord. 77-99; 1998 Code)
E. Subrogation: In the event of any payment under this plan, the city shall be subrogated to all of the employee's rights of
recovery therefor against any person or organization and the employee shall execute and deliver instruments and
papers and do whatever else is necessary to secure such rights. The employee shall do nothing after loss to
prejudice such rights.
F. Continued Coverage: Any defense and indemnification available to an employee under this plan shall continue to be
available to him after the termination of his employment so long as the act or omission causing his liability occurred
during the course of his duties while an employee of the city. Such defense and indemnification shall not be available
to a former employee, however, in the event that the tort of professional liability claim against him is asserted as a
counterclaim or set off in any suit brought by the employee, except to the extent that the liability of such employee
may exceed the amount of his own claim or suit.
G. Authority: The city council finds that the subject matter of this section pertains to the government and affairs of the city
and is passed pursuant to the home rule powers of the city. (Ord. 77-99)
Chapter 2
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
1-2-1: ORGANIZATION AND POWERS:
The city council shall consist of the mayor and six (6) council members, elected at large from the city as provided by law.
The council shall be purely legislative except as may otherwise be provided by law. (Ord. 2003-23)
1-2-2: QUALIFICATIONS FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE:
No person shall be eligible for any elective office who is not a qualified elector of the city and who shall not have resided
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 5/923
therein at least one year next preceding his election, nor shall any person be eligible for any office who is a defaulter of
the corporation. (1929 Code ch. XIV §§ 4, 14)
1-2-3: ELECTION AND TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES:
A. Election; Term: The mayor and council members shall be elected for a period of four (4) years and shall hold their
respective offices until the next quadrennial general election for such officers, respectively, or until their successors
are elected and qualified.
B. Vacancy: In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor or city council member, an appointment to fill the vacancy in
the office of mayor or city council member shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes governing such appointment. (Ord. 96-84)
C. Primary Election: In those cases where a nonpartisan primary election is required pursuant to the Illinois municipal
code1, the primary shall be held for the respective contested office or offices, and those candidates in the primary,
who receive the top two (2) number of votes for each respective office, shall be placed on the ballot for the general
election for each of the respective position of mayor, or city council person. No person may be elected to the position
of mayor, or city council, as a write in candidate, after a nonpartisan primary is held, without full compliance of all
requirements as set out in the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 2011-46)
1-2-4: COMPENSATION:
A. Salaries Fixed: The compensation of the mayor and any council member shall be fixed by ordinance. The salaries for
the mayor and council shall be as follows and shall continue until changed by ordinance:
Position FY 98 Effective May 1, 1997 FY 99 Effective May 1, 1998
Mayor $8,400.00 $9,000.00
Council member 3,900.00 4,200.00
B. Available Benefits: In addition to the compensation provided for in subsection A of this section, the mayor and each
council member shall be eligible to participate in any insurance program offered by the city to its nonunion personnel
on the same basis as accorded to the nonunion personnel. The mayor and council members shall be eligible to
participate in any other benefit program provided by law, including, but not limited to, the Illinois municipal retirement
fund. (Ord. 93-05)
1-2-5: OATH:
The mayor and council members shall each take oath. (Ord. 1347 § 4)
ARTICLE A. MAYOR
1-2A-1: OFFICIAL HEAD OF CITY:
The Mayor shall be the official head of the City for and for all legal purposes in relationship to the Governor. (Ord. 1347
§ 10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 6/923
1-2A-2: APPOINTMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided by City ordinance, the Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint
members of all committees, commissions and boards authorized by the Council. (Ord. 1347 § 12)
1-2A-3: MAYOR PRO TEM:
The Mayor shall, from time to time, as he sees fit, select from the membership of the Council a Mayor Pro Tem to
discharge the duties of the Mayor whenever the Mayor is absent from the City or is otherwise unable to discharge his
duties. Should the Mayor become incapacitated or is otherwise unable to discharge his duties, and no Mayor Pro Tem
has been selected, the Council Member who last served as Mayor Pro Tem shall be the Mayor Pro Tem until such time
the Mayor is able to discharge his duties or a replacement is selected. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have full power and
authority to discharge all duties of the office of Mayor whenever the Mayor is incapacitated or is otherwise unable to
discharge his duties. (Ord. 91-27)
1-2A-4: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The Mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the City Council; provided, that in the absence of the
Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall be the presiding officer. The Mayor shall vote on all questions coming before the
Council. (Ord. 1347 § 6; revised 6-30-1980, 4-01-1989, 8-01-1991)
1-2A-5: POWERS DURING CIVIL EMERGENCY:
A. Definitions:
CIVIL EMERGENCY: A. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat
to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without
authority of law; or
B. Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or
explosion within the corporate limits of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any
alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the City of Carbondale, Illinois,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
emergency.
B. Emergency Declared: Whenever an "emergency" as defined in subsection A of this Section exists, the Mayor shall
declare the existence by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
C. Impose Curfew: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable to
such geographical areas of the City or to the City as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable during such
hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
D. Additional Orders: After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also in the interest of the public safety
and welfare make any or all of the following orders:
1. Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the
consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted.
2. Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 7/923
3. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible
products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
4. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any
character whatsoever.
5. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. The orders authorized
in this subsection may be made singly, together, or in conjunction with the curfew order authorized in this Section.
E. Period Of Emergency Proclamation: The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty eight
(48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating that the civil emergency no longer
exists. The Mayor shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of civil emergency at the end of each forty eight
(48) hour period during the time the said civil emergency exists.
F. Posting And Publishing Notice: Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police shall notify the
news media situated within the City, and shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of
the emergency to be posted at the following places within the City: the City Hall, the police station and the post office.
G. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Section or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty
of an offense against the City, and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
H. Protection Of Power: Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to impair the powers granted to the Police
and Fire Departments in this Code, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. (Ord. 1446 §§ 1_8)
ARTICLE B. CITY COUNCIL
1-2B-1: MEETINGS:
A. Length Of Meetings: Unless otherwise called in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, City Council meetings will
begin at six o'clock (6:00) P.M., and will run until all business is completed. In the event there is any unfinished
business, that unfinished business will be completed at the next regular City Council meeting or, in the alternative, a
special City Council meeting may be called. (Ord. 2018-02)
B. Smoking Prohibited: There will be no smoking allowed in the City Council Chambers during Council meetings.
C. City Council Agenda:
1. The items to be considered at the Council meeting will be those items appearing on the published agenda.
2. An agenda will be prepared by the City Manager's Office and anyone desiring to be listed on the agenda should
contact the City Manager's Office to guarantee a place on the agenda. An opportunity will be provided at each
meeting under citizen comments and questions for members of the public to raise questions and make comments
on issues which do not appear on the agenda. (Ord. 87-45)
D. Consent Agenda: Each agenda may contain one or more groupings of items referred to as a "consent agenda".
These items will be matters which in the judgment of the City Manager appear to be routine and noncontroversial,
including, but not limited to, the approval of minutes and reports of bills paid. Those items on the consent agenda that
are voted on in one motion will be recorded individually by the Clerk in the Council minutes. The Mayor will give the
City Council members and the public an opportunity to request the removal of items from the consent agenda. Once
removed from the consent agenda, the item(s) will be treated as a separate matter immediately after approval of the
consent agenda items. (Ord. 2009-56)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 8/923
E. Discussions: The City Council desires a full discussion of all issues presented at the City Council meetings. In order to
facilitate full discussion, citizens' comments shall be limited to four (4) minutes in order to ensure that all parties
wishing to provide comments to the City Council are given an opportunity to do so, and to allow the City Council
reasonable time to fully discuss all meeting agenda items in a single meeting. In addition, comments under the
agenda item "citizens' comments and questions", for citizen comments on items not otherwise listed on the agenda,
are limited to four (4) minutes. The Mayor or any Council person may move to suspend the four (4) minute limitation
to ensure a comprehensive understanding of the comments being made. The four (4) minute limitation on citizen
comments shall be suspended if at least four (4) members of the City Council agree to do so. (Ord. 2016-70)
F. Tape Recording: A tape recording will be made of all Council meetings pursuant to the State Open Meetings Act.
These recordings will be retained and preserved by the City Clerk for future reference according to law. (Ord. 2009-
39)
G. Closed Meeting: The City Council may go into closed meeting at any Council meeting provided there is compliance
with the State Open Meetings Act including, but not limited to, the following:
1. That the subject to be discussed during the closed meeting is one of the enumerated exceptions listed in said
Open Meetings Act;
2. That a majority of a quorum at a meeting open to the public has voted to have such a closed meeting;
3. That proper notice was given for the meeting at which the vote was taken;
4. That the vote of each council member on the question of holding the closed meeting was recorded and entered in
the minutes of the open meeting;
5. That the motion to hold the closed meeting and the minutes of the meeting must contain the specific reason for
which the closed meeting is to be held, and only topics specified in the motion may be discussed at the closed
meeting. (Ord. 87-45)
H. Regular Meetings:
1. Regular meetings of the city council shall be established annually by motion of the city council. However, the city
council may also from time to time alter the days of its regular meetings by motion. Such motion shall be made and
approved at a regular meeting at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting day which is being altered and shall set
forth the amended date and time of the meeting so altered.
2. The city clerk shall annually prepare and disseminate by January 1 of each year to all news media, which have
filed an annual request for such, a schedule of the city council's regular meetings listing the times and locations of
the meetings. (Ord. 2009-39)
I. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any two (2) council members upon forty eight (48)
hours' notice to every member of the council and news media; provided, that such notice shall not be required for any
special meeting that is called at a public meeting of the council and at which all members of the council are present. It
shall be the duty of the city clerk to serve notice of the meeting upon all members of the council and upon the news
media as required by the open meetings act. (Ord. 87-45)
1-2B-2: ADDRESSING MEETINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to address or attempt to address any regular or special meeting of the council without
the consent of the mayor or the consent of the majority of the members present. (Ord. 1347 § 8)
1-2B-3: DISTURBING MEETINGS; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt any regular or special meeting of the council. Any person who violates the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense against the city and punishable by a fine not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1347 § 9; Ord. 97-166)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 9/923
1-2B-4: VOTING RIGHTS OF MEMBERS:
Each member of the council shall have the right to vote on all questions coming before the council. (1929 Code § 13-1)
1-2B-5: QUORUM; VOTING:
Four (4) members of the council shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of those members present
shall be necessary to adopt any motion, resolution, or ordinance, or pass any measure, except where otherwise provided
by city ordinance. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-2B-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
All meetings will be conducted under the provisions of "Robert's Rules Of Order Newly Revised" whenever applicable
and whenever they are not inconsistent with city ordinance or state law. (Ord. 2009-56)
1-2B-7: REVENUE AND EXPENSE:
The council shall levy all taxes, apportion and appropriate all funds and allow all bills, accounts, claims and payrolls and
order the payment thereof. (1929 Code § 13-3)
1-2B-8: CONTRACTS:
The council shall make or authorize the making of contracts with the city by motion, resolution or ordinance adopted by
the council. (Ord. 84-23)
1-2B-9: REMOVAL OF APPOINTEES:
The council may, by a majority vote of those council members present, remove any officer or employee appointed by
them except as provided in the managerial form of municipal government. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-2B-10: NAMING CITY FACILITIES AND ESTABLISHMENT OF PLAQUES AND MEMORIALS:
The council shall, by a majority vote of those council members present, approve the honorary naming of any streets
within the city of Carbondale, the naming of any government building under the control of the city of Carbondale, the
placement of any statues or memorials by the city honoring any person or event within the city of Carbondale, the
placement on any city building or structure of any plaque or inscription honoring any individual person or recognizing an
individual person, or any other commemoration as an official act of the city of Carbondale. No monuments or plaques
shall cover or obscure any existing monuments or plaques or cornerstones. The city shall immediately move to a new
location any plaques or monuments covering or obscuring the existing plaques, monuments, or cornerstones. (Ord.
2012-55)
1-2B-11: ORDER FOR LISTING OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
The order of listing of the council members for all official purposes shall have the mayor listed first, followed by the then
sitting council in alphabetical order of the council member's last name. (Ord. 2013-25)
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 10/923
ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER
1-3A-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
The office of city manager is hereby created. (Ord. 1504 Art. 1 § 1)
1-3A-2: APPOINTMENT:
The city manager shall be appointed by the city council for an indefinite term as provided by law. He shall be the
administrative head of the municipal government and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all
departments. He shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs and need not be a resident of the city when
appointed. (1998 Code)
1-3A-3: GENERAL DUTIES:
A. Enforce Ordinances: The city manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him by statute and
such other authority as may be granted by the city council. He shall be charged with the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances within the municipality.
B. Attend Meetings: The city manager shall attend all meetings of the council with the right to take part in the discussion,
but with no right to vote; and he shall recommend to the council such actions as may be necessary or expedient for
the welfare of the city.
C. Yearly Report: The city manager shall, immediately after the close of the fiscal year, prepare and submit to the city
council, an annual report of the state of affairs of the city. (Ord. 1504 Art. 1 § 3)
1-3A-4: EMPLOYEES:
The city manager shall appoint, suspend or remove all employees of the city. All employees hired by the city manager
shall be at such compensation as may be set or authorized by the city council. All employees shall perform their duties
subject to the direction of the city manager or that of the superior to whom the city manager may assign such employee.
These appointments shall be consistent with employment rules and compensation as is then currently in place for all city
employees and the city manager shall not enter into unique or additional employment contract terms with the appointee
without specific approval of the city council. (Ord. 2015-45)
1-3A-5: OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS:
A. Appointments: All directors of administrative departments of the city shall be filled by appointment by the city manager
except where otherwise provided by law and this chapter; and the city manager shall report to the mayor and council
such appointments, or any removal from office, made by him as soon as possible after the appointment. These
appointments shall be consistent with employment rules and compensation as are then currently in place for all city
employees and the city manager shall not enter into unique or additional employment contract terms with the
appointee without specific approval of the city council. This authority to appoint or remove shall not be construed to
include the elected officers or any commissions, boards or committees heretofore established or which may hereafter
be created by the council.
B. Removal From Office: Every administrative department of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the
city manager, who shall have the power to remove from office any officer appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 2015-
45)
1-3A-6: CONTRACTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 11/923
A. Signature: The city manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be a party, and may sign on
behalf of the city any contract authorized by the city council, excepting where the council directs that some other
officer or officers shall do so.
B. Performance: It shall be the duty of the city manager to see to it that all terms of any contract to which the city is a
party are fully performed by all parties thereto. (Ord. 1504 Art. 1 § 6)
1-3A-7: PURCHASES:
The city manager shall be general purchasing agent of the city, and except where specific provision to the contrary is
made by law or by the council, he shall make all purchases of supplies, materials and equipment authorized by the
council, in the manner prescribed by, and subject to the limitations imposed by law. No purchase shall be made or
obligation incurred except upon authorization by the council, and no expense shall be incurred, except for the purpose
for which no prior appropriation is required by law, if the amount thereof is not covered by an unexpected appropriation
for the purpose. (Ord. 1504 Art. 1 § 7)
1-3A-8: BUDGETS AND LEVIES:
A. Annual Budget And Projected Tax Levy: It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be prepared each year the
annual budget in time for consideration and enactment by the council, as provided by law, and to prepare the tax levy
ordinance for passage and file a certified copy thereof with the county clerk within the time required by law.
B. Capital Improvements Program: On or before April 1 of each year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a
proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year, an accompanying budget message, and a five (5) year capital
improvements program. The proposed budget shall present a complete revenues and expenditures plan for each
fund, except bond funds and special assessment funds. (Ord. 1504 Art. 1 § 8)
1-3A-9: PERMIT TO TEMPORARILY CLOSE STATE HIGHWAY:
The city manager is hereby designated as the proper local official to apply for issuance of permits from the department of
transportation of the state to temporarily close, work along or underneath, any portion of a state highway within the city
limits for public purposes or for the temporary needs of the city. (Ord. 1595 § 1)
1-3A-10: OFFICE MAINTAINED:
The city manager shall maintain an office in the city hall and shall spend full time in the performance of his duties. (Ord.
1504 Art. 1 § 15)
1-3A-11: AUTHORITY TO LEASE CITY OWNED REAL ESTATE:
The city manager is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement for the lease of city owned real estate in accordance
with this title, or in such manner as the city manager may determine. (Ord. 97-165; 1998 Code)
1-3A-12: ABSENCE FROM CITY:
In the event that the city manager shall be absent from the city or incapacitated from performing the duties of his
position, he shall designate a qualified administrative officer to act as city manager during his absence or incapacity.
Upon the failure of the city manager to designate a qualified administrative officer to act as city manager, the council
shall, in its discretion, so designate. (Ord. 1729)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 12/923
1-3A-13: OPERATION OF CIVIC CENTER:
The city manager is hereby authorized to set operating rules, rental room rates, ancillary service fees, hours of operation
and other guidelines for the Civic Center. (Ord. 96-38)
ARTICLE B. CITY CLERK
1-3B-1: EMPLOYMENT, DISCIPLINE, COMPENSATION AND RESIDENCY:
A. The city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager, with the consent of the city council, and shall serve an indefinite
period as an at will employee.
B. The city manager, with the consent of the city council, may remove the city clerk whenever the interests of the city
demand removal of the clerk who shall serve an indefinite period as an at will employee.
C. The city clerk shall receive compensation in an amount to be set out in the budget established by the city council.
D. The city clerk shall be governed in accordance with the nonbargaining unit employees rules and regulations.
E. The city clerk shall have the same residency requirements as city department heads and shall, within six (6) months
of being appointed, reside within the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale as a condition of employment.
F. The city clerk shall, in addition to his or her other duties, work with the mayor and city council members concerning city
business. (Ord. 2012-57)
1-3B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Corporate Seal; Public Records; Council Meetings: The city clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided by the
corporate authorities, and all papers belonging to the municipality the custody and control of which are not given to
other officers. The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council and keep a full record of its proceedings in its
journal.
B. Court Certified Copies As Evidence: Copies of all papers duly filed in the city clerk's office and transcripts from the
journals and other records and files of the office, certified by the clerk under the corporate seal, shall be evidence in
all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced.
C. City Elections: The city clerk shall serve as local election official and shall be responsible for the conduct of city
elections in accordance with the Illinois election code.
D. Compliance With Statutes: In coordination with the city attorney's office, the city clerk shall monitor the city's
compliance with the Illinois local records act1, open meetings act2, and freedom of information act3.
E. Archivist: The city clerk shall serve as custodian of the city's archives. (1998 Code)
1-3B-3: DELIVER PAPERS FOR LITIGATION TO CITY ATTORNEY:
The city clerk shall deliver to the city attorney and city manager any notice, summons, subpoena or necessary paper
filed in or delivered to the clerk's office which pertains to any suit or proceeding. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 13/923
1-3B-4: PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES:
A. Availability To Public: Copies of all ordinances published in pamphlet form shall be made available to the public within
ten (10) days of the passage by the city council:
1. By publishing said ordinance in a newspaper published within the city;
2. By publishing said ordinance in pamphlet form.
B. Copy To Library: The city clerk shall use discretion in determining which method is to be used when publishing each
ordinance. Further, the city clerk shall send a copy of all ordinances published in pamphlet form to any public library
located within the city. (1998 Code)
1-3B-5: DEPUTY CITY CLERK:
A. Appointment: The deputy city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager in accordance with the nonunion personnel
rules and regulations.
B. Execute Documents: The deputy city clerk shall have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any
law to be executed by the city clerk, and affix the seal of the clerk thereto whenever required. In signing any
document the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the clerk followed with the word "by" and the deputy clerk's own
name and the words "Deputy Clerk".
C. Exercise Duties In Absence Of Clerk: The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised only in the absence
of the city clerk from the place where the clerk's office is maintained, and only when either direction has been given
by the clerk to such deputy to exercise such power, or the corporate authorities have determined by resolution that
the city clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function. When authorized as herein
provided, the signature affixed by any such deputy in the manner herein prescribed on any document including, but
not limited to, contracts, bonds or other obligations of the municipality, such document shall have the same effect as if
the documents so executed had been signed by the city clerk in person. (1998 Code)
ARTICLE C. CITY TREASURER
1-3C-1: APPOINTMENT; BOND:
The Director of Finance shall be the appointed City Treasurer. The City Treasurer will furnish a public official's bond for a
minimum amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) above the normal limit included in the City's insurance for public
officials and employees liability coverage. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the City and shall be filed with the City
Clerk. (1998 Code)
1-3C-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer:
A. Cash Management System: To establish and maintain a cash management system that provides for:
1. The receipt of all monies belonging to the City and shall keep the Treasurer's books and accounts in the manner
prescribed by ordinance.
2. Disbursement of monies upon all warrants payable as approved by the City Council and countersigned by the City
Clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 14/923
3. Disbursement of monies upon all approved invoices, contracts and payrolls when payments are due and payable
prior to the next City Council meeting for approval of the warrant. All such payments shall be included on the
warrant list for approval at the next regular scheduled City Council meeting.
B. Investment Policy: To establish and maintain an investment policy that provides compliance with statutory, fiduciary,
prudence and due diligence requirements for the preservation of public funds.
C. Investments Of Pension Funds: To invest idle monies in securities as authorized and amended from time to time by
the State for general corporate purposes and for the board of trustees of the City's Firefighter's Pension Fund and the
Police Pension Fund.
D. Monetary Agreements: To enter into agreements of anyindefinite or definite term regarding the deposit, redeposit,
investment, reinvestment, or withdrawal of Municipal funds.
E. Annual Report: To prepare the annual City Treasurer's report as required by the State within six (6) months of the end
of the fiscal year, and file said report with the City Clerk for publication, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-35-65.
F. Bond Records: To prepare and keep all bond issue registers and register bearer bonds when required by City
bondholders. (1998 Code)
1-3C-3: MISUSE OF PUBLIC FUNDS:
The City Treasurer shall be expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the public monies or warrants in
his custody or keeping for his own use or benefit or that of any other persons whomsoever. For any violation of this
provision the City Treasurer shall be liable on the public officials bond for the amount of money thus misapplied and shall
be subject to immediate removal from the office by the City Council. (1998 Code)
ARTICLE D. BUDGET OFFICER
1-3D-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
By virtue of such statutes there is hereby created the office of Budget Officer who shall be designated by the City
Manager and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. (Ord. 1486 § 2)
1-3D-2: STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
As it pertains to the Budget Officer, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 9.10 is hereby adopted by the City.
(Ord. 1486 § 1)
1-3D-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Permit and encourage the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal
management procedures.
B. Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.3.
C. Examine all books and records of all Municipal departments, commissions, and boards, which relate to monies
received by the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the Municipality,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 15/923
Municipal departments, commissions, and boards, debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the
Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions and boards.
D. Obtain such additional information from the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions, and boards as may be
useful to the Budget Officer for purposes of compiling a Municipal budget, such information to be furnished by the
Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions, and boards in the formrequired by the Budget Officer. Any
department, commission, or board which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the
Budget Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the Municipality until
such Municipal department, commission, or board shall comply in full with the request of the Budget Officer.
E. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the Municipality, Municipal
departments, commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 1486 § 3)
1-3D-4: COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF BUDGET:
The Budget Officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenues available to the Municipality for
the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the Municipality and all of the
Municipality's departments, commissions, and boards. The budget shall be itemized in a manner consistent with a chart
of accounts as may now or in the future be consistent with the accounting system of the City. The budget shall contain
actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the
budget is prepared. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made.
(Ord. 1486 § 4; 1970 Illinois Constitution Art. V § 17)
1-3D-5: PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET, EFFECT:
Passage of the annual budget by the corporate authorities shall be deemed passage of the appropriation ordinance as
required by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9. (Ord. 1486 § 5)
1-3D-6: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND:
In the preparation by the budget officer of the annual budget, one-half of one percentum (0.5%) of equalized assessed
value of property subject to taxation by the municipality may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or
purposes of specific capital improvements, repairs, and/or replacements of specific types of municipal equipment or
other tangible property to be designated as the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund. Expenditures from the
capital improvement, repair or replacement fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital improvement,
repair or replacement will occur. Upon the completion or abandonment of any object for which the capital improvement,
repair or replacement fund, or should any surplus monies remain after the completion or abandonment of any object for
which the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund was inaugurated, then such funds no longer necessary for
capital improvement, repair or replacement shall be transferred into the general corporate fund of the municipality on the
first day of the fiscal year following such abandonment, completion, or discovery of surplus funds. (Ord. 1486 § 6)
1-3D-7: TRANSFER OF FUNDS:
Directors of administrative departments, boards and commissions may, with the prior approval of the budget officer and
the city manager effectuate transfers of funds between line items within budget divisions and may thereby delete, add or
change line items within budget divisions. All other revision by transfer, deletion or adding or changing budgeted items
shall be accomplished by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are
required. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-3D-8: FUNDS FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES:
The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 16/923
budget, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote of those council members present. (Ord.
2005-46)
1-3D-9: TIME FOR ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
The annual budget shall be adopted by the city council before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. (Ord.
1486 § 9)
1-3D-10: PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARING ON BUDGET:
The city council shall make the annual budget conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten (10) days priorto
the passage of the annual budget, by publication in the journal of the proceedings of the city council or in such other form
as the city council may prescribe. Not less than one week after the publication of the annual budget, and prior to final
action on the budget, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing on the annual budget. Notice of the hearing
shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality at least one week prior to the
time of the hearing. (Ord. 1486 § 10)
Chapter 4
HUMAN RESOURCES AND PERSONNEL POLICY
1-4-1: DECLARATION OF PERSONNEL POLICY:
The following personnel principles and policies are established:
A. Employment in the City government shall be based on merit and free of personal and political considerations.
B. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency
and economy.
C. "Equal pay for equal work" shall be made meaningful by assigning positions of substantially the same level of duties
and responsibilities to a single grade with a like range of compensation.
D. All new appointments to positions with the City shall be made on the basis of knowledge, ability skill, and examination
practical in nature, except as specified in section 1-4-2 of this chapter.
E. All promotions within the service of the City shall be made on the basis of knowledge, ability, and skill, with the City
being the sole judge of such qualifications.
F. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair administration of and consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interests of the City.
G. Continuity of employment covered by this chapter shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory performance of work,
necessity of the work, and availability of funds. (Ord. 1436 § 1)
1-4-2: PERSONNEL POLICY COVERAGE:
All offices and positions of the City shall be and are hereby allocated to the competitive service and the exempt service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 17/923
A. Exempt Service: The exempt service shall include all elected officials and all noncompensated members of citizen
boards and commissions, the City Manager, the Secretary to the City Manager, Assistant to the City Manager,
department and division heads, temporary employees, and all other personnel who may be appointed to serve
without compensation.
B. Competitive Service: The competitive service shall include all other regular positions in the City service which are not
specifically placed in the exempt service by this chapter. Personnel policies and rules shall apply to employees of the
competitive service where specified. (Ord. 1436 § 2)
1-4-3: ORGANIZATION; CITY MANAGER:
A. Basic Responsibility: The City Manager shall have the basic responsibility for administration of this chapter and the
City's Personnel Program. Those responsibilities shall be administered in accordance with this chapter and include:
1. Effective personnel administration.
2. Appointment, removal, suspension and discipline of City employees covered hereunder in this Chapter.
3. Establishment of employee numbers, duties and compensation subject to the approval of the City Council and
budget limitations.
4. Performance and exercise of such other duties and powers, including negotiations with organized groups of
employees as may be prescribed by law.
B. Delegate Duties: The City Manager may delegate specific duties to a Human Resources Manager or other
appropriate subordinates. (Ord. 1436 § 3)
1-4-4: ORGANIZATION; HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGER:
The City Manager may appoint a Human Resources Manager who shall be responsible for administration and technical
direction of the City personnel program. The Human Resources Manager shall:
A. Administer, under the direction of the City Manager, the personnel program as set forth in this Chapter and the
personnel rules.
B. Perform duties necessary to the effective administration of the personnel system.
C. Recommend to the City Manager rules and revisions and amendments thereto for the consideration of the City
Council.
D. Recommend to the City Manager a position classification plan for approval by Council, and install and maintain such a
plan.
E. Prepare and recommend to the City Manager a pay plan for all City employees.
F. Establish and maintain a roster of all persons in the Municipal service setting forth each officer and employee, class
title of his position, salary, and other pertinent data.
G. Develop and administer recruiting and examining programs necessary to obtain an adequate supply of competent
applicants to meet the needs of the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 18/923
H. Be responsible for certification of all payrolls.
I. Develop and coordinate employee training and educational programs.
J. Investigate periodically the operation and effect to the personnel provisions of this Chapter and the rules.
K. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the City Manager not inconsistent with this Chapter. (Ord. 1436 § 4)
1-4-5: ADOPTION OF RULES:
Personnel rules and regulations governing nonunion employees shall cover specific procedures and policies to govern
the following phases of the personnel program:
A. Administration of a position classification plan.
B. Administration of pay plan.
C. Announcement of vacancies and acceptance of employment applications.
D. Preparation and conduct of examinations.
E. Establishment and use of employment lists of persons eligible for employment.
F. Evaluation of the work of employees including those serving a probationary period.
G. Transfer, promotion, and reinstatement of employees.
H. Separation from the service of employees by resignation, layoff, suspension, dismissal and incapacity.
I. Regulation of hours of work, attendance, leave and working conditions.
J. Development of employee morale, welfare and training.
K. Rules relating to outside employment.
L. Maintenance and use of necessary records and forms.
M. A system of handling all grievances.
N. Such other matters necessary and proper to carry out the intent and purpose of this Chapter. (Ord. 84-50)
1-4-6: PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS; ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT:
The City Manager and the Personnel Board may propose nonunion personnel rules and regulations and amendments
thereto, which shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council after being considered by the Personnel
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 19/923
Board. Nonunion personnel rules and regulations adopted under this Section may be adopted by reference, with a copy
thereof maintained in the offices of the City Clerk and the Human Resources Manager of the City with copies thereof
made available to the employees of the City upon request. (Ord. 84-50)
1-4-7: APPOINTMENTS:
The personnel rules and regulations shall provide procedures for the employment of persons on the basis of merit in
conformity with this Chapter. Such procedures shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. An orderly and systematic method of recruitment to ensure that all those employed will be hired on merit basis, and
the establishment of qualified lists for employment purposes.
B. Provisional appointments in the absence of appropriate employment lists; provided, however, that employment lists
shall be established for such a position within twelve (12) months and that no person shall be employed by the City
under provisional appointment for a total of more than six (6) months.
C. During the period of suspension of an employee, or pending final action of proceedings to review the suspension,
demotion, or dismissal of an employee, the vacancy created may be filled by the employing authority only by
provisional appointment.
D. In the event of emergency the appointing authority may appoint such persons as are required to meet the situation but
such appointments shall not exceed sixty (60) working days in any twelve (12) month period.
E. Trainee, apprentice, or learner class appointments may be provided. (Ord. 1436 § 8)
1-4-8: CLASSIFICATION PLAN:
In preparing the classification plan as called for in this Chapter the City Manager shall ascertain the duties, authority, and
responsibility of all positions subject to the Chapter. After consultation with the Personnel Board, administrative
department heads and employees, he shall prepare and recommend to the City Council a position classification plan
which shall group all regular, full- and part-time positions in classes, based on their duties, authority, and responsibilities.
Such plan shall set forth for each class of position a class title, statement of duties, authority, and responsibilities, and
the qualifications for satisfactory performance thereof. (Ord. 1436 § 9)
1-4-9: PAY PLAN:
The City Manager shall develop a uniform and equitable pay plan consisting of minimum, intermediate, and maximum
rates of pay for each class of positions. Salary ranges for each class shall be coordinated with the position classification
plan and shall be based on the ranges of pay for other classes, requisite qualifications, general rates of pay for
comparable work in other public and private employment in the area, cost of living data, suggestions of administrative
department heads and employees, maintenance or other benefits received by employees, the financial policy of the City,
and other economic considerations. (Ord. 1436 § 10)
1-4-10: ADOPTION OF AMENDMENT OF CLASSIFICATION AND PAY PLAN:
The City Manager shall give the employees the opportunity to make suggestions and recommendations concerning the
classification and pay plans. After receiving such suggestions and recommendations the City Manager shall review this
information and shall make such modifications as he believes proper and submit the plan to the City Council. The City
Council shall adopt such plan as presented or as amended by resolution within thirty (30) days. The plans may be
amended from time to time in the same manner as they were adopted. Nothing herein shall be construed to interfere with
collective bargaining agreements relative to salary rates. (Ord. 1436 § 11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 20/923
1-4-11: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
A. Limited Time: The personnel rules and regulations shall provide that original and promotional appointments for all
employees shall be for a probationary period of not less than three (3) months nor more than twelve (12) months,
subject to limited extensions in unusual cases.
B. Termination Procedure: During this probationary period, employment may be terminated at any time with or without
cause. The City Manager or a person designated by the City Manager shall have the sole authority to terminate. The
probationary employee shall receive notice of the reasons for termination and shall have an opportunity for a hearing
according to procedures established by the personnel rules. The City Manager or the person designated by the City
Manager shall not be limited by the reasons listed in the personnel rules as reasons for dismissal of a permanent
employee; the City Manager may terminate any probationary employee who, at the discretion of the City Manager, is
unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily or whose work habits and dependability do not
merit his continuance in the employment with the City service.
C. Dismissal Of Probational Employee Final: The City Manager's decision to terminate the employment of a probationary
employee shall be final and the employee shall not have a right to appeal this decision.
D. Reinstatement Of Previous Position: Employment terminated during any promotional probationary period shall result
in the employee being reinstated to the position from which he had been promoted unless charges are filed, and the
employee is discharged as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules. (Ord. 80-85)
1-4-12: SUSPENSION, DEMOTION, DISMISSAL:
A. Suspension; Hearing: The City Manager or appointing authority designated by the City Manager may suspend any
employee with or without pay for disciplinary purposes. No employee shall be suspended for more than thirty (30)
days in any calendar year, except that extensions may be made pending any investigation or hearing. An employee
shall be given written notice of the reasons for the suspension prior to such action. An opportunity for hearing shall be
afforded the employee in accordance with procedures established by the personnel rules.
B. Demotion, Dismissal; Hearing: The City Manager or the appointing authority designated by the City Manager may
demote or dismiss any employee whose work is unsatisfactory. The employee shall be given written notice of the
reasons for such action and an opportunity for a hearing prior to such action becoming effective. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the City Manager from suspending an employee prior to a hearing concerning
the dismissal of that employee. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the
personnel rules. (1998 Code)
1-4-13: APPEALS:
Any nonprobationary employee who is suspended, demoted, or dismissed may appeal to the Personnel Board within five
(5) working days after such action has been taken. The personnel rules and regulations shall establish an appeal
procedure. (Ord. 80-85)
1-4-14: PROHIBITION CONCERNING DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT:
A. Discrimination: No person employed by the City or seeking employment with the City shall be employed, promoted,
demoted or discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or
because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or
ancestry.
B. Prohibition On Sexual Harassment: It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as
amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 21/923
harassment is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy
of City of Carbondale to prohibit harassment of any person by any Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal
employee or Municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All Municipal officials, Municipal agents,
Municipal employees and Municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person,
regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof.
1. Definition Of Sexual Harassment: This section adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the Illinois
Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
a. Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's
employment,
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions
affecting such individual, or
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or
creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
2. Conduct: Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes but is not limited to:
a. Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and jokes about sex, anatomy or genderspecific
traits, sexual propositions, threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees,
even outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
b. Non-Verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily
gestures, "catcalls", "smacking" or "kissing" noises.
c. Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature, viewing pornographic material or websites.
d. Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or
actual assault.
e. Textual/Electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages with sexual content, including pictures and video),
the use of sexually explicit language, harassment, cyberstalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/online postings, blogs, instant messages and social
network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine. On the other end of the
spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what would offend a "reasonable
person".
C. Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment:
1. An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself to be the object of sexual
harassment should deal with the incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his
position to the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary for sexual harassment to
be directed at the person making the report.
2. Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment, including the following:
a. Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee
should directly and clearly express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent messages are needed, they should be
put in writing in a note or a memo.
b. Contact with supervisory personnel. At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the event the
employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a Director of Human Resources, an
Ethics Officer, the City Manager or Administrator, or the Chief Executive Officer of the Municipality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 22/923
3. The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must not assume that the employer
is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible
officer, the Municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.
a. Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this section is to establish prompt, thorough and effective
procedures for responding to every report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
Municipality. However, all Municipal employees have the right to contact the Illinois Department of Human Rights
(IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal
complaint with those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must be filed within three
hundred (300) days.
Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said or done, the date, the time and
the place), including, but not limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated regardless of how the matter
comes to the attention of the Municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the questions of credibility involved, the
claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
D. Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations:
1. No Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or Municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory
action against any Municipal employee due to a Municipal employee's:
a. Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this section,
b. The provision of information related to or testimony before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing
or inquiry into any violation of this section, or
c. Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of this section.
2. For the purposes of this section, retaliatory action means the reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial
of promotion or transfer, or change in the terms or conditions of employment of any Municipal employee that is
taken in retaliation for a Municipal employee's involvement in protected activity pursuant to this section.
3. No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a report made in good faith is not substantiated. In
addition, any witness will be protected from retaliation.
4. Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act1 as
amended, provides whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension,
demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who does any of the
following:
a. Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer,
member, State agency, or other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in violation of a
law, rule, or regulation,
b. Provides information to or testifies before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into
any violation of a law, rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State employee, or
c. Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
5. Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act2 as amended, an employer may not retaliate against an employee who
discloses information in a court, an administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an
employee for disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has
reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation3.
6. According to the Illinois Human Rights Act4 as amended, it is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two (2) or
more people to conspire, to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably
and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 23/923
complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human
Rights Act.
7. An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed over for a promotion after filing a
complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a retaliation charge - due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or
three hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation.
E. Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment: In addition to any and all other discipline
that may be applicable pursuant to Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks
and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this section or the prohibition on sexual harassment
contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
per offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the Municipality and any applicable fines and penalties established
pursuant to local ordinance, State law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the Municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an Ethics
Commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a State or Federal agency.
F. Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report:
1. A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the sexual harassment report to
accomplish some end other than stopping sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness of the consequences for
the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person
who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to
discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreements.
2. In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act to an Ethics Commission, an Inspector General, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics
Commission may levy an administrative fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who
intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 2017-57)
1-4-15: EMPLOYMENT OF FAMILY MEMBERS:
A. Relationships Disqualifying Employment: The following listed family members are disqualified from holding any
appointive office or employment within the same working department or division where a supervisor-subordinate
relationship results:
Father - son
Father - daughter
Mother - son
Mother - daughter
Brother - brother
Sister - sister
Brother - sister
Stepbrother - stepbrother
Stepsister - stepsister
Grandfather - grandson
Grandfather - granddaughter
Grandmother - grandson
Grandmother - granddaughter
Great grandfather - great grandson
Great grandfather - great granddaughter
Great grandmother - great grandson
Great grandmother - great granddaughter
Uncle - nephew
Uncle - niece
Aunt - nephew
Aunt - niece
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 24/923
B. Effective Date: The provisions of subsection A of this Section shall not apply to situations in which one of the
employees, having the family relationship specified in that subsection, was employed with the City on or before
August 6, 1968.
C. Relationships Disqualifying Appointment: No person may be hired or appointed to any position in the City when that
person has any of the family relations specified in subsection A of this Section with any of the following positions:
Mayor
Council person
City Manager
City Attorney
Human Resource Manager
D. Effective Date: The provisions of subsection C of this Section shall not apply to those employees who were employed
by the City on or before May 1, 1987. (Ord. 92-23)
1-4-16: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR CITY EMPLOYEES:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
CORPORATE LIMITS: The original Town of Carbondale and those areas that have been annexed into the City of
Carbondale as of May 1, 1986, and those areas which are to be annexed into the City of Carbondale in the future as
of the effective date of the annexation ordinance.
EXECUTIVE PERSONNEL: All City employees occupying positions classified in pay ranges 8 or 9, the City Manager,
and the City Clerk.
RESIDENCY BOUNDARY: Only the following listed land sections shall be deemed to be within the residency
boundary:
JACKSON COUNTY, ILLINOIS
Township 8 South, Range 1 West (DeSoto Township) - All sections (1 through 36);
Township 8 South, Range 2 West (Somerset Township) - Sections 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36;
Township 9 South, Range 1 West (Carbondale Township) - All sections (1 through 36);
Township 9 South, Range 2 West (Murphysboro Township) - All sections (1 through 36);
Township 10 South, Range 1 West (Makanda Township) - All sections (1 through 36);
Township 10 South, Range 2 West (Pomona Township) - Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 36;
WILLIAMSON COUNTY, ILLINOIS
Township 8 South, Range 1 East (Blairsville Township) - Sections 19, 20, 21, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34;
Township 9 South, Range 1 East (Carterville Township) - Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35;
Township 10 South, Range 1 East (Grassy Township) - Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
29 and 30.
(Ord. 86-32; Ord. 99-15)
B. Residency Requirements For Executive Personnel:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 25/923
1. Persons employed on and after May 1, 1986, in executive personnel grades and all employees subsequently
promoted to executive personnel grades, shall be required to establish their residence within the corporate limits
within six (6) months of the date of employment and remain residents within the corporate limits as a condition of
employment. The city manager shall have the authority to grant one extension of a maximum of six (6) months for
compliance with this requirement. For purposes of this section, the date of employment shall be the first date the
employee actually performs services for which he/she is entitled to compensation at the rate paid for the executive
personnel position for which he/she has been hired or to which he/she has been promoted. The period a person is
appointed to an executive position on an acting basis will not be applied towards the six (6) month residency
compliance period. (Ord. 2005-51)
2. Employees hired prior to May 1, 1986, who are classified as executive personnel on May 1, 1986, and who reside
outside the corporate limits are not required to establish their residence within the corporate limits. However, once
residency within the corporate limits is established, it must be maintained as a condition of employment.
3. Employees hired prior to May 1, 1986, who are classified as executive personnel on May 1, 1986, and who reside
within the corporate limits are required to maintain their residence within the corporate limits as a condition of
employment.
4. Employees hired prior to May 1, 1986, who are classified as executive personnel on May 1, 1986, and who reside
outside the corporate limits but within the residence boundary as described in subsection A of this section must
maintain their residence within the residency boundary as a condition of employment.
5. Employees hired prior to May 1, 1986, who are classified as executive personnel on May 1, 1986, and who reside
outside the residency boundary as described in subsection A of this section are not required to establish residency
within the residency boundary. However, once residency within the residency boundary is established, it must be
maintained as a condition of employment.
C. Residency Requirements For Nonexecutive Personnel:
1. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, all persons employed by the city and who live within the
corporate limits on or after May 1, 1986, must maintain their residence within the residency boundary as described
in subsection A of this section as a condition of employment.
2. Employees hired on or after May 1, 1986, in nonexecutive positions shall be required to establish their residence
within the residency boundary as described in subsection A of this section within six (6) months of the date of
employment and remain residents of that residency boundary as a condition of employment. The city manager
shall have the authority to grant one extension of a maximum of six (6) months for compliance with this
requirement. For purposes of this section, the date of employment shall be the first date the employee actually
performs services for which he is entitled to compensation.
D. Exemptions:
1. All persons employed by the city on November 1, 1979, are exempt from all requirements of this section, unless
they are classified as executive personnel on or after May 1, 1986.
2. The city manager shall have the authority to exempt from the requirements of this section persons employed
pursuant to federally funded or state funded labor intensive programs that prohibit residency requirements for
employees in the program.
3. The city manager shall have the authority to exempt from the requirements of this section persons employed to
work in programs that are designated at a minimum to serve all the residents of Jackson County; provided,
however, that: a) the employee's regular work site is not located within the residency boundary; b) the employee
lives in the same area as the work site; and c) the employee's position is funded entirely by federal or state grant
funds.
4. Any employee who lives on city owned lands shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this
section.
5. The city manager may grant a waiver of any of the provisions of this section for a maximum of three (3) months for
reasons of hardships of an employee. (Ord. 86-32)
6. Due to the promotional nature of the positions which are filled from an eligibility list prepared by the board of police
and fire commissioners, employees promoted to the positions of police lieutenant or assistant fire chief are exempt
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 26/923
from subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. 99-15)
7. Promotions to the position of deputy police chief shall be exempt from subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. 2000-
05)
E. Qualifications For Employment:
1. All persons who otherwise qualify for employment are eligible to apply and be considered for a position without
regard to residency; provided, however, that all persons who accept employment with the city shall be required to
comply with the residency requirements of this section.
2. The city shall give preference to persons who reside within the corporate limits of the city when filling vacant job
positions.
F. Disciplinary Action: Any employee who fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall be dismissed from
such employment. (Ord. 86-32)
1-4-17: FACILITIES AND COOPERATIONS:
Administrative department heads and employees of the city shall, during usual business hours, grant to the city manager
or his designated representative free access to premises and records under their control and shall furnish such
assistance and information as may be required in carrying out the functions of the personnel department. Failure to
comply shall be subject to all penalties and remedies provided by law for the failure of a public official or employee to do
any act required of him by law. (Ord. 1436 § 19)
1-4-18: IN SERVICE OR OTHER TRAINING:
In instances where training is approved by the city manager that will cost in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
the city manager shall have the authority to enter into a payback agreement with the employee who is to receive said
training. The payback agreement shall take effect should the employee resign or be discharged for cause during a time
period to be determined by the city manager and listed in the payback agreement, said time period not to exceed five (5)
years. At that time, the employee shall be required to reimburse the city for a proportional share of the total cost of such
training, such reimbursement cost to be computed by dividing the total cost of the training by the fraction represented by
the amount of time left proportionally to the amount of employment time originally required for the completion of the
agreement. The employee shall repay any sum of money that is due to the city within a period of time following the
termination of employment as determined by the city manager and listed in the agreement. The total cost of the training
shall include the training tuition, travel costs, room and board, and any other such costs as are determined appropriate
by the city manager and listed in the agreement. Should the employee in question fail to enter into the agreement, the
city manager may cancel the proposed training. The city manager shall have the authority to release an employee from a
previously entered into payback agreement if, in his opinion, it would be in the best interest of the city to do so. (Ord. 80-
54)
1-4-19: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 80-54; Ord. 97-
166)
Chapter 5
CODE OF ETHICS
1-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 27/923
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination,
election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political organization, or
the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice presidential electors, but does not include activities: a)
relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective
bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or
who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular
election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected officials currently holding office of the city council of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, which
includes the mayor and six (6) city council members.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public labor
relations act2.
COMPENSATED TIME: Any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any
designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any
period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in
part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the city of Carbondale, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a
contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The city of Carbondale.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having
monetary value including, but not limited to: cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or
attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee.
INTEREST: Any direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a person as a result of a contract or
transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city except for such contracts or
transactions which by their terms and by the substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the
accrual of similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. For purposes of this chapter, a public
official, officer, or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of:
A. Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship exists with the public official or employee;
B. Any business entity in which the public official or employee is an officer, director, or member having a financial
interest in, or employed by;
C. Any business entity in which the stock of, or legal or beneficial ownership of, in excess of five percent (5%) of the
total stock or total legal and beneficial ownership, is controlled or owned directly or indirectly by the public official or
employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a) compensation for employment, b)
service credit toward pension benefits, and c) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 28/923
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of
whether the officer is compensated for services in his/her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political
organization, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official
duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated)
that is required to file a statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of
the election code4, but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county
clerk.
POLITICAL RIGHTS: To petition, make public speeches, campaign for or against political candidates, speak out on
questions of public policy, distribute political literature, make campaign contributions, and/or seek public office.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally,
political demonstration, or other political event.
B. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for
tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as
a campaign contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on
behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote
outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any
referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign
for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material
on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 29/923
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with an employee, or with the officer or another
employee directing that employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee
directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the
officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-38)
1-5-2: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT:
A. Interest In Appointments: Canvassing of members of the city council, directly or indirectly, in order to obtain
preferential consideration in connection with any appointment to the municipal service shall disqualify the candidate
for appointment except with reference to positions filled by appointment of the city council.
B. Use Of Public Property: No officer or employee shall request or permit the use of city owned vehicles, equipment,
materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public
generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such officer or employee in the conduct of official
business.
C. Obligations To Citizens: No officer or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any
citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen similarly situated.
D. Discrimination In Appointment: No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or
discriminated against with respect to race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual
orientation, national origin or ancestry, or political opinions or affiliations, if otherwise qualified for the position or
office. (Ord. 2004-38)
1-5-3: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No official, officer, or employee shall engage in any business or transaction or shall be financially interested directly in
said official's, officer's, or employee's own name or indirectly in the name of another person, association, trust, or
corporation, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his/her official duties in the public interest or would tend
to impair his/her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his/her official duties. (Ord. 2004-38)
1-5-4: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as
defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city of Carbondale in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 30/923
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited
political activity: 1) as part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, or 3) during any
compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration
for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary
adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political
activity.
D. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or
her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not
prohibited by this chapter.
E. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or 2) in a position
the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit
system or personnel administration applicable to grant in aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or
tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, or a political party, or of a political
organization or club. (Ord. 2004-38)
1-5-5: GIFT BAN:
A. Prohibition: Except as provided by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member
living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept
any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
B. Exceptions: Subsection A of this section does not apply to the following:
1. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
2. Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market
value.
3. Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or b) activities associated with a fundraising
event in support of a political organization or candidate.
4. Educational materials and missions.
5. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
6. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother,
sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother,
grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the
father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
7. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe
that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient
or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining
whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under
which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the
recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b) whether to the actual
knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who
gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or
immediate family members.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 31/923
8. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day;
provided that the food or refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased
ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
9. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment
activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits
have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and
are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
10. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any
gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity.
11. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
12. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse, or an immediate family member living with the officer
or employee, does not violate this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a
prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt
from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-38)
1-5-6: REPRESENTING PRIVATE INTERESTS:
No person holding any office, either by election or appointment under the laws or constitution of this state may represent,
either as an agent or otherwise, any person, association, trust, or corporation, with respect to any application or bid for
any contract work in regard to which such officer may be called upon to vote. Any contract made and procured in
violation hereof is void. (Ord. 2004-38)
1-5-7: PECUNIARY INTERESTS IN CONTRACTS:
A. Public Officials And Officers:
1. A public official or officer shall not be financially interested, directly in the official's or officer's own name or
indirectly in the name of any other person, association, trust, or corporation, in any contract, work, or business of
the city or in the sale of any article whenever the expense, price, or consideration of the contract, work, business,
or sale is paid either from funds of the city or by an assessment levied by statute or ordinance. A public official or
officer shall not be interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property that: a) belongs to the city; b) is
sold for taxes or assessments; or c) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the city. For purposes of this
section only, however, a public official or officer shall not be deemed interested if the official or officer is an
employee of a company or owns or holds an interest of one percent (1%) or less in the public official's or officer's
individual name in a company, or both, that company is involved in the transaction of business with the city, and
that company's stock is traded on a nationally recognized securities market, provided the interested member: a)
publicly discloses the fact that he/she is an employee or holds an interest of one percent (1%) or less in a company
before deliberation of the proposed award of the contract; b) refrains from evaluating, recommending, approving,
deliberating, or otherwise participating in the negotiation, approval, or both, of the contract, work, or business; c)
abstains from voting on the award of the contract though he/she shall be considered present for purposes of
establishing a quorum; and d) the contract is approved by a majority vote of those council members present.
2. A public official or officer shall not be deemed interested if the official or officer owns or holds an interest of one
percent (1%) or less, not in the official's or officer's individual name, but through a mutual fund in a company, that
company is involved in the transaction of business with the city, and that company's stock is traded on a nationally
recognized securities market.
3. This section does not prohibit any person serving on a municipal advisory panel or commission or nongoverning
board or commission from having an interest in a contract, work, or business for the city unless the person's duties
include evaluating, recommending, approving, or voting to recommend or approve the contract, work, or business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 32/923
B. Public Officials:
1. A public official may provide materials, merchandise, property, services, or labor, subject to the following provisions
under either subsection B1a or B1b of this section if:
a. (1) The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or cooperative association in which
the interested public official member has less than a seven and one-half percent (71/2%) share in the ownership;
and
(2) The interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of the interest before or during deliberations
concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
(3) The interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract (though the member shall be
considered present for the purposes of establishing a quorum); and
(4) The contract is approved by a majority vote of those council members present; and
(5) The contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest responsible bidder if the amount of the contract
exceeds one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) (but the contract may be awarded without bidding if
the amount is less than $1,500.00); and
(6) The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all contracts so awarded to the same
person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to
exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
b. (1) The award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of those council members present; and
(2) The amount of the contract does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); and
(3) The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all contracts so awarded to the same
person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to
exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00); and
(4) The interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest before or during deliberations
concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
(5) The interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract (though the member shall be
considered present for the purposes of establishing a quorum).
2. In addition to the above exceptions, any city council member may provide materials, merchandise, property,
services, or labor if:
a. The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or cooperative association in which the
interested member of the city council has less than a one percent (1%) share in the ownership; and
b. The award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of those council members present; and
c. Such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his interest before or during deliberations
concerning the proposed award of the contract; and
d. Such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract, though he shall be considered
present for the purposes of establishing a quorum.
3. A contract for the procurement of public utility services by the city with a public utility company is not barred by this
section by one or more public officials being an officer or employee of the public utility company, or holding an
ownership interest in no more than seven and one-half percent (7.5%) in the public utility company. A public official
having an interest described in this subsection does not have a prohibited interest under this section.
4. Nothing contained in this section, including the restrictions set forth in subsections B1b(2) through B1b(4) of this
section, shall preclude a contract or deposit of monies, loans, or other financial services by the city with a local
bank or local savings and loan association, regardless of whether a member of the city council is interested in the
bank or savings and loan association as an officer or employee or as a holder of less than seven and one-half
percent (7.5%) of the total ownership interest. A member holding an interest described in this subsection B4 in a
contract does not hold a prohibited interest for purposes of this chapter. The interested city council member must
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 33/923
publicly state the nature and extent of the interest during deliberations concerning the proposed award of the
contract but shall not participate in any further deliberations concerning the proposed award. The interested
member shall not vote on the proposed award. A member abstaining from participation in deliberations and voting
under this section may be considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum. Award of the contract shall
require approval by a majority vote of those council members present. Consideration and award of a contract in
which a member is interested may only be made at a regularly scheduled public meeting of the city council. (Ord.
2005-46)
5. Under either of the following circumstances, a city council member may hold a position on the board of a not for
profit corporation that is interested in a contract, work, or business of the municipality.
a. If the city council member is appointed by the governing body of the municipality to represent the interests of the
municipality on a not for profit corporation's board, then the city council member may actively vote on matters
involving either that board or the municipality, at any time, so long as the membership on the not for profit board
is not a paid position, except that the city council member may be reimbursed by the not for profit board for
expenses incurred as the result of membership on the not for profit board.
b. If the city council member is not appointed to the governing body of a not for profit corporation by the governing
body of the municipality, then the city council member may continue to serve; however, the city council member
shall abstain from voting on any proposition before the municipal governing body directly involving the not for
profit corporation and, for those matters, shall not be counted as present for the purposes of a quorum of the
municipal governing body. (Ord. 2012-17)
C. Employees:
1. Employees other than public officials or officers, who have a substantial interest, direct or indirect, or by the reason
of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city, or in the sale of land, materials, supplies, or
services to the city, or to a contractor supplying the city, shall make known that interest prior to the time any binding
agreement is entered into between the individual or entity in which the employee has such interest and the city.
Any such employee of the city who wilfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or wilfully violates the
requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his office or position.
Violation of this section with the knowledge expressed or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or
making the sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by either the city manager or the city council.
2. For the purpose of this subsection C, an employee is imputed to have a substantial financial interest in a
corporation in which he or his spouse, son, daughter, brother, sister, father, or mother owns five percent (5%) or
more of the outstanding stock of any corporation. Further, any employee is imputed to have a substantial financial
interest in the sale of any land, materials, supplies, or services to the city if said employee, his spouse, son,
daughter, brother, sister, father, or mother has any ownership in the land, legal or equitable, or in the business
entity which is selling the land, materials, supplies, or services to the city, in excess of five percent (5%).
D. Disclosure Of Interest: Any public official, officer or employee who holds an interest as described in this section shall
disclose the existence of such interest in a written, sworn statement filed with the city manager on or before April 1 of
each year. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-5-8: APPLICABILITY OF CODE:
A public official, officer, or employee shall seek a legal opinion from the city attorney for the interpretation and/or
implementation of the provisions of this chapter, except for interpretation and/or implementation of section 1-5-4 or 1-5-5
of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-38)
1-5-9: PENALTIES:
A. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-5-4 of this chapter may be punished by a term of
incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four
(364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 34/923
B. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-5-5 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of
not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
C. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of section 1-5-4 or 1-5-5 of this
chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the state's attorney, or any other law enforcement official may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
D. A violation of section 1-5-4 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the city of
Carbondale by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution
shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt
of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. A violation of section 1-5-5 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a
quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the city of Carbondale.
E. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer, official, or employee who
intentionally violates any provision of section 1-5-4 or 1-5-5 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge.
F. A public official or officer who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall forfeit his/her office
immediately. (Ord. 2004-38)
Chapter 6
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
1-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the department of finance for the city. The department shall consist of the director of finance
who shall be appointed by the city manager and such other employees as may be required. The director shall have
control and supervision over all employees assigned to the department subject to the control of the city manager. The
director of finance shall be the appointed city treasurer. (1998 Code)
1-6-2: DUTIES AND FUNCTION:
A. The director of finance reports directly to the city manager and has a functional responsibility to the city council as city
treasurer. The director advises the city manager on fiscal policy and prepares financial analysis of operations for
guidance by the city manager.
B. It shall be the duty of the director of finance:
1. To establish a double entry general ledger accounting system that conforms to the standards of the governmental
accounting standards board (GASB) for generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
2. To supervise and coordinate the preparation of the annual city budget as directed by the city manager.
3. To prepare the annual property tax levy ordinance in time for enactment and filing as required by state law.
4. To prepare internal financial reports, forecast future financial position and budget requirements.
5. To manage and delegate authority for receipt, disbursement, banking protection, custody of funds, securities and
financial instruments as required by the city's cash management system.
6. To direct and formulate internal financial controls for all city operations.
7. To develop policies and procedures for accounts receivable collection and extension of credit to customers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 35/923
8. To formulate strategies for issuing debt for short and long term financing of capital improvements and capital
equipment.
9. To facilitate and coordinate the purchasing of expendable materials, supplies, services and capital outlays in
accordance with this chapter.
10. To advise and coordinate risk management policies and loss control activities. (1998 Code)
1-6-3: ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT:
The department of finance shall be responsible for the preparation of the comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR).
The CAFR shall conform to the standards as set from time to time by the government finance officers association
(GFOA), the governmental accounting standards board (GASB), the U.S. office of management and budget's circular A-
128, audits of state and local governments. (1998 Code)
1-6-4: FIXED ASSETS INVENTORY:
The finance department shall keep a current inventory of all capitalized real and personal property of the city, its location,
acquisition date, useful life, and cost. Depreciation expense shall be included on the fixed asset inventories of the city's
enterprise funds. (1998 Code)
1-6-5: PURCHASING PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS; DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE HEAD: The city manager of Carbondale.
CAPITAL OUTLAYS: All vehicles, equipment, and infrastructure of the city.
CITY: The city of Carbondale.
CITY COUNCIL: The council of the city of Carbondale.
CITY PURCHASING SPECIALIST: The purchasing specialist of the city of Carbondale, who shall be appointed by the
city manager.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: Shall mean and include all telephone, gas, water, electric light, and power service; towel
and cleaning service; insurance; leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other space required by the using agencies;
and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and city owned property. The term shall not include
professional and other contractual services which are in their nature unique and not subject to competition.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes materials, objects, goods, chattels, effects and movable things, the ownership of
which is held in right, title and interest by a particular person or entity.
SUPPLIES: Shall mean and include all supplies, materials, and noncapital equipment.
USING AGENCY: Any department, agency, commission, bureau, or other unit in the city government using supplies or
procuring contractual services as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-6: SCOPE OF PURCHASING AUTHORITY:
A. Purchases Under Twenty Thousand Dollars: Authority to procure items under twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00)
shall be as set forth in the purchasing manual of the city.
B. Council Approval: Contracts awarded within the purview of this chapter and other law; provided, however, that no
purchase order or contract for an amount in excess of nineteen thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars ninety nine
cents ($19,999.99) may be executed without city council approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 36/923
C. Change Orders: The city manager shall have the authority to execute the following change orders along with his
designee without prior approval by the city council; provided, however, he shall present an accounting of the project
to the city council after it is closed out:
1. Change orders which result in a reduction in cost, but do not alter the scope of quality of the project.
2. Change orders under emergency situations bearing on conditions which would require the cessation of work on the
project, if not immediately executed.
3. Change orders in emergency situations as provided in this chapter.
4. Change orders within the budget which result in additional contract amount if the accrued costs of all change
orders to date relative to the contract do not exceed the greater of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or ten
percent (10%) of the original contract amount provided the scope of work is not altered.
D. Contractual Service: The city purchasing specialist shall have the authority:
1. To award all contracts within the purview of this chapter and other law; provided, however, that no purchase of
contractual services in an amount in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be executed without the
finance director's approval and no purchase of contractual services in an amount in excess of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) may be executed without the city manager's approval.
2. To prepare purchasing procedures necessary for the function of purchase.
3. To sell or dispose of all obsolete or unusable personal property in accordance with the laws of the state or the
ordinances or resolutions of the city.
4. To act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services at least expense to the city.
5. To discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases
and sales.
6. To establish all rules and regulations authorized by this chapter and any others necessary to do its operation.
7. To prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find necessary to the operation of this chapter.
8. To prepare and adopt a standard purchasing nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers.
9. To prepare, adopt, and maintain a vendors' catalog file.
10. To exploit the possibilities of buying "in bulk" so as to take full advantage of discounts.
11. To procure for the city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled.
12. In addition to the authority otherwise conferred to this chapter, the purchasing specialist shall have the authority:
a. To declare vendors who default on their quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving
any business from the municipality for a stated period of time.
b. To reject all bids, parts of bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the
proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby.
c. To reject the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses, or other monies due the city.
(Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-7: CLASSIFICATION, STANDARDIZATION AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The purchasing specialist may cause to be prepared standard specifications for, and the classification of all the supplies
used by the various branches of the city government, and to adopt as standards the minimum number, quality, size and
variety of supplies consistent with the successful operation of the city government. (Ord. 2012-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 37/923
1-6-8: CONSULTATION WITH USING AGENCIES:
The purchasing specialist shall consult with the administrative department heads and other officials of the using agencies
to determine their precise requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe those standards which meet the needs of the
majority of such agencies. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-9: NOTICE OF SPECIFICATIONS:
All specifications shall be definite and certain and shall permit competition; provided, however, that the provision of this
section shall not apply to noncompetitive types and kinds of supplies. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-10: ESTIMATES:
All using agencies, either by or with authorization of the administrative department head under which the using agency
operates, shall file with the purchasing specialist detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual
services in such manner, at such times, and for the future periods as the purchasing specialist shall prescribe.
A. Unforeseen Requirements: A using agency shall not be prevented from filing, in the same manner, with the
purchasing specialist at any time an estimate for supplies or contractual services, the need for which was not
foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed.
B. Revisory Power In Purchasing Specialist: The purchasing specialist shall examine each estimate and have the
authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost, but the revision as to quality shall be in accordance with
the standards and specifications established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-11: ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS:
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing specialist shall not issue any order for delivery on a contractor open
market purchase until the finance director shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the using
agencies concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the
amount of such order. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-12: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED:
All purchases and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become
obsolete and unusable shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based wherever possible on competitive bids.
(Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-13: FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE:
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder,
after due notice inviting proposals. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, when the
estimated value shall exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals.
A. Notice Of Inviting Bids:
1. Newspaper: Notice of inviting bids shall be published once in at least one official newspaper in the city, at least five
(5) days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. Such notice shall include a general description of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 38/923
such services and supplies and shall state where bidding information may be secured and the time and place of
opening bids.
2. Bidder's List: The purchasing specialist shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible vendors who have
requested their names be added to the bidder's list which the purchasing specialist shall maintain, by sending them
a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale.
Invitations sent to such vendors shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled
by the trade group to which invitations are sent.
B. Bid Deposits: Bid deposits or bid bonds shall be required on all contracts with the dollar amount in excess of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) except for maintenance contracts, or contracts which require the provision of
materials. Bid bonds or bid deposits are not required for contracts with the dollar amount less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), but said bonds or deposits may be required, at the discretion of the city manager. When bid
bonds or bid deposits are required, said requirement shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety pursuant to the requirements set forth in the public notice
inviting bids. Further, a successful bidder may be required to forfeit any surety required by the city upon failure on
such bidder's part to enter a contract within fifteen (15) days after the award of said contract, or as is otherwise
required in the bidding documents.
C. Bid Opening Procedures:
1. Sealed Bids: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing specialist and shall be identified as bids on the
envelope.
2. Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice.
3. Tabulation: Tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection and shall be furnished to all
bidders.
D. Award Of Contract:
1. Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest
responsible bidder", in addition to price, the purchasing specialist shall consider:
a. The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required.
b. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without
delay or interference.
c. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder.
d. The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
e. The previous and existing compliance of the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service.
f. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or service.
g. The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required.
h. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract.
i. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
j. Preference shall be given to the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment from local merchants.
2. Local Bidder Preference: For purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), if: a) the lowest bidding
local vendor is a responsible bidder; and b) the lower responsible bidders are not local vendors; and c) the lowest
bidding local vendor's bid is higher than the nonlocal vendor by no more than two percent (2%) or two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00), whichever is less, then that local vendor shall be the lowest responsible bidder. This provision
shall not be applied to a contract if the funding source prohibits it through law, rule, or regulation. For purposes of
this section, "local vendor" means a vendor whose principal place of business is located within the city limits of
Carbondale, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 39/923
3. Award To Other Than Low Bidder: When the award is not given to the low bidder, a full and complete statement of
the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing specialist and filed with the other
papers related to the transaction.
4. Tie Bids:
a. Local Vendors: If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal,
the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder.
b. Outside Vendors: Where subsection D4a of this section is not in effect, the purchasing specialist shall award the
contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public.
5. Performance Bonds: The purchasing specialist shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before
entering a contract, in such amount as he shall find necessary to protect the best interests of the city.
E. Exceptions To Formal Contract Procedure: The "formal contract procedure" as defined in this section is not required in
the following cases:
1. Where the goods or services to be procured are economically procurable from only one source, such as contracts
for telephone service, electrical energy and other public utility services, books, pamphlets, and periodicals and
specially designed business and research equipment and related supplies.
2. Where the services required are for professional or artistic skills pursuant to a written contract.
3. In emergencies involving public health, public safety, or where immediate expenditure is necessary for repairs to
city property in order to protect against further loss or damage to city property or to prevent or minimize serious
disruption in city services. Where funds of this nature are expended in an emergency by purchase, contract, or
otherwise, the city council shall be notified of the expenditure and the justification of such expenditure.
4. Contracts for the maintenance, servicing, or provision of repair parts for equipment which are made with the
manufacturer or authorized service agent of that equipment where the provision of parts, maintenance or servicing
can be best performed by the manufacturer or authorized service agent or when such contract would otherwise be
advantageous to the city.
5. Purchases and contracts for the use, purchase, delivery, movement, or installation of data processing equipment,
software or services; telecommunications and interconnect equipment; software or services, or any contract for
photocopying machines, supplies or service.
6. Where the goods or services are procured from other governmental agencies.
7. Any contract for goods, services or supplies when it is determined to be in the best interests of the city by a vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-14: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURES:
All purchases of supplies and contractual services, of less than the estimated value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, of less than the estimated value of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the
procedure prescribed under this chapter for the award of formal contract.
A. Minimum Number Of Bids: All open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three (3)
competitive bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the standards set forth in
this chapter for the award of formal contract.
B. Recording: The purchasing specialist shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted to
competition thereon, or the reason for the lack of competitive bids thereon, for the purchase of supplies and services
in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and such records shall also be open to public inspection. (Ord. 2012-
20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 40/923
1-6-15: INSPECTION AND TESTING:
The purchasing specialist shall inspect, or supervise the inspection of, all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to
determine their conformance with the specification set forth in the order or contract.
A. Inspection By Using Agency: The purchasing specialist shall have the authority to authorize using agencies having the
staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies under direction of the
purchasing specialist.
B. Tests: The purchasing specialist shall have the authority to require chemical and physical testing of samples
submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with
the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing specialist shall have the authority to make use of
laboratory facilities of any agency of the city government or of any outside laboratory. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-16: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The purchasing specialist shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans
when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. (Ord. 2012-20)
1-6-17: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined an amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(Ord. 2012-20)
Chapter 7
DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
1-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created a department of development services for the city. (Ord. 1651 § 3)
1-7-2: DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES:
The office of the director of development services is hereby created. The director shall be appointed by the city manager.
The director shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to
the control of the city manager. Additional staff may be assigned to the department exclusive of the divisions and offices
hereinafter enumerated. (Ord. 87-31)
1-7-3: DIVISIONS; PURPOSE:
A. Building And Neighborhood Services Division:
1. Establishment: There is hereby created a building and neighborhood services division within the department of
development services of the city. This division shall consist of a manager of building and neighborhood services,
who shall be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees as may be provided. The
manager of the building and neighborhood services division shall have control and supervision over all employees
assigned to the building and neighborhood services division, subject to the control of the director of the department
of development services and the city manager.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 41/923
2. Functions: The building and neighborhood services division shall perform at the direction of the development
services director and the city manager all functions as prescribed by law including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Enforcing all laws and ordinances of the city relating to the demolition, moving, construction, repair or alteration
of all buildings or structures.
b. Enforcing all laws and ordinances of the city relating to mobile homes and mobile home parks, housing, fire
prevention, garbage and refuse, signs, Illinois standard specifications for the handicapped, litter, dead trees,
inoperable vehicles on private property, weeds, encroachment on city right of way, unlawfully parked vehicles,
site plans, buildings used for public assembly, rodent and pest control, and amusement machine devices (except
where elsewhere delegated to the police department). Said enforcement shall include, but not be limited to,
issuing citations, summonses, and notices upon persons for ordinance violations.
c. Providing assistance to the planning services division manager in the enforcement of the zoning and subdivision
ordinances of the city.
d. Maintaining a uniform and consistent policy of interpretation and enforcement of all codes or ordinances
assigned to the division.
e. Issuing all proper permits and licenses after such fees in connection herewith are paid.
f. Maintaining contact with each of the other divisions and offices of development services and other departments
and agencies of the city. (Ord. 2010-10)
B. Planning Services Division:
1. Establishment: There is hereby created a planning services division within the department of development
services. The division shall consist of a manager of planning services division and such other officers and
employees as may be assigned. The director of development services may serve as the manager of the planning
services division or the manager may be appointed by the city manager. The manager of the planning services
division shall control and have supervision over all employees assigned to the division subject to the control of the
director of development services and the city manager.
2. Functions: The planning services division shall perform at the direction of the director of development services and
the city manager, all functions prescribed by law including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Developing, gathering, and analyzing basic research data relating to the physical, social, and economic
development and redevelopment aspects of the city and its inhabitants, also taking into consideration the
Carbondale area that surrounds the corporate boundaries.
b. Undertaking special planning studies or other activities as directed by the city council, planning commission, and
director of development services. (1998 Code)
c. Serving as technical staff for the manager of the planning services division in his capacity as executive secretary
of the planning commission as provided in subsection 15.5.1.4 of this code. (Ord. 2013-21)
d. Cooperating and coordinating activities with other divisions of the department of development services; other city
departments; noncity governmental units; citizens; and, nongovernmental groups as issues appear which
manifest a Carbondale regional planning concern, to the extent that normal planning service division functions
will not be hindered.
e. Maintaining a comprehensive plan for the Carbondale region for ultimate approval by the city council.
f. Being the coordinator of all activities relating to annexation of properties to the city and keeping a systematic
record, as required by law, of all information relating to special annexations. (1998 Code)
g. Administering the zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, and site plan regulations as indicated in title 15 of
this code, in close coordination with appropriate divisions and departments of the city. A systematic record of all
activities relating to zoning, subdivisions and site plans shall be kept by the planning services division. (Ord.
2013-21)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 42/923
Chapter 8
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
1-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Department of Public Works for the City. This Department shall consist of the Director of
Public Works and such other employees as may be provided for by the Council. (Ord. 1504 Art. V § 1)
1-8-2: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
There is hereby created the office of Director of Public Works, who may also be the City Engineer. He shall be a duly
qualified engineer, licensed by the State, and he shall be appointed by the City Manager as provided by law. The
Director shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the Department subject to the
control of the City Manager. (Ord. 1504 Art. V § 2)
1-8-3: RESPONSIBILITIES AND FUNCTIONS:
A. Supervising Of Public Property: The Director of Public Works shall have charge of and supervision over all public
property of the City, including all streets, parks, lakes, parkways, sidewalks, Municipal buildings, cemetery, and all
other property of the City not specifically assigned to some other officer.
B. Care Of Street Lighting Systems, Cemeteries, Storm Drains: The Director of Public Works shall have charge of and
be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the City street lighting system, cemeteries, all streets and
sidewalks and the drainage thereof and shall furnish engineering support services to the various departments of the
City. (Ord. 80-12)
C. Repair And Extension Of Pavement, Buildings Sewers: All construction, repair or extension of any pavement, building,
sewer or lighting system, water mains; and any appurtenances thereto, and all other construction, repair or
maintenance work conducted by the City, shall be done by or under the supervision of the Director of Public Works
unless specified direction to the contrary is made by the City Council.
D. Public Improvements: The Director of Public Works shall prepare or approve all plans, blueprints, and specifications
of public improvements, made or caused to be made by the City; heshall be the City's chief supervisory official on
and for all public improvements, and no work shall be accepted and payment made therefore except upon approval
and certification by him. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for keeping all City maps and plats current;
and for the procurement, care and custody of such maps, plats and plans necessary to the efficient conduct of the
Department.
E. Motor Vehicles And Equipment: The Director of Public Works shall also have charge of and be responsible for the
condition of all motor vehicles, trucks and other equipment of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
and of all buildings or places in which the same are housed or kept.
F. Solid Waste Disposal: The Director shall also have charge of the collection and disposal of solid waste. (Ord. 1504 Art.
V § 3)
G. Water And Wastewater Facilities: The Director of Public Works shall have charge of and be responsible for the care,
maintenance and operations of the City's water supply and treatment facilities, the central laboratory, water
distribution system, the sanitary sewer system, and wastewater treatment facilities. (Ord. 87-31)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 43/923
Chapter 9
POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created and established a Police Department which shall consist of the Chief of Police and other officers
and employees as may be provided for by the City Council. (1998 Code)
1-9-2: APPOINTMENTS; PROMOTIONS:
There is hereby created the position of the Police Chief who shall be appointed by and under the supervision of the City
Manager. Appointments to the Police Department and promotions therein shall be made by the City Manager from the
eligibility list as compiled by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners pursuant to this Chapter. (1998 Code)
1-9-3: DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Overall Operation Of Department: The Chief of Police is responsible for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances
within its legal jurisdiction, and for the planning, directing, coordinating and staffing all activities of the Department, for
its continued and efficient operation, for the enforcement of rules and regulations within the Department and for the
Department's relations with the citizens of Carbondale, and other agencies.
B. Supervision Of Officers And Employees: The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the supervision and performance
of all officers and employees who may be assigned to the Police Department in all matters of policy and operation. All
employees, who are assigned to the Police Department, shall be subject to the order of the Chief of Police who shall
be subject to the supervision and control of the City Manager. (1998 Code)
1-9-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police shall promulgate rules and regulations for the guidance of the officers and other employees of the
Department. The rules and regulations shall become part of the Department rules and regulations upon review and
approval by the City Manager and shall be binding upon all police officers. (1998 Code)
1-9-5: CUSTODIAL FUNCTIONS:
The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or confiscated property within the City. He shall also
serve as custodian of all property provided by the City for use by the Department. (1998 Code)
1-9-6: RECORDS:
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the preparation and maintenance of all records which may be required by
local, State and Federal agencies. (1998 Code)
1-9-7: FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the fiscal management in the Department pursuant to the general procedures
for accounting and budget control as established by the City Manager. (1998 Code)
1-9-8: DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 44/923
Every person who holds the position of police officer is hereby declared to be a conservator of the peace and shall be
responsible to enforce all ordinances of the City and all State and Federal laws and to preserve order and prevent
infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof. (1998 Code)
1-9-9: SERVICE OF WARRANTS:
Every police officer shall have authority to serve all warrants, writs, summons and other processes for violation of this
Code and other State and Federal laws within the corporate limits of the City. (1998 Code)
1-9-10: WITNESS FEES:
Every police officer shall have a duty to appear as a witness whenever his presence is necessary in the prosecution of
the violation of a City ordinance, State or Federal law. No police officer shall receive any witness fee for such
appearance in anyaction or suit in which the City is a party. All witness fees paid for such services shall be turned over to
the Finance Department. (Ord. 89-108)
1-9-11: ADOPTION OF POLICE PENSION FUND ACT:
The Police Pension Fund Act of the State, as it appears in 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., is hereby
adopted by the City in its entirety, and as amended. (1998 Code)
Chapter 10
FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-10-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created and established a Fire Department for the City consisting of the Fire Chief and such other
members and officers as may be provided for from time to time by the City Council. (Ord. 1504 Art. VII § 1)
1-10-2: FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department and every member thereof to extinguish fires, to prevent the
occurrence or spread of fires, to undertake fire prevention and rescue work. (Ord. 1504 Art. VII § 5)
1-10-3: OFFICE OF FIRE CHIEF:
There is hereby created the office of Fire Chief, who shall be appointed by the City Manager as provided by law. The Fire
Chief shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the Department, subject to the
control of the City Manager. (Ord. 1054 Art. VII § 2)
1-10-4: SUPERVISION OVER DEPARTMENT, EQUIPMENT:
The Fire Chief shall have the control, subject to the order and direction of the City Manager, of the Fire Department and
all fire apparatus belonging to the City. Whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing, said Fire Chief shall cause the
same to be done without delay. (Ord. 1504 Art. VII § 3)
1-10-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 45/923
The Fire Chief may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the Department as
he shall see fit; such rules, when approved by the City Manager and the City Council, shall be binding on such members.
(Ord. 1504 Art. VII § 7)
1-10-6: CAUSE OF FIRES:
The Fire Chief shall investigate, or cause to be investigated the cause of all fires occurring within the City. (Ord. 1504 Art.
VII § 8)
1-10-7: COMMAND AT FIRES:
In case of fire, the Fire Chief and members of the Department shall rank in the order prescribed by the rules and
regulations of the Department, and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the Fire Department
and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. (Ord. 1504 Art. VII § 4)
1-10-8: INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS, PREMISES AND STREETS; ORDER FOR CORRECTION OF
CERTAIN DANGEROUS CONDITIONS:
A. Inspections: It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect or cause to be inspected by the Fire Department officers or
members as often as may be necessary, all buildings, premises and public streets within the City limits for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the
provisions or intent of any ordinance of the City affecting the fire hazard.
B. Order Removal Of Fire Hazards: Whenever any officer or member of the Fire Department shall find in any building or
upon any premises or any other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or
unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any other highly inflammable materials especially liable
to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs,
passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department, or egress of
occupants, in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be
complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings within ten (10) days or sooner if the officer
believes the situation presents a life safety hazard.
C. Service Of Order: The service of any such order shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is
directed by either delivering a true copy of same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving
it with any person in charge of the premises or by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the
entrance of such premises.Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, such
order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a true copy of such order, or, if such owner is
absent from the jurisdiction of officer making the order by mailing such copy to the owner's last known address. (R.O.
1929 Ch. XX § 3)
1-10-9: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Fire Chief and other members of the Fire Department shall have the right to enter upon premises in order to
investigate the origin of fires as required in this Chapter of this Code, and to make the investigation referred to in this
Chapter. (R.O. 1929 Ch. XX § 3)
1-10-10: ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES:
It shall be the duty of all officers of the Fire Department to see that the provisions of this Chapter are enforced and to
arrest on view any person who shall hinder, resist, or refuse to obey any such officer in the discharge of his duty, and to
that end all such officers are hereby vested with the usual power and authority to police officers. (Ord. 1504 Art. VII § 6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 46/923
1-10-11: ADOPTION OF FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND ACT:
The Firefighter's Pension Fund Act of the State, as it appears in 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-101 et seq., is hereby
adopted in its entirety by the City. (Ord. 990 § 1)
Chapter 11
LEGAL DEPARTMENT
1-11-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the legal department for the city. This department shall consist of the city attorney as director of
the legal department and such other officers and employees as may be provided for by the city council. (Ord. 1504 Art.
VIII § 1)
1-11-2: CITY ATTORNEY:
There is hereby established the office of the city attorney, who shall be appointed by the city manager as provided by
law, and who shall be an attorney at law, duly licensed to practice in the state. The city attorney, as director of the legal
department, shall have control and supervision over all employees assigned to this department subject to the control of
the city manager. (Ord. 1504 Art. VIII § 2)
1-11-3: FUNCTIONS:
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city council, the city manager and other city officers in all matters of law
wherein the interest of the city is involved. The city attorney shall prosecute or defend, or cause to be prosecuted or
defended, all suits in which the city is a party, in any court, and shall use all necessary and proper means for the
enforcement and protection of the rights of the city. It shall be the city attorney's duty to draw all ordinances, bonds,
contracts or other papers which may come up for passage or action upon by the city or its officers or committees. The
city attorney shall report to the city manager all cases in which he shall deem it expedient to take an appeal or writ of
error on behalf of the city. He shall keep an account book showing all claims placed in his hands for collections, all
monies received by him on account of the city and all payments to the city treasurer. The city attorney shall see that all
judgments in favor of the city are properly and promptly enforced by execution or other proper final process. It shall be
the duty of the city attorney, in all cases where he is engaged, to see, so far as may be in his power, that justice be done
to the city. (1929 Code § 14-30; Ord. 1504 Art. VIII § 3)
1-11-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF CITY SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The city attorney may dismiss any suit instituted by or on behalf of the city whenever he shall be of the opinion that the
evidence is not sufficient to sustain the same. (1998 Code)
1-11-5: MONTHLY REPORT OF COURT WORK:
The city attorney shall make a monthly report to the city manager in which he shall report the status of pending legal
matters pertaining to the city together with such other matters in relation to his office as he may deem necessary or
proper or as the city manager may require. (1929 Code § 14-3; 1998 Code)
1-11-6: PROSECUTION; FEES:
The following provisions are authorized, and it is further declared that the fees are levied pursuant to the legal authority
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 47/923
of the city and are solely for the purpose of providing revenue to cover the costs of municipal prosecution of municipal
ordinances and traffic violations.
A. A municipality shall be entitled to a twenty five dollar ($25.00) prosecution fee for any violation of the city ordinance
violation or municipal traffic law, pursuant to 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-2002. Such fee shall apply to any
conviction, plea of guilty, award of supervision, or nolo contendere disposition. Such fee shall be taxed as costs to be
collected from the defendant, if possible, upon final judgment of the case. A municipality shall have a lien for such
prosecution fees on all judgments or fines procured by the municipal attorney from prosecutions.
B. In all actions for violations of any city ordinance or municipal traffic law, where a defendant is found guilty, pleads nolo
contendere, or is awarded court supervision, a prosecution fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be assessed by
the clerk of the court and payable to the municipality as "prosecution fees". (Ord. 2010-33)
Chapter 12
COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
1-12-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created a Community Services Department for the City. (1998 Code)
1-12-2: OFFICE OF COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR:
The office of Community Services Director is hereby created. The Director shall be appointed by the City Manager. The
Director shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the Department, subject to the
control of the City Manager. (1998 Code)
1-12-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Community Services Department shall perform the following functions:
A. Equal Opportunity Issues; Affirmative Action: Assist the City in meeting its obligations to provide equal employment
opportunity to women and minorities in City jobs and in projects funded by the City and oversee the City's affirmative
action program to provide opportunities for disadvantaged persons.
B. Youth Activities: Work with local governments and private organizations to optimize the availability of programs and
activities for youth.
C. Day Care Services: Operate the Eurma C. Hayes Day Care Center for the children of persons who are working or in
job training.
D. Specialized Services: Contract with community based organizations to provide specialized services such as youth
activities, senior citizens programs, and abused women.
E. Coordinate Service Delivery: Coordinate the efforts of the City and other organizations in the community which
provide human and social services in an effort to coordinate the delivery of services.
F. Fair Housing: Provide staff assistance for the enforcement of the City Fair Housing Ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 48/923
G. Affordable Housing: Coordinate affordable housing efforts in the community.
H. Grants: Prepare grant applications for activities related to the Department's functions.
I. Staff Support: Provide staff support to City advisory bodies as assigned. (1998 Code)
Chapter 13
CITY PROPERTY
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following definition, unless specified
otherwise:
AFFIRMATIVE VOTE: When a vote is taken by the City Council on a motion, resolution or ordinance, all votes counted
toward the passage of the motion, resolution or ordinance shall be in the form of "yeas". If a City Councilmember
abstains, passes vote or refuses to vote, such will be counted as a "nay" vote.
CAPITAL OUTLAY: Vehicles, equipment, infrastructures of the City, or any other item, object or property which is of a
nonexpendable nature and recorded as fixed assets in the City's funds.
CITY: The City of Carbondale.
CITY COUNCIL: The current members of the Carbondale City Council.
CITY-OWNED: The ownership of which is held in right, title and interest by the City of Carbondale.
CITY PROPERTY: All property such as land, buildings, motor vehicles, furniture, and equipment now owned by the City
or which for City purposes is hereafter acquired and owned by the City, including all lands now owned or which are
hereafter acquired and owned by the City for cemetery purposes, shall constitute City property, unless and until disposed
of in such manner as may be provided by law, ordinance or the provisions of this City Code.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES1: Any contract created for the use and service of the following: telephone, gas, water,
electric light, or power, towel and cleaning services, insurance, leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other space
required by the using agencies, rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and City-owned property. The
term shall not include professional and other contractual services which are in their nature unique and not subject to
competition.
CONVEYANCE: The transfer of property or the title to property from one person or entity to another by means of a
written instrument and other formalities.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The members of the legislative body of any "municipality" as defined herein.
ENTERPRISE ZONE: That enterprise zone as designated by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs which encompasses portions of the City of Carbondale, City of Murphysboro and unincorporated Jackson County,
Illinois.
LEASE: An agreement whereby one party relinquishes his right to immediate possession of property to another while
retaining ultimate ownership.
MAI: Member of appraisal institute.
MUNICIPALITY: Whether used by itself or in conjunction with other words, shall mean and include any municipal
corporation or political subdivision organized and existing under the laws of the state of Illinois and including, but without
limitation, any city, village, or incorporated town, whether organized under a special charter or under the general act, or
whether operating under the commission or managerial form of government; any county, water district, school district,
trustee of school, board of education, sanitary district or sanitary district trustee, forest preserve district or forest preserve
district commissioner, park district or park commissioner, airport authority and township.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 49/923
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes materials, objects, goods, chattels, effects, and movable things, the ownership of
which is held in right, title and interest by a particular person or entity.
REAL ESTATE: See definition of Real Property in this section.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, lands under water, structures and any and all easements, franchises and incorporeal
hereditaments and estates, and rights, legal and equitable, including terms for years and liens by way of judgment,
mortgage or otherwise.
SALE: An agreement whereby the seller transfers real or personal property to a buyer for a consideration.
STATE OF ILLINOIS: The state of Illinois or any department, commission, board or other agency of the state.
SUPPLIES: All supplies, materials, and noncapital outlay equipment.
SURPLUS: Action taken by a simple majority of the city council members then holding office upon determining that
certain property is no longer necessary, useful to, profitable, or in the best interests of the city. If not specified, the city
council may take action by passage of a motion.
VOTE: The city council may take action under this chapter by passing a motion, unless such action specifically calls for a
resolution or ordinance. The vote upon the motion, resolution or ordinance shall be a concurrent vote of the city council
members then holding office. All "yea" votes shall be counted toward the passage of the motion. If a city council member
abstains, passes vote or refuses to vote, such will be added as a vote to whichever side has the most votes on the
motion. (Ord. 97-165)
1-13-2: CITY COUNCIL VOTE REQUIRED:
Any action taken by the city council under this chapter shall be pursuant to a motion and approved by a vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required, unless such action specifically requires
action to be taken by a resolution or ordinance or approved by a simple majority vote of those council members present.
(Ord. 2005-46)
1-13-3: SURPLUS BY SIMPLE MAJORITY VOTE:
By motion, the city council may take action to surplus real or personal property under this chapter, when, in the opinion of
a simple majority of the council members present, the property is no longer necessary, useful to, profitable, or in the best
interests of the city to retain. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-13-4: CONSIDERATION PAID THROUGH PLEDGING OF TAXES:
If the city enters a purchasing contract or lease for the purpose of purchasing or leasing real or personal property, and
said contract or lease agreement provides for the consideration to be paid in installments over a period of time through
the pledging of future property taxes, the city shall follow the statutory procedures pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-76.1 et seq. (Ord. 97-165)
1-13-5: PROCEEDS OF SALE, LEASE OR CONVEYANCE:
Proceeds of the sale, lease or conveyance of real or personal property pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the
appropriate fund account per generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP). (Ord. 97-165)
1-13-6: AUTHORIZATION:
The city council hereby gives authorization for the following transactions in order to carry out the intent and purpose of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 50/923
this chapter:
A. Leases: Unless otherwise stated herein, the city manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to enter into any lease
agreement on behalf of the city, as lessor or lessee, for the purpose of leasing real estate or personal property,
subject to city council approval if required by this chapter. Such lease shall be signed by the city manager on behalf
of the city and shall be attested by the city clerk under the city seal. Such lease shall be executed by the other party
to the lease in such manner as may be necessary to legally bind the party to the lease agreement. Any lease for real
estate, upon execution by both parties, shall be duly recorded in the county clerk's office of Jackson County, Illinois.
B. Contracts: Unless otherwise stated herein, the city manager, or his designee, shall be authorized to enter into any
contract, document or agreement on behalf of the city for the purchase, sale or conveyance of real estate or personal
property, subject to city council approval if required by this chapter.
C. Deeds For Conveyance Of Real Estate: Upon the city council conveying or selling real estate pursuant to this chapter,
the mayor shall execute any deed or other evidence of transfer of title on behalf of the city along with the city clerk
attesting to such execution for the purpose of selling, conveying or accepting real estate. After being so executed, the
deed shall be duly recorded in the county clerk's office of Jackson County, Illinois. (Ord. 97-165)
1-13-7: PURCHASE OF REAL ESTATE:
The city may purchase real estate upon passage of a resolution by an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council
members present, but at least four (4) votes are required, through one of the following methods:
A. Upon the city council's determination that acquiring said property is in the best interests of the city or that said
property is necessary for a specific public purpose.
B. Upon the city council's determination that acquiring said property is in the best interests of the city for the public
purpose of promoting economic, industrial, commercial or residential development or redevelopment within the city.
The city manager shall be authorized to enter into a contract or agreement for the purchase of the real property. (Ord.
2005-46)
1-13-8: SALE OF CITY OWNED REAL ESTATE:
Real estate owned by the city shall be sold by one of the following methods as determined appropriate by the city
council:
A. Bidding Process: Upon the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council members then
holding office, the city council may authorize the sale of real estate. Said ordinance shall specify the location of the
real estate, the use thereof, and such conditions with respect to further use of the real estate as the city council may
deem necessary and desirable to the public's interest. Upon the adoption of said ordinance, notice shall be published
once each week for three (3) successive weeks in a daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation in the city. The
first publication shall be not less than thirty (30) days before the day provided in the notice for the opening of bids for
the real estate. The notice shall advertise for bids, contain an accurate description of the property, state the purpose
for which it is used, when the bids will be opened, and at what city council meeting the bids will be considered. All
bids shall be opened in public by the city manager, or his designee. The bids shall be presented to the city council for
consideration at a regular or special city council meeting. The city council may accept the high bid or any other bid
determined to be in the best interests of the city by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council members then holding
office; but a simple majority vote of the city council members then holding office may reject any and all bids. The
consideration for such a sale may include, but need not be limited to, the provision of off street parking facilities by
the purchaser, which parking facilities may be made part of the municipal parking system. Such consideration may
also include the provision of other public facilities by the purchaser.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 51/923
B. Alternative Process: The city may, upon passage of a resolution by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council
members then holding office, authorize the sale or public auction of surplus real estate. The value of the real estate
shall be determined by a written MAI certified appraiser or by a written certified appraisal of a state certified or
licensed real estate appraiser. The appraisal shall be available for public inspection. The resolution may direct the
sale to be conducted by the city manager or his designee; by listing with any local licensed real estate agency, in
which case the terms of the agent's compensation shall be included in the resolution; or by public auction. The
resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at the first opportunity following its
passage. The resolution shall also contain pertinent information concerning the size, location, use, and zoning of the
real estate and the terms of sale. The city council may accept any contract proposal determined to be in the best
interests of the city by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council members then holding office, but in no event at a
price less than eighty percent (80%) of the appraised value.
C. Conveyance Of Surplus Real Property: Any real property, that is acquired or held by the city of Carbondale for any
purpose whatsoever, may be conveyed to any person, entity, corporation, organization or agency, upon the city
council's determination that such real property is no longer necessary, appropriate, required for the use of, profitable
to or for the best interests of the city of Carbondale, upon the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
the city council members then holding office. Notice of the proposed sale or conveyance shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city no less than seven (7) days and no more than thirty (30) days prior to the
meeting at which the ordinance shall be considered by the city council. The notice shall contain a general description
of the property, the purpose for which it is to be used by the purchaser, the terms of the conveyance or sale, and the
benefits to the community to be served thereby. The city manager is hereby authorized to negotiate the terms,
conditions and consideration for the sale or conveyance.
D. City Manager/Real Estate Agencies/Public Auction:
1. If the city has either: a) adopted an ordinance to sell public real estate, pursuant to subsection A of this section, but
has received no bid on a particular parcel; or b) adopted a resolution to sell surplus public real estate under
subsection B of this section and has received no acceptable offer on a particular parcel within six (6) months after
passage of the resolution, then the city council may, upon passage of a resolution by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
the city council members then holding office, authorize that parcel of real estate be sold in one of the following
manners:
a. Authorize the city manager to negotiate the sale of real estate;
b. List the real estate with any local licensed real estate agency; or
c. Sell the real estate by public auction.
2. The resolution shall include the terms of the sale, the compensation of the agent (if any), the time and place of the
auction (if applicable), a legal description of the property and its size, and the use and zoning of the property. The
resolution shall be published once each week for three (3) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city on a daily or weekly basis. No sale may be conducted until at least thirty (30) days after the first
publication. The city council may, by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council members then holding office,
accept any offer or bid determined to be in the best interests of the city.
E. Economic, Industrial, Commercial Or Residential Development Or Redevelopment: The city council may convey or
sell real estate which has been purchased by the city for promoting economic, industrial, commercial, or residential
development or redevelopment within the city or when other city owned real estate is no longer necessary,
appropriate, required for the use of, profitable to or for the best interests of the city but instead would be of value to
promote economic, industrial, commercial or residential development or redevelopment within the city, upon the
adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council members then holding office, at a regular or
special meeting. Notice of the proposed sale or conveyance shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city at least seven (7) days but not more than thirty (30) days prior to the meeting at which the ordinance is
considered by the city council. The notice shall contain a description of the property, the purpose for which it is to be
used by the purchaser, the terms of the conveyance or sale (including the sale price, if any), and the benefits to the
community to be served thereby. The city manager is hereby authorized to negotiate the terms, conditions and
consideration of the sale or conveyance. When considering the ordinance, the city council may take into
consideration factors such as the number of jobs to be created, the amount of increase to the community's tax base,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 52/923
long term economic, industrial, commercial or residential growth, and the physical development or redevelopment of
the community.
F. Sale Of City Owned Real Estate In An Enterprise Zone: Upon being declared surplus, the city may dispose of unused
structures or vacant land owned by the city and located within an enterprise zone, through any method for conveying
real estate pursuant to this chapter, upon the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council
members then holding office. Upon the city establishing an urban homestead or shopstead program, disposal of real
estate under such programs shall be pursuant to 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 655/10 et seq., or as hereafter
amended.
G. Real Estate Acquired By State Or Federal Funding: If the city has acquired real estate with funds from the state or the
United States and a condition of the receipt of such funds was that the real estate would be sold in a manner
prescribed by the state or the United States and said conditions and prescriptions remain in effect at the time of the
proposed sale, then the sale shall be in conformity with said conditions and prescriptions. Such sale shall be
approved upon the adoption of an ordinance by an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city council members then
holding office.
H. Cemetery Property: The sale of city owned cemetery spaces, lots and blocks shall be pursuant to title 6, chapter 2 of
this code.
I. Exchange Of City Owned Real Estate: The city may exchange real estate for property held by another party when the
following conditions are met:
1. A public hearing on the proposal to exchange real estate shall be held by the city council at a time and place to be
designated by them upon such proposal, pursuant to notice of public hearing duly published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. Said notice shall be so published not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty
(30) days prior to the date of the hearing, shall set forth a legal description of the property or properties to be
exchanged, as well as the property or properties that the city is to receive through such exchange, and the
proposed terms and conditions otherwise of such exchange.
2. After the conclusion of said public hearing, the city council may, upon adoption of an ordinance by a vote of twothirds
(2/3) of the city council members then holding office, authorize the exchange proposed, or as modified by the
city council after the public hearing. The authorization shall state the following findings that: a) the premises to be
conveyed by the city under such exchange is no longer necessary, useful to, or in the best interests of the city; b)
the premises to be received by the city under such exchange will prove useful to the public's interests; and c) the
total value of the substitutional premises is approximately equal to or exceeds the value of the premises for which
same is being exchanged, as determined by the city council, taking into consideration the long term best interests
of the public.
J. Easements To Public Utility Services: The city may, upon the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
the city council members then holding office, convey or grant an easement to public utility companies or entities for
the use of city owned real estate upon determining that such conveyance would be in the best interests of the city.
Any easement conveyed pursuant to this subsection shall be executed by the mayor, attested to by the city clerk and
duly recorded in the Jackson County clerk's office. (Ord. 2012-44)
1-13-9: LEASE OF CITY OWNED REAL ESTATE:
The city may lease real estate by one of the following methods:
A. City As Lessor: Real estate owned by the city may be leased by one of the following methods based on the proposed
duration of the lease, unless otherwise specified in this section:
1. More Than Twenty Years, Less Than Ninety Nine Years: The city may lease city owned real estate for a term in
excess of twenty (20) years and not more than ninety nine (99) years, upon the adoption of an ordinance by a vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required, during a regular or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 53/923
special meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days before the date of the meeting at which the ordinance
will be considered. The notice shall contain an accurate description of the property, the purpose for which it is used,
the restrictions upon the proposed use of the property to be leased, and the time and place of the regular or special
city council meeting at which the ordinance will be considered. The city manager may negotiate the consideration
and terms of such lease and enter into it on behalf of the city. Such consideration may include the provision of off
street parking facilities by the lessee, which parking facilities may be made part of the municipal parking system,
and provisions for other public facilities on the real estate acquired. The city council may contract with the lessee
for the use of a portion of a structure or improvements to be constructed on the real estate leased. The duration of
the lease shall not exceed ninety nine (99) years.
2. More Than Two Years, Twenty Years Or Less: The city may lease city owned real estate for a term in excess of
two (2) years but not in excess of twenty (20) years, upon the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required, without publication of notice in a
newspaper. The city manager is authorized to negotiate the consideration and terms of the lease and enter into it
on behalf of the city.
3. Two Years Or Less: The city manager is hereby authorized to lease city owned real estate for a term not to exceed
a period of two (2) years, and in such manner as the city manager may determine.
4. Intergovernmental Lease: The city may, upon the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those
council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required, lease to any other municipality, the United States,
the state, or any proper agency thereof, any real property owned or held by the city, or any part thereof or interest
therein, upon such terms and conditions and for such uses as may be agreed upon by the city council and the
representative authorities of the governmental agency for any period of time not to exceed fifty (50) years.
5. Lease Of Space Around City Buildings: The city may, upon adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required:
a. Lease the space above and around buildings located on land owned or otherwise held by the city to any person
for any term not exceeding ninety nine (99) years.
b. Lease any space over any street, alley, or other public place, in the city, more than twelve feet (12') above the
level of the street, alley, or other public place, to any person who owns a fee simple or a leasehold estate, for a
term not less than that of the proposed lease, in the property on both sides of the portion of the street, alley, or
other public place so to be leased, whenever the city council is of the opinion that the space is not needed for
street, alley, or other public purpose, and that the public interests will be subserved by such leasing. Such lease
shall be for a term not exceeding ninety nine (99) years.
c. A lease created pursuant to this subsection A5 shall by its terms specify the purpose for which the leased space
may be used. If the purpose is to erect in the space of a building above or around a building owned by the city,
the lease: 1) shall contain a reasonably accurate description of the building to be erected and of the manner in
which it shall be imposed upon or around the existing building of the city, 2) shall contain a provision granting to
the city the option of renting for municipal use from the lessee any part of the building to be erected and stating
the terms upon which this option may be exercised as well as the rent which, after exercise of this option, shall
be paid by the city, and 3) shall contain a provision granting to the city the option to purchase for municipal use
the entire building to be erected in the space leased and stating the terms upon which this option may be
exercised and the price which shall be paid for the building by the city in the event it exercises this option to
purchase.
d. Any building erected in the space leased, by exercise of the power granted by this subsection A5, which is
above or around buildings located on land owned or otherwise held by the city shall be operated, as far as
practical, separately and apart from any building owned or operated by the city. No liability shall in any manner
attach to the city by reason of the election or operation of the building space so leased.
B. City As Lessee: The city may lease real property in the following manner:
1. Lease For Public Purpose: The city may lease real property for public purposes pursuant to a lease and/or
purchase agreement, which may provide that the city may, at its option, purchase the property which is subject to
the agreement or lease upon terms wherein payments previously made, or a portion of them, are deducted from
the purchase price of the property as provided for in such lease or agreement. Such lease shall be approved by
adoption of an ordinance by an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 54/923
four (4) votes are required. If the option to purchase is acted upon, the city council shall purchase the real property,
pursuant to section 1-13-7 of this chapter.
2. Lease From Governmental Agency: The city may lease for any term not to exceed fifty (50) years from any other
municipality, state or federal agency, real property owned or held by the other municipality, state or federal agency,
or any part thereof or interest therein, upon such terms and conditions and for such uses as may be agreed upon
by the city council and the corporate authorities of the other municipality, state or federal agency in the same
manner provided in section 1-13-10 of this chapter. Such lease shall be approved by adoption of an ordinance
upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required.
3. Two Years Or Less: The city manager is hereby authorized to lease real estate for city purposes for a term not to
exceed a period of two (2) years, and in such manner as the city manager may determine. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-13-10: INTERGOVERNMENTAL TRANSFERS OF REAL ESTATE:
The city may take the following action:
A. Local Government:
1. The city may grant or convey real estate or any portion thereof to another municipality upon such terms as may be
agreed upon by the city council and the corporate authorities of the other municipality, upon adoption of an
ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required,
and duly recorded in the Jackson County clerk's office.
2. The city may purchase or accept real estate or any portion thereof from another municipality upon such terms as
may be agreed upon by the city council and the corporate authorities of the other municipality, upon a vote of twothirds
(2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required. The city shall thereafter have
the right to use, occupy or improve the real estate so transferred for any municipal or public purpose.
3. The transfer of two (2) or more parcels of real estate between the city and another municipality at the same time
and in the same proceeding may be done in the manner provided in subsections A1 and A2 of this section.
B. State And Federal Governments: The city may take the following action:
1. The city may, upon adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at
least four (4) votes are required, transfer all of the right, title and interest held by the city immediately prior to such
transfer, in and to any real estate, whether located within or without the city, to the state, or any authorized agency
thereof, upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the city council and the state, or in
consideration of a grant or loan of money by the United States, the state, or any agency thereof, for the
construction, extension, or improvement of any public works project or municipal building.
2. Upon adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4)
votes are required, the city may donate, sell, lease, or convey any land heretofore acquired to the state or any
agency thereof, to be used as a site for an armory for the national guard or naval militia, and to acquire land for
these purposes.
C. Transfer For School Or Academic Purposes:
1. The city may, by the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at
least four (4) votes are required, convey real property that has been conveyed to the city for school or academic
purposes, to the school officials or officers authorized to hold it, for the use of the school district in which the real
estate is situated. All monies which may remain in the city's funds to the credit of any fund connected with the use
of such real estate, while so held by the city, shall be used by the city for any lawful corporate purpose.
2. When authorized by the adoption of an ordinance by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present,
but at least four (4) votes are required, the city may sell and convey city owned real estate, or the city's interest
therein, to the trustee of the schools of the township or other county board of school trustees, as the case may be,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 55/923
in which the real estate is situated, to be used as a school site for the school district in which the real estate is
situated.
3. As a condition of the sale, if any real estate conveyed by virtue of this subsection ceases at any time to be used for
school purposes for a period of three (3) years, the school officers, holding the title to the real estate, shall convey
the real estate back to the city to be held, enjoyed, and disposed of thereafter as other city owned property. A
provision expressing this condition shall be inserted in the deed made by the city, pursuant to this subsection. (Ord.
2005-46)
1-13-11: VACATION OF STREETS OR ALLEYS:
A. Upon the city council's determination that the public interest will be served thereby, the city council may adopt an
ordinance to vacate a street or alley or a part thereof, upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council
members present, but at least four (4) votes are required, during a regular or special city council meeting. Notice of
the meeting and subject matter of the ordinance to be considered shall be published at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, not less than fifteen (15) days before the meeting. The ordinance may provide that it
shall not become effective until the owners of all property or the owners of a particular parcel or parcels of property
abutting upon the street or alley, or part thereof so vacated, shall pay compensation in an amount which, in the
judgment of the city council, shall be the fair market value of the property acquired or of the benefits which will accrue
to them by reason of that vacation. If there are any public service facilities in such street or alley, or part thereof, the
ordinance may also reserve to the city or to the public utility, as the case may be, owning such facilities, such
property, rights of way and easements as, in the judgment of the city council, are necessary or desirable for
continuing public service by means of those facilities and for the maintenance, renewal and reconstruction thereof. If
the ordinance provides that only the owner or owners of one particular parcel of abutting property shall make
payment, then the owner or owners of the particular parcel shall acquire title to the entire vacated street or alley, or
the part thereof vacated.
B. The determination of the city council that the nature and extent of the public use or public interest to be subserved is
such as to warrant the vacation of any street or alley, or part thereof, is conclusive, and the passage of such an
ordinance is sufficient evidence of that determination, whether so recited in the ordinance or not. The relief to the
public from further burden and responsibility of maintaining any street or alley, or part thereof, constitutes a public use
or public interest authorizing the vacation. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-13-12: PURCHASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Personal property may be purchased by the city pursuant to either of the following methods:
A. Purchase Of Personal Property Valued In Excess Of Ten Thousand Dollars: The city may, upon a vote of a simple
majority of those council members present, authorize the purchase of personal property with an estimated value in
excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), in accordance with the provisions of chapter 6 of this title. The city
manager shall be authorized to enter into a contract, lease or agreement for such purchase2.
B. Purchase Of Personal Property Valued At Ten Thousand Dollars Or Less: The city manager is hereby authorized to
purchase personal property, including, but not limited to, contractual services, supplies or capital outlays pursuant to
chapter 6 of this title, estimated in value at ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less, in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 6 of this title3. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-13-13: SALE/CONVEYANCE OF CITY OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Personal property owned by the city may be disposed of by one of the following methods:
A. Property In General: Upon the passage of a motion declaring the property surplus, the city council may, by a simple
majority vote of those council members present: 1) pass an ordinance authorizing the sale of personal property in the
open market, with or without advertising the sale, upon the receipt of competitive bids, pursuant to the formal contract
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 56/923
procedures as prescribed in chapter 6 of this title; or 2) by motion, authorize the city manager to convert that personal
property into some other form that is useful to the city; or 3) by motion, authorize the city manager to convey the
personal property as part payment on a new purchase of similarly used property4.
B. Property Valued At Ten Thousand Dollars Or Less: Personal property with an estimated value of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) or less, may be disposed of, conveyed or sold by the city manager in the open market, without prior city
council approval, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedures for awarding a formal
contract as prescribed in chapter 6 of this title. Provided, however, that any capital outlay property shall first be
declared surplus by a simple majority of the city council before being disposed of, conveyed or sold5.
C. Property Held By Police Department: This subsection applies to all property, other than real property, of which
possession is transferred to the Carbondale police department under circumstances supporting a reasonable belief
that such property was abandoned, lost or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed, except property seized during a
search, and retained and ultimately returned, destroyed or otherwise disposed of pursuant to order of a court in
accordance with 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/108-11, 5/108-12, 5/114-12 or other law hereafter applicable to
property of which custody and disposition is prescribed by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 et seq.
1. Property believed to be abandoned, lost or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed shall be retained in custody by
the chief of police who shall make reasonable inquiry and effort to identify and notify the owner or other person
entitled to possession thereof, and shall return the property after such person provides reasonable and satisfactory
proof of his ownership or right to possession and reimburses the city for all reasonable expenses of such custody.
2. Weapons which have been confiscated as a result of having been abandoned or illegally possessed may be
transferred to the department of state police for use by the crime laboratory system, for training purposes, or for
any other application as deemed appropriate by the department, if no legitimate claim is made for the confiscated
weapon within six (6) months of the date of confiscation, or within six (6) months of final court disposition if such
confiscated weapon was used for evidentiary purposes.
3. If the identity or location of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the property has not been
ascertained within six (6) months after the Carbondale police department obtains such possession, upon approval
by the city manager, the chief of police shall either:
a. Effectuate the sale of the property for cash to the highest bidder at a public auction, notice of which (including
time, place and a brief description of such property) shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city at least ten (10) days prior to such auction. Property offered but not sold at such public
auction may be offered and sold at a subsequent public auction without such notice; or
b. Transfer custody of the property to the city for use or disposal pursuant to this chapter, rather than effectuating
the sale of the property by public auction.
4. The owner or other person entitled to possession of such property may claim and recover possession of the
property at any time before its sale, upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right to
possession and reimbursing the city for all reasonable expenses of custody thereof.
D. Intergovernmental Transfer Of Personal Property: Upon a vote by a simple majority of those council members
present, the city may convey, grant, transfer, or sell to a municipality, the United States, the state, or to any proper
agency thereof, any personal property owned by the city, upon such terms as may be agreed upon by the city
council, or in consideration of a grant or loan of money by the United States, the state, or any agency thereof, for the
construction, extension, or improvement of any public works project or municipal building.
E. School Purposes: Upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are
required, the city may convey personal property that has been conveyed to the city for school or academic purposes,
to the school officials or officers authorized to hold it, for the use of the school district, by proper conveyance
executed by the city, under the corporate seal thereof. (Ord. 2005-46)
1-13-14: LEASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
The city may enter into a lease for personal property in the following manner:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 57/923
A. Lease Valued In Excess Of Ten Thousand Dollars Or For Longer Than Two Years: If the lease of personal property is
for an estimated value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or for a period longer than two (2) years, the
city council may authorize the city manager to enter into a lease, with the city as lessee or lessor, for such personal
property, as may be required for city purposes upon an affirmative vote of a simple majority of those council members
present.
B. Lease Valued At Ten Thousand Dollars Or Less And For Two Years Or Less: If the lease of personal property is for an
estimated value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less and for a period of two (2) years or less, then the city
manager is hereby authorized to lease the personal property and enter into such lease agreement on behalf of the
city as lessee or lessor, without prior city council approval.
C. Lease Of Personal Property With Option To Purchase: If the city is granted an option to purchase leased property
subject to an agreement or lease, then payments previously made, or a portion of them, may be deducted from the
purchase price of the property pursuant to the lease agreement. If the total purchase price of the leased personal
property exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in estimated value, then the city shall purchase the personal
property upon a simple majority vote of those council members present, pursuant to section 1-13-12 of this chapter. If
the total purchase price of the leased personal property does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in
estimated value, then the city manager is hereby authorized to purchase all or a portion of the leased property,
without prior city council approval.
D. Lease Of Personal Property With Local, State Or Federal Government: The city may, upon a vote of a simple majority
of those council members present, lease from a municipality, the United States, the state, or any proper agency
thereof, any personal property for use for any municipal purpose, for any period of time not to exceed fifty (50) years,
with or without an option to buy the property and with or without a clause to the effect that title to the leased property
shall vest in the city at the expiration of the lease.
E. Lease Of Equipment And Machinery: The city may, upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council
members present, but at least four (4) votes are required, authorize the city manager to enter into a lease for a period
not to exceed five (5) years for such equipment and machinery as may be required for city purposes. (Ord. 2005-46)
Chapter 14
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
ARTICLE A. BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
1-14A-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
A. Establishment; Composition: There is hereby established a Board of Local Improvements for the City. This Board shall
consist of three (3) to five (5) members at the discretion of the City Manager.
B. Appointments: The City Manager shall appoint all of the members of the Board of Local Improvements. Such persons
may be appointed from persons holding other offices or positions in the government of the City. The City Manager
shall appoint an engineer to serve on the Board.
C. President Named: The City Manager shall appoint the President of the Board of Local Improvements.
D. Meetings: The Board shall meet at such times as it may determine or upon the call of the President thereof, and shall
have the powers and duties granted to it by statute. (Ord. 73-37 § 1)
1-14A-2: PROCEDURE FOR MAKING LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 58/923
The City hereby adopts, by reference, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-1 et seq., and as amended from time to time,
as the procedure for making local improvements in the City. (Ord. 73-30 § 1)
ARTICLE B. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT LOAN AND GRANT
REVIEW BOARD
1-14B-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
There is hereby established within the city a community development loan and grant review board. It shall be the
purpose of said board to review any and all requests for loans, or grants made to the city, or any division thereof, or to
any agency, individual, corporation, or any other entity which has a contract with the city, which contract provides that
said entity may make loans or grants which would result in the expenditure of, at least partially, community development
assistance program funds. Provided, further, that no loan or grant which results in the expenditure of community
development funds shall be made by the city, any division thereof, or any entity referred to herein which contracts with
the city, which results in the expenditure of community development funds, at least partially, unless said request has
been reviewed by the board established herein. It shall further be the purpose of said board to review facade
improvement loan requests submitted to the city for approval. The board may also review other loan and grant requests
referred to it by the city manager or city council. (Ord. 2007-40)
1-14B-2: MEMBERSHIP:
Said board shall be composed of five (5) persons who have had at least one year of experience in financial and business
matters, either as a businessperson who owns, operates or manages a business, or as an employee of a financial
institution, or a person who has received substantial professional training in financial areas. Said board shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council. All terms on said board shall be for a period of three (3) years.
Any member may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the council, without cause, notice or hearing. Members
may be removed by being notified, by the mayor, thirty (30) days prior to the removal date in writing, at the last known
address of the member and by the mayor making the recommendation to the council of a successor for said member. An
affirmative vote on a successor shall be approval by the council of the removal of the member being removed. The
replacement shall serve the remainder of the term of the member being replaced. (Ord. 2007-40)
1-14B-3: DUTIES:
A. Meetings: The board shall meet at least once annually in person and at such times as is directed by the chairperson
or at the request of three (3) members. The chairperson shall be appointed by the mayor. All requests for grants or
loans proposed to be made by the city or any division thereof, or by any entity contracting with the city from funds
enumerated as provided in this article shall be forwarded to the board after review by appropriate city staff. The board
shall review said request, and make recommendation to the city manager within thirty (30) days from the receipt of
said request. The board shall advise the city manager of its recommendation, which recommendation shall be
advisory only.
B. Seniority: The board shall be required to submit its recommendation of approval or disapproval of loan applications to
the city manager with the written signature of the board chairperson. In the event that a conflict of interest, absence,
or other event arises which renders the chairperson unavailable to fulfill their duties, the remaining board members
shall assume the approval authority of the chairperson based on seniority. Seniority shall be established by date of
appointment to the board with the earliest appointment being most senior.
C. Seek Additional Information: The board shall have the authority to request additional information concerning any loan
or grant request which the board feels is relevant, and shall have the authority with the consent of the city manager to
prescribe the form upon which said request shall be made.
D. Observe Confidentiality: Members of the board shall comply with the requirements of the city concerning ethics
disclosure, and shall complete the ethics disclosure form required by subsection 1-5-7D of this title. No member shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 59/923
make any recommendation concerning any loan or grant, or discuss any loan or grant request which involves a
relative within the second degree of kinship of any said member, or any request which will directly or indirectly
financially benefit the member. (Ord. 2014-34)
ARTICLE C. PERSONNEL BOARD
1-14C-1: ORGANIZATION:
The Personnel Board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be selected in the following manner: the Mayor and
City Council shall appoint three (3) citizen members. Three (3) nonunion City employee members shall be chosen in an
election process conducted by the Personnel Officer. All nonunion City employees shall be eligible to vote in the election
and shall be eligible to be elected to the Personnel Board with the exception of the City Manager, the City Manager's
secretary, the City Manager's assistants and all administrative department heads. Those six (6) members shall then
choose a seventh member. Citizen members shall be qualified electors of the City and shall hold no salaried office or
employment in the City government, nor shall any of these three (3) members, while a member of the Board, be eligible
for appointment to any salaried office of employment in the service of the City. One of the citizen members may serve
simultaneously on the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners. The first appointees to the Board shall choose by lots for
terms as follows: three (3) members for three (3) years, three (3) members for terms of two (2) years, and one member
for a term of one year. After that, all members shall be appointed or elected, as the case may be, for a term of three (3)
years, except for replacements who shall serve until the end of the term of the member replaced. (Ord. 80-85)
1-14C-2: POWERS, APPEALS:
The Board shall have jurisdiction over any appeals submitted by any employee of the competitive service1. The Board
shall submit a written statement of facts, findings and recommendations to the City Manager. The Board's
recommendations shall be advisory in nature and the action taken by the City Manager shall be final and conclusive. The
hearing may be open to the public if requested by the employee or the City Manager. (Ord. 1436 § 5)
1-14C-3: INVESTIGATIONS:
In addition to the authority to propose nonunion personnel rules and regulations and amendments thereto, the Personnel
Board shall also conduct any investigations it deems necessary for the purpose of making recommendations concerning
nonunion personnel rules and regulations and amendments thereto to the City Manager or the City Council. (Ord. 84-50)
1-14C-4: POWER TO SUBPOENA WITNESSES:
The Personnel Board shall have full power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be
enforced by the Board by proper petition to any court of competent jurisdiction. The Board shall have power to administer
oaths and to take sworn testimony. (Ord. 1436 § 5)
1-14C-5: REMOVAL; VACANCIES:
Any member of the Board may be removed for cause at any time by the City Council. Vacancies from among the three
(3) citizen members of the Personnel Board, from whatever cause, shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with
approval of the City Council for the unexpired term. Vacancies from among employee members shall be filled from the
runner-up of candidates for the last election. The first runner-up shall fill the first vacancy and so on. The term of
employee members shall automatically cease upon their separation from service, and any employee member shall be
disqualified to participate in any grievance proceeding provided for in this Code, wherein such employee is a party
aggrieved or complained against. In the event of such disqualification, the first runner-up shall take the disqualified
employee's place for such a proceeding. (Ord. 80-85; 1998 Code)
1-14C-6: COUNSEL AND SECRETARY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 60/923
A. The City Attorney shall serve as the Personnel Board's legal advisor.
B. The Human Resources Manager or his designee shall serve as the Personnel Board's secretary. (Ord. 84-50)
ARTICLE D. CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
(Rep. by Ord. 2003-39)
ARTICLE E. INFORMATION AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION
1-14E-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established in the city a commission which shall be known as the Carbondale information and
telecommunications commission of the city. (Ord. 98-06)
1-14E-2: MEMBERSHIP:
Said commission shall be composed of seven (7) members and one city council member, appointed by the mayor, with
the consent of the city council. The chairperson and any other officers created by the bylaws of the commission shall be
elected by an affirmative vote of a majority of the commission members present and shall serve for the period specified
in the bylaws. (Ord. 2002-75)
1-14E-3: TERMS:
A. The original members shall be appointed for terms as follows:
1. Two (2) for one year terms.
2. Two (2) for two (2) year terms.
3. Three (3) for three (3) year terms.
B. All subsequent terms shall be for periods of three (3) years.
C. Members shall be residents of the city except as hereinafter provided, and the mayor shall make all reasonable efforts
to appoint to said commission representatives as follows:
1. At least one student from Southern Illinois University at Carbondale;
2. At least one representative from the office of the chancellorof Southern Illinois University, which representative
need not be a resident of the city but must live within the mile and one-half boundary of the city;
3. At least one representative from the College of Mass Communication and Media Arts, which representative need
not be a resident of the city but must live within the mile and one-half boundary of the city; (Ord. 2002-35)
4. At least four (4) other citizens of the city, who are subscribers to cable services in the city;
5. At least one city council member, who shall be an ex officio member with no right to vote. (Ord. 2002-75)
1-14E-4: BYLAWS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 61/923
The commission shall be empowered to organize and establish its own bylaws, not in conflict with this article. (Ord. 98-
06; 1998 Code)
1-14E-5: STAFF SUPPORT:
The commission shall receive reasonable support from the staff of the city manager's office of the city. All requests for
such support shall go to the city manager. (Ord. 98-06)
1-14E-6: MONETARY SUPPORT:
The commission shall be authorized to request such monetary support as it deems necessary from the city manager's
office. Said request shall be submitted by the city manager to the city council. (Ord. 98-06)
1-14E-7: PURPOSE:
A. Review Operations Of Cable Service Provider: It shall be the purpose of the commission to review the operations of
cable service providers in the city. In order to carry out such purpose, the commission is hereby authorized to carry
out the following functions:
1. Advise the city council on the following issues and matters:
a. Issues or matters which may constitute grounds for revocation of a franchise agreement in existence;
b. Disagreements among the franchisee, subscribers, and public and private users of the cable service;
c. Regulation of rates and application of said rates by the franchisee;
2. Make an annual report to the city council evaluating the cable service providers in the city. Such evaluation shall
take into account the amount of franchise fees received and distributed, total number of hours of utilization of public
channels, totals of various appropriating categories, plans submitted during the year by the franchisee for the
development of its services, and an evaluation indicating whether the franchisee is complying with the franchise
agreement between the franchisee and the city;
3. Advise the city manager of the city, if requested, concerning the audit of franchisee records which are required to
be kept. In addition, the commission may request such other information in addition to that required herein which
would aid in analyzing and evaluating cable service system operations. Such requests shall be within the scope of
the franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee;
4. Investigate complaints at the discretion of the commission filed by any subscriber to a cable service provider in the
city. Based on said investigation, the commission may request that the franchisee adjust billing charges or make
reasonable refunds. If the franchisee fails to cooperate with the commission concerning said requests, the
commission shall inform the city manager's office for further action if necessary; and
5. Encourage the use and access to cable service channels among the widest range of institutions, groups, and
individuals within the city.
B. Issues Involving Informational And Telecommunication Services: It shall be the purpose of the commission to address
and discuss issues involving informational services and telecommunication services, including, but not limited to,
matters involving the operations of telecommunication providers in the city. In order to carry out such purpose, the
commission is hereby authorized to carry out the following functions:
1. Conduct public hearings, to make investigations which it deems necessary and appropriate, and to do such other
and further acts which are required by, or incidental to the functions to be carried out by the commission;
2. Discuss current issues, changes, and services involving telecommunication providers and advise the city council
accordingly;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 62/923
3. Serve as an advocate for positive change in the telecommunications and informational service area by obtaining
information and conducting public forums or hearings on new or emerging telecommunication or informational
services and programs that will benefit the citizens of the city;
4. Conduct public hearings on current and proposed programs and services;
5. Assist the city manager in seeking financial support fromgovernment grants, corporations, foundations and other
sources for projects, programs, or services approved by the commission and the city council and prepare
proposals for such support to be considered by the city council;
6. Provide information to the community on issues and changes in telecommunication programs, services,
technology, personal privacy, government regulations, and proposed changes in local, state and federal law;
7. Utilize expertise and resources from Southern Illinois University at Carbondale to conduct surveys and research
pertinent to the above responsibilities; and
8. Transact other matters that may be referred or delegated to the commission by the city council. (Ord. 98-06)
1-14E-8: DUTIES:
In order to carry out the commission's purpose and function, the commission is authorized to conduct public hearings, to
make investigations which it deems necessary and appropriate, and to do such other and further acts which are required
by, or are incidental to the functions to be carried out by this commission. (Ord. 98-06)
ARTICLE F. SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION
1-14F-1: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
A. Commission Created: There is hereby created a committee which shall be referred to as the Sustainability
Commission and which shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
City Council, seven (7) of whom shall be general members and two (2) of whom shall be student members.
B. Terms:
1. General Members: General members shall be appointed for three (3) year staggered terms. Each successive term
shall be for a period of three (3) years in accordance with a staggered schedule.
2. Student Members: Student members shall be appointed for two (2) year terms.
C. Membership; Qualifications:
1. General Members: All of the members shall reside within the corporate boundaries or within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of the corporate boundaries of the City. No less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members must reside within
the corporate boundaries. General members of the commission will be appointed to include a wide spectrum and
citizens with interests and expertise in environmental issues, energy use and planning, consumers, builders, and
contractors, students, landlords, utility representatives and others with interest in energy, environmental, and
sustainability matters.
2. Student Members: Student members shall reside within the City at the time of their appointment and shall maintain
such residence during their term on the Sustainability Commission with the exception of temporary absences
during school breaks. One student member shall be a student in good standing at Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale while the other student member shall be a student in good standing at Carbondale Community High
School. Both student members shall possess sustainability, energy related, or environmental academic
backgrounds or shall hold membership in sustainability, energy related, or environmental clubs or groups. (Ord.
2017-45)
D. Compensation: All members, both general and student members, shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2009-43)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 63/923
1-14F-2: FUNCTIONS:
The Sustainability Commission shall advise the City Council concerning the following matters:
A. Recommendations for energy conservation provisions in the Building Code.
B. Study of possible incentives and financing methods of energy conservation and the use of renewable energy sources
such as solar energy.
C. Application of energy and environmental conservation principles within all facets of the City.
D. Increase energy efficiency in transportation.
E. Facilitation of interagency exchange of information, findings, and expertise in the field of energy conservation and
environmental issues.
F. Recycling and the use of recycled or reusable materials.
G. Utilization of new technology in sustainable resources to create energy conservation using sustainable and renewable
energy sources.
H. Provide information to the City Council of the City of Carbondale and the citizens of Carbondale concerning
sustainable environmental issues, and the utilization of sustainable and renewable energy resources.
I. Make recommendations concerning renewable and sustainable energy and environmental issues facing the city of
Carbondale. (Ord. 2009-43)
ARTICLE G. BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
1-14G-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the approval and consent of a majority of the city council. The term of office shall be three
(3) years and members shall serve until their successors are appointed and have qualified. No appointment shall be
made by any mayor within thirty (30) days of the expiration of his term of office. (1998 Code)
1-14G-2: QUALIFICATIONS; REMOVAL:
No person holding an office in the city shall be a member of the board. The acceptance of any such office by a member
of the board shall be treated as a resignation of his position as a member of the board. No person shall be appointed a
member of the board who is related either by blood or marriage, up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of
the city. Members are subject to removal for cause by a majority vote of the city council. (1998 Code)
1-14G-3: DEFINITIONS:
BOARD: The board of fire and police commissioners of the city.
FIREFIGHTER: Any person holding a position in the Carbondale fire department, except as hereinbelow modified.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 64/923
OFFICER: Any sworn officer holding a position in the Carbondale police department, except as hereinbelow modified.
(1998 Code)
1-14G-4: AUTHORITY OF BOARD:
A. The board of fire and police commissioners shall have the duty and authority to compile the register of eligibles
resulting from the examination process for original appointment in the classified service of the fire and police
departments; the promotional eligibility register for promotional appointments; and shall serve as the body to hear
appeals from any suspension, demotion or termination which may be imposed by the city manager against any police
officer or firefighter, and to hear appeals as a result of complaints brought against a member of the police or fire
departments by a member of the public. The board shall have no authority to discipline or discharge police officers or
firefighters.
B. The board of fire and police commissioners is created pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1. (1998 Code)
1-14G-5: MEETINGS:
A. Notice: Notice of regular or special meetings shall be posted in accordance with the open meetings act and open to
the public. During any regular or special meeting, a closed session may be held upon a proper motion made by a
member of the board. Closed sessions may be limited to board members and such invited persons as the board may
deem necessary.
B. Quorum: Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business.
C. Chairperson: The board shall elect a chairperson at the April meeting to serve during the fiscal year. The chairperson
shall serve for one year or until a successor is duly elected and qualified. The board may designate one member to
serve as vice chairperson. (1998 Code)
1-14G-6: GOVERNING RULES:
A. Formulate And Distribute: The board shall formulate rules to carry out the purposes of these provisions. All rules and
revisions thereto shall be made available for distribution not more than ten (10) days from the date of adoption. (1998
Code)
B. Substance And Application: The governing rules shall apply only to the examination process for certification to the
eligibility list and promotional register, to the appeal process which may be filed by an officer or firefighter as a result
of a suspension, demotion or termination imposed by the city manager and to the appeal process arising out of
complaints brought against a member of the police or fire department by a member of the public. (Ord. 2008-10)
C. Limitation Of Rules: No governing rule of the board shall apply to the operation of the police or fire departments or the
conduct of its members. (1998 Code)
D. Examination Process: The board of fire and police commissioners shall have the authority to promulgate rules
governing the examination process for original appointment and promotion in the classified service of the fire and
police departments. (Ord. 96-44)
1-14G-7: ANNUAL REPORT:
The board shall provide to the mayor an annual report of its activities and of the rules in force and the practical effect
thereof. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 65/923
1-14G-8: SECRETARY:
The deputy city clerk shall serve as secretary for the board and shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings, shall
be the custodian of all records pertaining to the business of the board, and shall keep a record of all examinations held.
(1998 Code)
1-14G-9: FACILITIES AND FUNDS:
The city shall allow reasonable use of public buildings for meetings and for the holding of examinations and shall provide
adequate funds in the annual appropriation for the operation of the board. (1998 Code)
1-14G-10: ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD:
The city attorney shall represent the board and handle all matters before the board upon behalf of the city. In the event
that the city attorney shall represent the board, the city may employ an attorney of its choosing to serve as prosecutor
before the board. (1998 Code)
1-14G-11: APPLICATION PROCESS:
A. Application Cards: Application cards for positions in the police or fire department shall be available in the city clerk's
office. Completed cards shall be kept on file pending publication of the test date. Upon publication of the test date,
the clerk shall notify, by mail, those persons who have completed an application card that an application form will be
available in the clerk's office during regular business hours.
B. Time Qualification; Preemployment Agreement: Applications for positions in the police or fire departments shall
consist of a completed application form, provided by the city. Applications shall be submitted to the city clerk's office
by the deadline determined by the board with respect to each examination. Such dates shall be included in
publication of the examination notice. In addition, each person submitting an application shall submit a signed
preemployment agreement on the form provided by the city clerk.
C. Informational Booklet: Upon submission of a completed application form and the signed preemployment agreement,
each applicant shall receive a written explanation of the testing procedures for original appointment to the police or
fire department. (1998 Code)
1-14G-12: APPOINTMENTS:
A. Appointments By City Manager: Board, upon compilation of an eligibility list for original appointment to either the fire
department or police department, shall deliver to the city manager an alphabetical list of names of all qualified and
eligible persons for the positions. The city manager shall make all original appointments to the fire and police
departments from the list of eligible candidates. Any certificate of appointment issued shall be signed by the city
manager.
B. Appointments Discretionary: The board, upon certifying that applicants under this article have satisfied all
requirements imposed by the board, shall deliver to the city manager analphabetical list of names of all qualified and
eligible persons for reappointment to the police department or fire department. The city manager may, at his
discretion, make appointments to the police department or fire department from the respective lists of eligible
candidates for reappointment. The city manager shall sign any reappointment. (Ord. 91-53)
1-14G-13: PROMOTIONAL APPOINTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 66/923
A. The board, upon completion of an eligibility register for promotional appointments to either the fire department or
police department, shall deliver to the city manager an alphabetical list of the names of all qualified and eligible
people for said positions. The city manager shall make all promotional appointments to the fire and police
departments from the list of eligible candidates. Any certificate of appointment issued to any officer or member of the
fire or police department shall be signed by the city manager.
B. If a candidate does not wish to be certified as one of the eligible candidates for promotion, then his name will be
dropped from the eligibility list or if the certified letter is returned from the post office as undeliverable, then the board
of fire and police commissioners will remove the name of the uninterested or unavailable candidate from the eligibility
list. (Ord. 90-102)
1-14G-14: REVIEW OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
A. Appeals Board: The board has no authority in disciplinary matters involving police officers and firefighters other than
to serve as an appeal board from any disciplinary action taken by the city manager.
B. Criteria For Appeal: Any police officer or firefighter, who has been suspended, demoted or terminated by action of the
city manager, may appeal that action to the board.
C. Decision: The board is hereby granted the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the city manager's decision. The city
manager may appeal any decision of the board to reverse his decision to the circuit court pursuant to the
administrative review act.
D. Time Limited Suspension: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city manager from suspending,
with or without pay, an officer or firefighter for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. Any police officer or
firefighter so suspended may appeal for review to the city manager within twenty four (24) hours of the notice of the
suspension, and upon appeal, the city manager may conduct a hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be
appealable to the board. The burden to show that the suspension is erroneous is upon the individual bringing the
appeal. (1998 Code)
1-14G-15: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
The provisions of this article pertaining to disciplinary action shall apply only to full time firefighters and full time police
officers of a regularly constituted fire or police department, who hold the rank of patrol officer or firefighter, and not to any
other personnel of the city or the police or fire chief. (1998 Code)
ARTICLE H. CARBONDALE OFFICE OF EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT
1-14H-1: PURPOSE:
It is the declared purpose of this article to provide for the preparation and implementation of plans for the protection of
persons and property within the city in the event of a civil emergency; the direction of the Carbondale office of
emergency management; the coordination of the Carbondale office of emergency management with all other public
agencies, corporation, organizations and affected private persons. This article will assure the general well being of the
people of Carbondale. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-2: DEFINITION:
As used in this article, "civil emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of peril to the safety
of persons and property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 67/923
earthquake, wind, storm, toxic spill, or water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger, damage,
epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, or critical shortages of essential fuels and energy.
(Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-3: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Carbondale office of emergency management (COEM) to ensure that the city will be
prepared to deal with any civil emergency and protect the public peace, health, and safety in the event of such a
disaster. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-4: COORDINATOR:
The COEM shall consist of the coordinator who shall be appointed by the city manager and such other employees as
may be determined by the coordinator with the approval of the city manager. In the event of the absence of the
coordinator, the city manager, or his designee, shall act as coordinator until a new appointment is made. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-5: FUNCTIONS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The coordinator of COEM shall have the following duties and responsibilities and perform the following functions:
A. Prepare and distribute a clear and complete statement of the emergency disaster plan for the city which shall conform
to the Illinois emergency management agency and regulations which may be promulgated by the governor. In
complying with 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/10(f), a copy of this statement shall be prepared and distributed
annually to the director of the Illinois emergency management agency for the state of Illinois;
B. Develop and direct the city's emergency awareness and public information program;
C. Negotiate mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions in the state, which shall require approval by the city
council and the director of the Illinois emergency management agency;
D. Conduct activities outside the corporate limits of the city as may be required, pursuant to any mutual aid agreements
which may be entered into between the city and other political subdivisions regarding the agency. If any such
agreements are entered into, the coordinator shall inform the city attorney's office promptly as to the nature and
extent of the agreement;
E. Recommend the declaration of a state of civil emergency by the mayor and to inform the mayor of the reasons for and
status of events requiring the declaration;
F. Cooperate fully with the state and federal emergency management agencies and the governor in the event the
governor declares that an emergency exists;
G. Prepare, for the issuance by the mayor, orders, proclamations and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping
with disasters;
H. Develop rules and requirements for the city emergency operating plan, in accordance with state and federal
guidelines;
I. Establish a register of persons with types of emergency management training skills and equipment in mitigation,
preparedness, response and recovery;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 68/923
J. Establish a list of government and private response resources available for use in the event of a disaster; and
K. Do anything else necessary to fulfill his duties under municipal, state, and federal laws. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-6: SERVICE OF MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
A. All members of the city organization may be designated as members of the mobile support team created by the
director of the Illinois emergency management agency.
B. Any city employee or officer serving as a member of a mobile support team at the request of the governor, mayor, or
the director of the Illinois emergency management agency shall receive compensation and have the powers, duties,
rights and immunities incident to the employment or office with the city. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-7: OATH OF SERVICE:
Every person hired or appointed to serve in any capacity in the COEM organization shall, before entering upon his
duties, take the oath, in writing, as set forth in 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/20. The oath shall be filed with the
coordinator. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-8: DECLARATION OF A STATE OF CIVIL EMERGENCY:
A. The mayor, mayor pro tem, or city manager, in the order named, shall have the authority to declare a state of civil
emergency by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the civil emergency, which shall
be filed in the office of the city clerk.
B. Upon the absence or unavailability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem may issue the written declaration; and upon the
absence or unavailability of the mayor and mayor pro tem, the city manager may issue the written declaration.
C. Any declaration of civil emergency and all emergency regulations activated under the provisions of this article shall be
effective for a period of seven (7) days unless sooner terminated by the mayor. The declaration may be continued or
renewed for additional periods of seven (7) days with the approval of the city council.
D. A declaration of civil emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the city
clerk. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-9: MAYOR'S AUTHORITY DURING CIVIL EMERGENCY:
The mayor's authority upon declaration of a civil emergency shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
A. To order an evacuation in the face of fire, earthquake, toxic spill, flood or other similar threat.
B. To seal off threatened or damaged areas of the city.
C. To enter upon private property if such action is deemed necessary for the preservation of life or other disaster
mitigation, response or recovery.
D. To close any and all retail or wholesale business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 69/923
E. To commandeer citizens to assist in the fight against the civil emergency.
F. To commandeer vehicles, boats, pumps, buildings or any other private property when necessary.
G. To proclaim a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city, or the city as a whole, if such is
necessary in the interest of public safety and welfare.
H. To prohibit the sale of merchandise, goods or services at more than the normal average retail price.
I. To suspend the provisions of any municipal ordinance proscribing procedures for the conduct of municipal business, or
the orders, rules and regulations of any municipal agency if strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance,
rule or regulation would prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-10: PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES:
In carrying out the provisions of this article, the mayor may authorize the taking of property on behalf of the city;
provided, however, that simultaneously with such taking, a signed statement is delivered to the owner or agent, which
shall include the name and address of the owner, the date and place of the taking and if possible, a sum the owner is
willing to accept as just compensation for the property or the use thereof. When the compensation to be paid for the
taking or use of property or interest cannot be determined, the determination shall be made pursuant to 20 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 3305/7(a)(4)b and (a)(4)c. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-11: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
In carrying out the provisions of this article, the coordinator, with the approval of the city manager, may exercise such
power necessary to protect life and property without regard to the procedures and formalities normally prescribed
pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligation, employment of
temporary workers, rental of equipment, or the purchase of supplies and materials. (Ord. 2015-32)
1-14H-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The city council may make an appropriation for COEM purposes in the manner provided by law, and any additional levy
for COEM purposes only, a tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value
of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the Illinois emergency management agency act of
19921, as amended; however, the amount collectible under such levy shall, in no event, exceed twenty five cents ($0.25)
per capita. (Ord. 2015-32)
ARTICLE I. CARBONDALE HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
1-14I-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The City Council of the City of Carbondale hereby seeks to protect its citizens from prejudice and the practice of
discrimination against any individual or group because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial
status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry. The City of Carbondale seeks to eliminate any such prejudice and
discrimination by creating a Human Relations Commission that will be instrumental in maintaining a community free of
such prejudice and discrimination. A commission is hereby established through which the citizens of the City of
Carbondale may be kept informed of developments in human relations, businesses and public entities may obtain
assistance in ameliorative practices to keep peace and good order, and private persons and groups may be officially
encouraged to promote tolerance and goodwill toward all people. (Ord. 2003-66)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 70/923
1-14I-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The Carbondale Human Relations Commission shall be comprised of eleven (11) members.
A. Appointment: The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and with the advice and consent of the City Council. The
Chairperson shall also be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Appointments to
the commission shall reflect the broad ethnic and cultural diversity from within the Carbondale community. The Mayor
shall take all reasonable steps to appoint a commission, wherein the members reside throughout the community
including the northeast, northwest, southeast, and southwest sections, and wherein the business community is
represented. One member shall be a full time student enrolled at Southern Illinois University Carbondale. All
members of the commission shall permanently reside within the corporate limits of the City of Carbondale, or in the
alternative, within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits. No less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members
must reside within the corporate boundaries.
B. Term: The members shall be appointed and hold office as follows: three (3) members shall be appointed for one year
(1 of which shall be a student appointment), four (4) shall be appointed for two (2) years, and four (4) shall be
appointed for three (3) years. Members thereafter appointed or reappointed shall serve a term of three (3) years from
the date of their appointments and until their successors shall be appointed and qualified, except for the student
member who shall serve a term of one year, beginning on June 1 of each year, except for the student member initially
selected who shall serve a term beginning on the date of such selection and expiring on the next succeeding May 31.
All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for any personal expense incurred in the
performance of their duties.
C. Removal: Any member may be removed from the commission by the City Council upon a majority of the City Council
members determining that such person's role on the commission no longer serves the best interests of the City of
Carbondale and its citizens. (Ord. 2017-45)
1-14I-3: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The general purpose and function of the Human Relations Commission shall include the following:
A. To serve as an advisory body to the City Council on human relations;
B. To study problems in the City of Carbondale relating to relationships among individuals and groups of all kinds, and to
make recommendations to the City Council for the betterment of such relationships within the community;
C. To invite and enlist the cooperation of all racial, sexual and ethnic groups, as well as persons representing various
economic, educational, and social groups in all areas of the City of Carbondale, and to act as a coordinating agency
among these and other groups in the community in the establishment and maintenance of educational programs in
the community designed to bring about better human relations;
D. To promote mutual understanding and foster equality and respect among all racial, religious, sexual, sexual
orientation, national origin or ancestry, age and ethnic groups, among persons of all economic and educational
status, and generally throughout the entire community so as to prevent discriminatory practices in human relations;
E. To institute and conduct educational and other programs to promote the equal rights and opportunities of all persons,
regardless of their race, color, religion, sex, age, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry, familial status or
marital status, and to promote understanding among persons and groups of different races, colors, religions, national
origins or ancestries, sexes, ages, sexual orientations, familial statuses and marital statuses;
F. To assist the general public in contacting the appropriate agency and/or person to file a complaint with the Illinois
Human Rights Commission and/or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission for alleged discrimination under
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 71/923
the Illinois Human Rights Act;
G. To prepare and submit to the Carbondale City Council an annual report on its progress in accomplishing the duties of
the commission;
H. To make a recommendation to the appropriate agency or organization in regard to promoting positive human
relations;
I. To receive and review a semiannual report from the Carbondale Police Department that shall include a general
summary of complaints, dispositions and noticeable trends in human relations in regard to the interaction between
the general public and the Carbondale Police Department. Upon review and discussion of the report, the commission
may make recommendations to the Carbondale Police Department, the City Manager or the City Council on how to
address negative trends or reduce complaints. Any specific complaint involving a Carbondale police officer shall be
referred directly to the City Manager to be handled in accordance with the governing rules of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners, the Carbondale Police Department rules and regulations, and/or an applicable collective
bargaining agreement;
J. To request an annual report from any law enforcement agency that performs law enforcement duties in the City of
Carbondale, which shall include a general summary of complaints, dispositions and noticeable trends between the
general public and the law enforcement agency in the City of Carbondale. Such agencies shall include, but not be
limited to, Southern Illinois University Police Department, Jackson County Sheriff's Department, Illinois Secretary of
State Police, and the Illinois State Police. Upon review, the commission may make recommendations to the law
enforcement agencies on how to address negative trends or reduce complaints. Any recommendation shall be
included in the commission's annual report to the City Council; and
K. To adopt bylaws for the regulation of the commission in conducting meetings and carrying out the duties and functions
provided herein, in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. Such bylaws shall be adopted upon the
affirmative vote of a majority of the commission members then holding office. (Ord. 2003-66)
1-14I-4: COOPERATION WITH CIVIC GROUPS AND GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES:
The Human Relations Commission may invite and enlist the cooperation of racial, religious and ethnic groups,
community organizations, labor and business organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veterans' organizations,
professional and technical organizations, and other groups in the City of Carbondale in carrying out its duties and
responsibilities. The commission may aid in the formation of local community groups in such neighborhoods as it may
deem necessary or desirable to carry out specific programs designed to lessen tensions or improve understanding in the
community. The commission shall cooperate with State and Federal agencies whenever it deems such action
appropriate in effectuating good human relations. (Ord. 2003-13)
Chapter 15
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
1-15-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created a department of administrative services for the city. (Ord. 2005-50)
1-15-2: DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES:
The office of the director of administrative services is hereby created. The director shall be appointed by the city
manager. The director shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department,
subject to the control of the city manager. Additional staff may be assigned to the department exclusive of the divisions
and offices hereinafter enumerated. (Ord. 2005-50)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 72/923
1-15-3: DIVISIONS:
In addition to the director's office, the department of administrative services shall consist of the city clerk division, civic
center division and human resources division. (Ord. 2005-50)
Chapter 16
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
1-16-1: OBJECTIVE:
The purpose of this identity theft prevention program (the "program") is to protect customers of the city of Carbondale
from identity theft. The program is intended to establish reasonable policies and procedures to facilitate the detection,
prevention and mitigation of identity theft in connection with the opening of new covered accounts and activity on existing
covered accounts. (Ord. 2009-17)
1-16-2: SCOPE:
This program applies to the creation, modification and access to identifying information of a customer of one or more of
the utilities operated by the municipality (water, sewer, and refuse) by any and all personnel of the municipality, including
management personnel. This program does not replace or repeal any previously existing policies or programs
addressing some or all of the activities that are the subject of this program, but rather it is intended to supplement any
such existing policies and programs. (Ord. 2009-17)
1-16-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this program, the following terms have the meanings set forth opposite their names, unless the context
clearly requires that the term be given a different meaning:
COVERED ACCOUNT: An account that the city of Carbondale offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or
household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments of transactions (16 CFR 681.2(b)(3)(I)). A
utility account is a "covered account". The term "covered account" also includes other accounts offered or maintained by
the municipality for which there is a reasonable foreseeable risk to customers of the municipality from identity theft (16
CFR 681.2(b)(3)(ii)).
IDENTIFYING INFORMATION: Any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other
information, to identify a specific person, including any name, social security number, date of birth, official state or
government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number,
employer or taxpayer identification number. Additional examples of "identifying information" are set forth in 16 CFR
603.2(a).
IDENTITY THEFT: A fraud committed or attempted using the identifying information of another person without authority
(16 CFR 681.2(b)(8) and 603.2(a)).
RED FLAG: A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.
Certain terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings given to them in the FTC's identity theft
rules (16 CFR part 681) or the fair credit reporting act of 1970 (15 USC 1681 et seq.), as amended by the fair and
accurate credit transactions act of 2003 into law on December 4, 2003 (public law 108-159). (Ord. 2009-17)
1-16-4: PROGRAM:
A. Administration Of The Program: Issues to be addressed in the annual identity theft prevention report include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 73/923
1. The effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the
opening of new covered accounts and activity with respect to existing covered accounts.
2. Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response.
3. Recommendations for material changes to the program, if needed for improvement.
B. Identity Theft Prevention Elements: The city of Carbondale has considered the guidelines and the illustrative
examples of possible red flags from the FTC's identity theft rules and has reviewed the municipality's past history with
instances of identity theft, if any. The municipality hereby determines that the following are the relevant red flags for
purposes of this program given the relative size of the municipality and the limited nature and scope of the services
that the municipality provides to its citizens:
1. The presentation of suspicious documents:
a. Documents provided for identification appear to have been altered or forged.
b. The photograph or physical description on the identification is not consistent with the appearance of the
applicant or customer presenting the identification.
c. Other information on the identification is not consistent with information provided by the person opening a new
covered account or customer presenting the identification.
d. Other information on the identification is not consistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the
municipality, such as a recent check.
e. An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the appearance of having been destroyed and
reassembled.
2. Suspicious personal identifying information:
a. Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides (example:
inconsistent birth dates);
b. Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, an address
not matching an address on a credit report);
c. Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications that were found to
be fraudulent;
d. Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or
fictitious billing address);
e. Social security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer;
f. An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person;
g. A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application when reminded to do so
(however, by law social security numbers must not be required); and
h. A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer.
3. Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account:
a. Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name;
b. Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up to date account;
c. Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity);
d. Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable;
e. Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the utility;
f. Notice to the utility that an account has unauthorized activity;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 74/923
g. Breach in the utility's computer system security; and
h. Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
4. Alerts from others:
a. Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, law enforcement or other person that has opened or is
maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (Ord. 2009-17)
1-16-5: DETECTING RED FLAGS:
A. Detection Of Red Flags: The employees of the city of Carbondale that interact directly with customers on a day to day
basis shall have the initial responsibility for monitoring the information and documentation provided by the customer
and any third party service provider in connection with the opening of a new account and the modification of or
access to existing accounts and the detection of any red flags that might arise. Management shall see to it that all
employees who might be called upon to assist customers with the opening of a new account or with modifying or
otherwise accessing an existing account are properly trained such that they have a working familiarity with the
relevant red flags identified in this program so as to be able to recognize any red flags that might surface in
connection with the transaction. An employee who is not sufficiently trained to recognize the red flags identified in this
program shall not open a new account for any customer, modify any existing account or otherwise provide any
customer with access to information on an existing account without the direct supervision and specific approval of a
management employee. Management employees shall be properly trained such that they can recognize the relevant
red flags identified in this program and exercise sound judgment in connection with the response to any unresolved
red flags that may present themselves in connection with the opening of a new account or with modifying or
accessing of an existing account. Management employees shall be responsible for making the final decision on any
such unresolved red flags.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written program setting forth the manner in which a
prospective new customer may apply for service, the information and documentation to be provided by the
prospective customer in connection with an application for a new utility service account, the steps to be taken by the
employee assisting the customer with the application in verifying the customer's identity and the manner in which the
information and documentation provided by the customer shall be maintained. Such program shall be generally
consistent with the spirit of the customer identification program rules (31 CFR 103.121) implementing section 326(a)
of the USA PATRIOT act but may be detailed as needed. The program administrator shall establish from time to time
a written program setting forth the manner in which customers with existing accounts shall establish their identity
before being allowed to make modifications to or otherwise gain access to existing accounts.
B. Response To Detected Red Flags: If the responsible employees of the city of Carbondale as set forth in the previous
section are unable, after making a good faith effort, to form a reasonable belief that they know the true identity of a
customer attempting to open a new account or modify or otherwise access an existing account based on the
information and documentation provided by the customer, the municipality shall not open the new account or modify
or otherwise provide access to the existing account as the case may be.
The program administrator shall establish from time to time a written program setting forth the steps to be taken in the
event of an unresolved red flag situation. Consideration should be given to aggravating factors that may heighten the
risk of identity theft, such as a data security incident that results in unauthorized access to a customer's account, or a
notice that a customer has provided account information to a fraudulent individual. Appropriate responses to prevent
or mitigate identity theft when a red flag is detected include:
1. Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft.
2. Contacting the customer.
3. Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to a covered account.
4. Reopening a covered account with a new account number.
5. Not opening a new covered account.
6. Closing an existing covered account.
7. Notifying law enforcement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 75/923
8. Determining that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. (Ord. 2009-17)
1-16-6: PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY:
A. Initial Risk Assessment; Covered Accounts: Utility accounts for personal, family and household purposes are
specifically included within the definition of "covered account" in the FTC's identity theft rules. Therefore, the city of
Carbondale determines that with respect to its residential utility accounts it offers and/or maintains covered accounts.
The municipality also performed an initial risk assessment to determine whether the utility offers or maintains any
other accounts for which there are reasonably foreseeable risks to customers or the utility from identity theft. In
making this determination the municipality considered: 1) the methods it uses to open its accounts, 2) the methods it
uses to access its accounts, and 3) its previous experience with identity theft, and it concluded that it does not offer or
maintain any such other covered accounts.
B. Program Updates; Risk Assessment: The program, including relevant red flags, is to be updated as often as
necessary but at least annually to reflect changes in risks to customers from identity theft. Factors to consider in the
program update include:
1. An assessment of the risk factors identified above.
2. Any identified red flag weaknesses in associated account systems or procedures.
3. Changes in methods of identity theft.
4. Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft.
5. Changes in business arrangements, including mergers, acquisitions, alliances, joint ventures, and service provider
arrangements.
C. Training And Oversight: All staff and third party service providers performing any activity in connection with one or
more covered accounts are to be provided appropriate training and receive effective oversight to ensure that the
activity is conducted in accordance with policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of
identity theft.
D. Other Legal Requirements: Awareness of the following related legal requirements should be maintained:
31 USC 5318(g) - reporting of suspicious activities.
15 USC 1681c-1(h) - identity theft prevention; fraud alerts and active duty alerts - limitations on use of information for
credit extensions.
15 USC 1681s-2 - responsibilities of furnishers of information to consumer reporting agencies.
15 USC 1681m - requirements on use of consumer reports.
(Ord. 2009-17)
1-16-7: RESPONSIBILITY:
The initial adoption and approval of the identity theft prevention program shall be by ordinance of the city council.
Therefore, changes to the program of a day to day operational character and decisions relating to the interpretation and
implementation of the program may be made by the director of finance (program administrator). Major changes or shifts
of program positions under the program shall be approved by the city council. Development, implementation,
administration and oversight of the program will be the responsibility of the program administrator. The program
administrator may, but shall not be required to, appoint a committee to administer the program. The program
administrator shall be the head of any such committee. The program administrator will report at least annually to the city
manager regarding compliance with this program. (Ord. 2009-17)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 76/923
Chapter 17
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
1-17-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Carbondale freedom of information ordinance. (Ord. 2010-04)
1-17-2: PHILOSOPHY OF DISCLOSURE:
Pursuant to the fundamental philosophy of the American constitutional form of government, it is declared to be the public
policy of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, that all persons are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs
of the city of Carbondale and the official acts and policies of those who represent the citizens of the city of Carbondale,
as public officials and employees, consistent with the terms of this chapter. Such access is necessary to enable the
people to fulfill their duties of discussing public issues fully and freely, making informed political judgments, and
monitoring city government to ensure that it is being conducted in the public interest. (Ord. 2010-04)
1-17-3: INFORMATION DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS:
The city of Carbondale hereby adopts, as part of this chapter, the Illinois freedom of information act contained in 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq., and hereby adopts said Illinois statute as if it were fully set out in this chapter. (Ord.
2010-04)
1-17-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city manager of the city of Carbondale shall adopt regulations and procedures consistent with this chapter to allow
for public access to city information consistent with the policies as set out in this chapter. These rules and regulations
shall be in conformity with Illinois freedom of information act, and specifically, but not limited to, 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 140/3(h). (Ord. 2010-04)
1-17-5: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICER:
There is hereby established the office of freedom of information officer, consistent with the Illinois open meetings act
contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/3.5, being one or more city officials or employees, as designated by the
mayor, each to serve until replaced by the mayor. (Ord. 2010-04)
Title 2
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Chapter 1
SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS
2-1-1: CONSTRUCTION:
This title shall be liberally construed, to the end that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city shall be
protected. Temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and promoted by sound and careful
control and regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors. (Ord. 2007-38)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 77/923
2-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases as used in this title shall be construed according
to the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin
thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOL SERVER: Person who sells or serves open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail and anyone whose job
description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail or for
entry into the licensed premises.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing more
than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, and intended to be consumed as a beverage by a human
being.
BANQUET HALL FACILITY: A business operating primarily as a venue for prearranged private parties, functions, or
events where specific social or business occasions may be held, either by invitation or reservation and not open to the
general public, wherein all or a portion of the facility is contractually rented, and where the guests in attendance are
served food and beverages in a room designated and used exclusively for such private party, function or event.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to
the public with no more than five (5) guestrooms for rent. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and
breakfast establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and
hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BEER GARDEN - OUTDOOR GARDEN/CAFE AREA: Any open air area both adjacent to and accessible to a business
possessing a license pursuant to this title to sell beer, wine, and/or any other alcoholic liquor, which contains a fence,
wall, or other construction surrounding its perimeter, and in which beer, wine, and/or any other alcoholic liquor is sold,
offered for sale, delivered, or consumed.
BOWLING ALLEY: An establishment or premises, or part of an establishment or building, as the case may be, wherein
the game of bowling, played with composition balls and ten (10) wooden pins, is played with at least ten (10) lanes of
bowling available.
CIDER: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcohol fermentation of the juice of apples or pears including, but not
limited to, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider.
CLUB: An organization formed under the laws of the state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some
common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building of such extent and
character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members
and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining
a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and
their guests; provided, that the club shall file with the local liquor control commission at the time of its application for a
license under this title two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of its board of directors, and similarly file within
ten (10) days of the election of any officer, his or her name and address; and provided further, that its affairs and
management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body, chosen by the members at
their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly
receives in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the
members of the club, or the bona fide guests of the members thereof, beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed
and voted on at the annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the
general revenue of the club.
CONTROL PREMISES: The total area of the premises which the licensee controls or is responsible for and shall include,
but not be limited to, licensed premises, parking lots, or other areas adjacent to the licensed premises.
DELIVERY: The act of transferring or giving in any manner or by any means alcoholic liquor to another by any person,
whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 78/923
ENTERTAINMENT: Any music, whether live, prerecorded, or broadcasted via radio or television, any sporting contests
including, but not limited to, volleyball and horseshoes, and any dance, play, comedy presentation, or motion picture.
FOOD: Any meat, poultry, fish, dairy product, vegetables, fruits, either alone or in combination with each other or other
material to produce an edible substance, which does not contain any alcoholic liquor except trace amounts remaining
from the cooking process.
GROCERY STORE: An establishment, the principal stock of which is one of staple and fancy groceries and for which the
principal business is the sale and distribution of said stock, including, but not limited to, produce, dairy products, eggs,
canned goods, meat, frozen goods, household cleaners, paper products and breads. A convenient store which offers a
limited availability of food items shall not be considered a "grocery store" for the purposes of this definition.
GROSS RETAIL SALES (OR REVENUE): The amount of money collected from the establishment's customers from the
sale of beverages and food, less any money collected as tax on the items sold.
GROWLER: A glass jug no larger than a U.S. half gallon (1890 ml) used to transport draft beer, sold at a microbrewery,
as a means to sell takeout beer.
HOTEL AND MOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to
be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient,
permanent or residential, in which six (6) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests.
KEG: A container of two (2) gallons or more of beer of any brand.
KITCHEN: An area containing all of the following restaurant equipment: a sink or other device for dishwashing, stove or
other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for storage of food, cabinets or shelves for storage of cooking
equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation.
LICENSED PREMISES: That area as described in the application where alcoholic liquor is allowed to be served, stored
or sold and areas internally or externally connected thereto by doorways which areas are integrally related to the
operation of the licensed establishment.
LICENSEE: Any person, corporation, limited liability company, or partnership holding a license under the terms and
provisions of this title.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION: The commission consisting of the mayor and city council of the city of
Carbondale, Illinois.
MENU: A list of the dishes to be served or available for a meal.
MICROBREWERY: A commercial enterprise at a single location producing malt beverage or beer in quantities no less
than one hundred (100) barrels per year nor more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year. The retail sale of
goods, food, and beverage or beer and on site consumption of malt beverage or beer may be permitted.
MICRODISTILLERY: A commercial enterprise at a single location producing spirits in quantities no less than one
hundred (100) gallons per year, and no more than five thousand (5,000) gallons per year. The retail sale of goods, food,
spirits and spirit products and the on site consumption of spirits may be permitted.
MOVIE THEATER: Any building to which the public is invited and pays consideration for the purpose of viewing motion
pictures.
MOVIE THEATER AUDITORIUM: That portion (or those portions) of a movie theater where patrons are seated for the
actual viewing of motion pictures.
OFF TRACK PARI-MUTUEL WAGERING: A legal wager placed or accepted at a location licensed by the state of Illinois
with respect to the outcome of a simultaneously televised horserace taking place at an Illinois racetrack or horseraces of
national or international interest held at racetracks in other states or countries.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: A bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, or any other receptacle or container, used, corked or
capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and convey any alcoholic liquor.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, limited liability company, and any other
group acting as a unit, as well as individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 79/923
representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" appears in any section of this title prescribing a
penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to
corporations or limited liability company, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for
any violation of this title.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: A private party, function or event for a specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or
reservation and not open to the general public.
REGIONALLY PRODUCED: Alcoholic beverages produced in any area south of U.S. Route 50 within the state of Illinois.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals
are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations; such space being provided with an adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for guests, and obtaining at least fifty one percent (51%) of the
annual gross revenue from the sale of nonalcoholic beverages and food. Alcohol may be served with or without the
actual purchase of meals.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
SALE: Any transfer or exchange in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration, and includes and means
sales made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee.
SENIOR LIVING FACILITY: A facility which provides housing for persons aged fifty five (55) years or older and provides
a continuing care retirement community.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution
and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise
mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TASTING: An outlet that allows a current liquor licensee to promote their alcoholic beverages by providing samples to
the public, either complimentary or for a fee.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing
sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or "spirits", as defined herein.
WINERY: An establishment that produces wine using products fully or partially grown on site. The retail sale of goods,
food and wine products and the on site consumption of wine may be permitted. (Ord. 2007-38; Ord. 2010-28; Ord. 2011-
34; Ord. 2011-42; Ord. 2011-43; Ord. 2011-53; Ord. 2013-9; Ord. 2015-55; Ord. 2016-58; Ord. 2017-02; Ord. 2017-23)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
2-2-1: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION:
The Mayor and those City Council members who have not applied for, or do not hold a Class A liquor license shall be the
Local Liquor Control Commission for the City, and are charged with the administration of the applicable provisions of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act, and ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations relating to alcoholic liquor as may be
adopted by the Mayor and City Council. To prevent any conflict of interest, the elected official with a Class A liquor
license and the direct interest in manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor cannot participate in any meetings,
hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor before either the City
Council or the Local Liquor Control Commission. The Local Liquor Control Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
A. Act On Applications: To receive applications, investigate applicants, and grant, renew, or deny liquor licenses.
B. On Site Inspection: To enter, or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, at any time, upon any premises
licensed under this title in order to enforce the ordinances of the City, laws of the State, or the Illinois Liquor Control
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 80/923
Act, or any rules or regulations adopted by the Local Liquor Control Commission to determine whether any such laws
are being violated and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in connection herewith.
C. Respond To Complaints: To receive complaints from any citizen of the City that any of the provisions of this title or any
rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the
manner hereinafter provided.
D. Collect Fees: To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the City Treasurer.
E. Examine All Pertinent Information: To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license
or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee under this title upon whom notice of suspension or revocation of license has
been served; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any applicant or licensee under this
title; to authorize any law enforcing officer to require any applicant or licensee to furnish said officer with a complete,
current list of all employees of said applicant or licensee including the names and addresses of all employees; and to
hear testimony and take proof for their information in the performance of their duties and for such purposes to issue
subpoenas. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Local Liquor Control Commission
under this section, it may authorize its agent to act in its behalf.
F. Impose Penalties: To impose penalties as provided in chapter 5 of this title.
G. Hearing Officer: The commission shall appoint an independent Hearing Officer to preside over liquor hearings.
H. Chairman: The Mayor of the City of Carbondale shall serve as the Chairman for the Local Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. 2018-18)
2-2-2: RECORDS:
The Local Liquor Control Commission shall maintain or cause to be maintained a complete record of all liquor licenses
issued pursuant to this title. A copy of each license shall be maintained in the Office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk
shall maintain all original documents pertaining to Carbondale liquor licenses. (Ord. 2018-18)
2-2-3: HEARINGS:
A. Imposition Of Penalties; Hearing To Precede Action: The Hearing Officer of the Local Liquor Control Commission may
issue a dismissal or finding of not guilty without further action from the commission. If the Hearing Officer determines
that the licensee has violated the provisions of this title, the Hearing Officer shall prepare a report and
recommendation of a proposed penalty as provided in section 2-5-2 of this title. In addition, the Hearing Officer may
request that the Local Liquor Control Commission issue a letter of reprimand, a fine, or to suspend or revoke a liquor
license issued pursuant to this title. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no licensee shall receive a
written reprimand or be fined and no license shall be suspended or revoked prior to an evidentiary hearing before the
Hearing Officer pursuant to this section. The licensee shall be given written notice of the charge or charges against it
not less than seven (7) days prior to such hearing. The licensee may, if it so chooses, be represented at its own
expense by legal counsel at the evidentiary hearing.
B. Exceptions; Summary Action: A licensed premises may be closed for not more than seven (7) days without notice or
hearing, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason(s) for closing if the Chairman of the Local Liquor
Control Commission has reason to believe that the continued operation of the specific licensed premises will or does
threaten the welfare of the community. Upon being presented with reliable evidence of a violation of this Code which
the Chairman of the Local Liquor Control Commission reasonably believes poses a danger or threat to the health,
safety or welfare of the community, the Chairman of the Local Liquor Control Commission may take action to
summarily suspend a liquor license without full Local Liquor Control Commission action. An evidentiary hearing
before the Hearing Officer shall be held within seven (7) days from the date of suspension, giving the licensee the
opportunity to be heard on the matter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 81/923
C. Duty Of Hearing Officer: The evidentiary hearing shall be presided over by the Hearing Officer of the Local Liquor
Control Commission. The Hearing Officer shall have the right to issue subpoenas for witnesses, to place witnesses
under oath, to rule on objections, to dismiss charges before the Local Liquor Control Commission, to conduct the
evidentiary hearing in an efficient manner, and to issue a report and recommendation of a proposed penalty as
provided in section 2-5-2 of this title for any violation of this title. The Hearing Officer shall be responsible for securing
the services of a certified court reporter at the evidentiary hearing. The initial costs and fees of the court reporter shall
be paid by the City, subject to subsection 2-5-2A of this title.
D. Procedure: The City Attorney's Offices shall draft the charging documents on behalf of the Local Liquor Control
Commission, and shall represent the City before the commission in all hearings. The City shall have the burden of
proving by a preponderance of the evidence the charges alleged against the licensee. After the City has presented its
evidence, the licensee may present evidence in its defense. After the licensee has presented its evidence, if any, the
City shall have the right to present rebuttal evidence, if it so chooses. The evidentiary hearing shall be informal and
strict rules of evidence shall not apply. All motions shall be filed with the City Clerk and in writing no later than three
(3) days before the scheduled hearing. Any motion not filed in accordance with this section may be denied without
hearing.
E. Order/Report And Recommendation By Hearing Officer: If the Hearing Officer of the Local Liquor Control Commission
determines that the licensee should be found not guilty no further action of the commission shall be necessary. If the
Hearing Officer determines that the licensee is guilty of the violation and that a penalty should be entered as provided
in section 2-5-2 of this title, he shall prepare a report and recommendation to the Local Liquor Control Commission.
The report and recommendation shall include the Hearing Officer's findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall
include a recommended penalty for the violation. The Hearing Officer shall also make available a copy of the
transcript of the evidentiary hearing to the Local Liquor Control Commission. Attorneys for the City and the licensee
shall receive a copy of the Hearing Officer's report and recommendation.
F. Decision Of Commission: The Local Liquor Control Commission shall consider the Hearing Officer's report and
recommendation at a public meeting. The City and the licensee shall have the opportunity to present any evidence in
aggravation or mitigation of the recommended penalty. However, no new or additional evidence regarding the
charges shall be presented to the Local Liquor Control Commission. After reviewing the report and recommendation
and any objections, the Local Liquor Control Commission may by majority vote impose a penalty against the licensee
as provided in section 2-5-2 of this title.
G. Determination Criteria: In making the determination regarding the appropriate penalty, the Hearing Officer and Local
Liquor Control Commission may consider the nature of the violation, past violations of the licensee, and the facts and
circumstances surrounding the violation as presented at the evidentiary hearing.
H. Order To Be Served: One copy of the order shall be served upon the licensee within seven (7) days of its signing by
the Chairman of the commission. Service may be made by placing the order in the United States mail, postage
prepaid. The Chairman shall also send a copy of the order to each member of the Local Liquor Control Commission.
If a fine is imposed, the licensee shall pay the fine within thirty (30) days after the date of the order, unless the order
specifically states otherwise in which case the licensee shall pay the fine by the date provided in the order. If such
fine and costs are not paid within the required time period, the Chairman of the Local Liquor Control Commission may
summarily suspend the license until such time as the fine and costs are paid.
I. Review By State; Cost: Any review by the State Liquor Control Commission of the proceedings before the Hearing
Officer or the Local Liquor Control Commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings.
No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or considered. All costs of preparing and transcribing an official
record on appeal to the State Liquor Control Commission shall be borne by the licensee requesting the review of the
official proceedings. If a fine is assessed, and the licensee requests an appeal before the State Liquor Control
Commission, the licensee shall post a bond in the amount of the fines and cost assessed with the City Clerk.
J. Appeal From Commission Decision To Suspend, Revoke Or Nonrenewal: The licensee may request an appeal before
the State Liquor Control Commission as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9, as amended, except as
provided in this section. In any case in which a licensee appeals to the State Liquor Control Commission a
suspension or revocation by the Local Liquor Control Commission that is the second or subsequent suspension or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 82/923
revocation placed on that licensee within the preceding twelve (12) month period, the licensee shall consider the
suspension or revocation to be in effect until a reversal of the Local Liquor Control Commission's decision has been
issued by the State Liquor Control Commission and shall cease all activity otherwise authorized by the license. In any
case in which a licensee appeals to the State Liquor Control Commission the nonrenewal of a license and the
licensee has had any liquor license suspended or revoked in the preceding twelve (12) months, the licensee shall
cease all activity otherwise authorized by the license. (Ord. 2018-18)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR ADVISORY BOARD
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a Liquor Advisory Board which shall have the powers and duties set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-18)
2-3-2: MEMBERS; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS:
A. Voting Rights: The Liquor Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) voting members and one ex officio member who
shall not be eligible to vote on matters before the Liquor Advisory Board, but may participate in discussions as fully as
the seven (7) voting members.
B. Residency Requirements: All of the voting members shall reside within the corporate boundaries or within one and
one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate boundaries of the City. No less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members must reside
within the corporate boundaries.
C. Composition Of Membership; Appointments: The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of the City Council, all
members of the Liquor Advisory Board. Of the seven (7) voting members, two (2) shall be students at Southern
Illinois University Carbondale. No voting member shall be employed by, own stock in, be a partner in, have an
interest in or own personally any business entity which has a license for the sale or distribution of liquor by retail or
wholesale. However, the ex officio (nonvoting) member shall be selected from among the corporate officers, partners
or individual proprietors which hold a liquor license within the City.
D. Terms Of Office: Except as provided herein, each member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. The two
(2) student members shall be appointed for a term of one year, which term shall coincide with the term of office of the
presidents of Southern Illinois University Carbondale undergraduate student government and graduate and
professional student council. (Ord. 2018-18)
2-3-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Liquor Advisory Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To review all liquor license renewal applications;
B. To meet and discuss liquor license applications with applicants that request assistance from the Liquor Advisory
Board;
C. To render an advisory opinion to the Local Liquor Control Commission as to the merits or demerits of each liquor
license renewal application it reviews;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 83/923
D. To receive and investigate complaints made by citizens of the City regarding liquor licenses; the Liquor Advisory
Board shall inform the Local Liquor Control Commission of all complaints which warrant the attention of the Local
Liquor Control Commission for further action;
E. To monitor all liquor licensees to assure their compliance with the laws of the City and the State;
F. To review the provisions of this Code pertaining to alcoholic liquor and to make recommendations to the City Council
and/or the Local Liquor Control Commission regarding those provisions;
G. To perform such other functions and duties as requested by the Mayor and City Council, from time to time. (Ord.
2018-18)
Chapter 4
APPLICATIONS AND LICENSING
2-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. License Required: No person shall sell, or offer for sale, possess or display for sale within the corporate limits of the
city, any alcoholic liquor without first obtaining a license from the local liquor control commission.
B. Exceptions: No person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, or possess any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes, except as specifically provided in this chapter. This chapter shall not prohibit
nor prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor for the personal use of the possessor, his or her
family and guests, nor prevent the making of wine, cider, or other alcoholic liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables
or grains, or the products thereof, by simple fermentation and without distillation, if it is made solely for the use of the
maker, his or her family and guests; and provided further that nothing herein contained shall prevent any duly
licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her
profession, or any hospital or other institution caring for sick and diseased persons, from possessing and using
alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of such hospital or other institution; and provided further that
any drugstore employing a licensed pharmacist may possess and use alcoholic liquors in the concoction of
prescriptions of duly licensed physicians; and provided further, that the possession and dispensation of wine by an
authorized representative of any church for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony
conducted by such church shall not be prohibited by this chapter.
C. Penalties: Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-2: NATURE AND EXTENT OF LICENSE:
A. Retail Sales: The license required by the preceding section shall be a retailer's license and shall permit the licensee to
sell and offer for sale alcoholic liquor at retail upon the licensed premises specified and described in the application.
Any license granted shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, other applicable ordinances of the city, and the
applicable law of the state of Illinois including the Illinois liquor control act. (Ord. 2007-38)
B. Exemption From State Prohibition: All city real property acquired through city, state, federal redevelopment acts and
occupied by a holder of a liquor license at the time of acquisition, and the civic center, and the following properties on
Southern Illinois University Carbondale campus: Lesar Law Building, Stone Center, Student Center, Student Health
Center, Dunn Richmond Economic Development Center, Communications Building, Morris Library, Glove Factory,
Shryock Auditorium, Arena, Saluki Stadium, Charlotte West Stadium, and Richard "Itchy" Jones Stadium, shall be
exempt from the state prohibition against sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor in any building belonging to or under the
control of political subdivisions of the state and the city may lease and license such premises for the sale of alcoholic
liquor at retail in the premises. (Ord. 2013-38)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 84/923
2-4-3: APPLICATION:
A. Form; Procedure: All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be in writing, under oath, addressed to the local
liquor control commission, and filed in the office of the city clerk.
B. Area Specified: Each license application shall indicate the dimensions of the licensed premises, its location, its control
premises, and all parking areas located on the property.
C. Signatures Required: Each application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, all partners
shall sign the application. If the applicant is a corporation or club, the application shall be signed and verified by the
president and secretary. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall be signed and verified by
the manager and all members of the limited liability company. The information recited in the application shall be under
oath or affirmation as to each person signing the application.
D. Content: Each application shall include the following information and statements:
1. In the case of an individual, the name, birth date, social security number, driver's license number, and address of
the applicant.
2. In the case of a partnership, the names, birth dates, social security numbers, driver's license numbers, and
addresses of all partners.
3. a. In the case of a corporation or club, the names, birth dates, social security numbers, driver's license numbers,
and addresses of the officers, directors, managers; and the names, birth dates, social security numbers, and
addresses of all persons who own or have an interest in over five percent (5%) of the stock.
b. In the case of a limited liability company, the date of organization, and the names, birth dates, social security
numbers, driver's license numbers, and addresses of the managers and members owning directly or beneficially
more than five percent (5%) of the ownership of the company and the person operating as manager of the
premises.
4. The class of license for which application is submitted.
5. The nature of the business which the applicant(s) intends to carry out, and the amount of applicant's anticipated
gross revenue from other sources within the proposed licensed premises.
6. The nature of entertainment, if any, proposed to be offered within the proposed licensed premises.
7. The length of time the applicant has been a resident of the state, the county, and the city, or if a partnership, the
length of time each partner has been a resident of the state, county and city; or if a corporation, the length of time
each officer or director has been a resident of the state, county and city; or if a limited liability company, the length
of time each manager and/or member has been a resident of the state, county, and city.
8. The address and telephone number of the manager, premises, and business office if different.
9. A list of the governmental entities to which the applicant has submitted an application for a liquor license, the date
of the application, the disposition of such application, amounts of and reasons for fines imposed, and the dates,
reason and length of suspension or revocation of such license, if any.
10. A completed criminal background for each person required to report conviction information.
11. The name of any person who has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax year.
12. Evidence of dramshop liability insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state. The certificate shall insure the applicant and the owner or lessor of the
premises in at least the following amounts:
Thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) general liability/personal injury per person
Thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) general liability/property damage per person
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 85/923
Forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) general liability/loss of means of support per person
The insurance coverage shall be kept current at all times during the license year. Upon request of the local liquor
control commission, or its agent, a licensee shall provide evidence of coverage at times other than the initial
application and renewal of a license.
E. Additional Information Required For A License: In addition, as a condition of applying for or maintaining a city of
Carbondale liquor license, the applicant shall copy the city on all subsequent correspondence or forms submitted to
the Illinois liquor control commission, and all documents, forms, licenses or correspondence received from the Illinois
liquor control commission.
F. Additional Information For Certain Licenses: Each applicant for an A1 or A2 license shall include the following:
1. A description of the kitchen facilities and equipment to be used in the preparation and serving of food; and
2. The hours during which the kitchen will be used in the preparation of all food items included on the restaurant
menu and the times that full menu service is available. (Ord. 2015-33)
2-4-4: PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO HOLD LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to:
A. An individual person:
1. Who is not a bona fide resident of the city.
2. Who is not of good character and reputation in the city.
3. Who is not a citizen of the United States Of America.
4. Who has been convicted of a felony or who has been convicted of pandering or any other crime of morality or a
person who has been convicted of being a keeper of a house of ill fame under the laws of the state, or any other
federal or state law, unless the local liquor control commission determines, within its sole discretion, that such
person now warrants the public trust.
5. Whose license issued under this title or the Illinois liquor control act has been revoked for cause.
6. Who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued under this title would not be eligible for such
license upon a first application.
7. Whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee.
8. Who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the
full period for which the license is to be issued.
9. Club, association, or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
10. Who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1(a)(3)
through (a)(10), or as prescribed by section 5/28-3 of the criminal code, as heretofore or hereafter amended or as
proscribed by statute replaced by the aforesaid statutory provisions.
11. To whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
12. Who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession, or
sale of alcoholic liquor, or who has forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation on or after the adoption date hereof.
13. Who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not
have liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability
amounts set out in subsection (a) of section 6-21 of the Illinois liquor control act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 86/923
B. Any law enforcing public official, mayor or any member of the city council; and no such official shall be interested, in
any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license
may be granted to a member of the city council (excluding the mayor) in relation to a premises or to an establishment
in which the council member has a direct or indirect interest if:
1. The sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food (class A license only);
2. The issuance of the license is approved by the Illinois liquor control commission;
3. The issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable ordinances of this code; and
4. The official granted the license does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the local liquor control
commission or the city council.
C. A corporation or limited liability company:
1. If any officer, manager, member, director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more
than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest of such corporation or limited liability company, would not
be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship or residence within the political
subdivision. Provided, however, that the manager of a corporation or limited liability company shall be required to
comply with the residency requirement or the corporation or limited liability company shall appoint an agent who
complies with the residency requirement.
2. Unless it is incorporated or organized in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the
business corporation act of 19831 to transact business in Illinois.
3. If the corporation, limited liability company, or any officer, manager, member, or director thereof or any stockholder
owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest of said corporation or
limited liability company has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the
current tax period.
D. A partnership:
1. Unless all of the members of such partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license.
2. To which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period or if any
of the partners have been issued a federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period.
(Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FINDINGS:
The commission shall not issue a new liquor license, renew a liquor license, approve a change of classification or
transfer of location or the transfer of the license to a new owner unless it has previously been determined that there is no
reason to refuse to issue, renew or approve such license. In determining whether there is reason to refuse to issue,
renew, or approve a license, the commission shall consider the following criteria:
A. The class of the liquor license applied for and the availability of a license in the class.
B. Compliance with all applicable state and city regulations and laws.
C. The potential impact on and demand for city services.
D. The location of the proposed establishment and probable impact of a liquor establishment at the location upon the
surrounding neighborhood or the city as a whole. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to:
1. Proximity to residential property,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 87/923
2. Proximity to schools, churches or synagogues,
3. Proximity to gasoline stations or convenience stores which offer gasoline for sale,
4. Potential impact on traffic safety,
5. Potential adverse impacts on surrounding property values,
6. Proximity to other liquor establishments,
7. Adequate street lighting and lighting on the proposed property,
8. Availability of on street and off street parking in the area,
9. Availability of sidewalks in the area if significant pedestrian traffic is anticipated.
E. The character and nature of the proposed establishment.
F. Whether live entertainment will be provided and, if so, the nature of the entertainment.
G. The proposed operation of the establishment, including staffing levels, the ability and commitment to abide by laws
and regulations, and the ability to effectively monitor activities both within the establishment and on the property.
H. The financial responsibility of the applicant and the past performance of the applicant, if any, in the area of liquor sales
or services.
I. The advisory recommendation of the Liquor Advisory Board and City staff.
J. Whether the issuance (or renewal) of said license would be in the "best interests" of the City of Carbondale (for
example, would there be an adverse impact on public health, safety, or welfare; would the issuance of the license
adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood; would the license adversely impact the City's orderly
growth and development, etc.).
K. Whether the applicant or licensee has been delinquent on payment for services, loans or other contractual
agreements received by the licensed establishment from the City of Carbondale. For the purpose of this subsection,
a licensee shall be considered delinquent on payments if the licensee is currently in arrears on an outstanding debt
owed to the City, or has been in arrears for more than fifteen (15) days on a payment to the City for services, loans or
other contractual agreements, two (2) or more times within a two (2) year period.
L. For Class A1 and A2 licenses:
1. The kitchen facilities and equipment to be used in the preparation and serving of food;
2. The hours during which the kitchen will be used in the preparation of all food items included on the restaurant
menu; and
3. The existence of game rooms, dance floors, etc., that are commonly found in bar type establishments. (Ord. 2007-
38)
2-4-6: LIMITATIONS ON AREA OF SALE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2011-34)
2-4-7: PAYMENT OF FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 88/923
A. All fees payable pursuant to this title shall be paid in full by cash, certified check, or money order and submitted at the
time the application is made for new licenses or prior to the issuance of the license for renewal licenses. There shall
be no refund of any fee paid hereunder except as set forth in this section.
B. The application fee shall be credited toward the payment of the license or transfer fee due for the license. In the event
the license applied for is denied, the license fee deposited, but not the application fee, shall be returned to the
applicant.
C. In the event the licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic beverages and return its liquor license to the City Clerk, the
licensee shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee less that percentage of the original fee which has been utilized
due to the expiration of full calendar months and less twenty percent (20%) for administrative costs.
D. Prior to making any refund, the City Clerk shall determine whether the licensee owes the City any money and withhold
payment of any refund until all monies due the City have been paid in full.
E. In the event a license issued under this title is revoked, all fees shall be forfeited. (Ord. 2007-48)
2-4-8: FEE SCHEDULE:
A. Annual Fee: The annual fees for the licenses issued under this chapter shall be as follows:
1. Class A1: All Class A1 licensees shall pay a fee of the occupancy permit number times a multiplier of 4.5, with a
minimum of two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00) and a maximum of six hundred seventy five dollars
($675.00).
2. Class A2: All Class A2 licensees shall pay a fee of the occupancy permit number times a multiplier of 13.5, with a
minimum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and a maximum of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($2,250.00).
3. Class A3: All Class A3 licensees shall pay a fee of the occupancy permit number times a multiplier of 13.5, with a
minimum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and a maximum of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($2,250.00).
4. Class B1: All Class B1 licensees shall pay a fee of the occupancy permit number times a multiplier of 7.5, with a
minimum of three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) and a maximum of one thousand one hundred twenty five
dollars ($1,125.00).
5. Class B2: All Class B2 licensees shall pay a fee of the occupancy permit number times a multiplier of 13.5, with a
minimum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and a maximum of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($2,250.00).
6. Class B3: All Class B3 licensees shall pay a fee of the occupancy permit number times a multiplier of 13.5, with a
minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a maximum of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00).
(Ord. 2017-23)
7. Class B4: All Class B4 licensees shall pay a fee of the occupancy permit number times a multiplier of 13.5, with a
minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a maximum of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00).
8. Class C1: All Class C1 licensees shall pay a fee of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00).
9. Class C2: All Class C2 licensees shall pay a fee of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00).
10. Class D1: All Class D1 licensees shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
11. Class D2: All Class D2 licensees shall pay a fee of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00).
12. Class D3: All Class D3 licensees shall pay a fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
13. Class E: All Class E licensees shall pay a fee of one thousand one hundred twenty five dollars ($1,125.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 89/923
14. Class F1: All Class F1 licensees shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); however, the Local Liquor
Control Commission may waive such fee upon good cause shown.
15. Class F2: All Class F2 licensees shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); however, the Local Liquor
Control Commission may waive such fee upon good cause shown.
16. Class F3: All Class F3 licensees shall pay a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a single event or one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00) for five (5) or more events during a license year.
17. Class G: All Class G licensees shall pay a fee of one thousand one hundred twenty five dollars ($1,125.00).
18. Class H1: All Class H1 licensees shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the option of paying an
additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for sale by the drink.
19. Class H2: All Class H2 licensees shall pay a fee of nine hundred dollars ($900.00).
20. Class I: All Class I licensees shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
21. Class J: All Class J licensees shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
22. Class K: All Class K licensees shall pay a fee of two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00). (Ord. 2018-
42)
B. Beer Garden Area Included: The occupancy permit number for each licensee's establishment shall be calculated in
such a manner as to include any area that is used or intended for use as a "beer garden" as that term is defined in
this title.
C. Application And Transfer Fee: The application fee and transfer fee provided for in this title shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00), unless a greater amount is otherwise provided in this title.
D. Background Investigation; Costs: A background investigation shall be conducted by the City in regard to the applicant
to determine the accuracy of the application and the character and fitness of the applicant, and, if applicable,
corporate officers and directors, partners, individual proprietors, members, and managers. All costs associated with
such investigation shall be paid by the applicant in full at the time the application is submitted to the City Clerk, and
are nonrefundable.
E. Fee Forfeited: Upon revocation of any license issued under this title, the fee shall be forfeited. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-9: CLASSIFICATION:
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be of the following classes:
A. Class A Licenses:
1. Class A1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only, by the drink and not by the package, except
in the case of wine where it may be sold in its original package, with food for consumption on the premises only,
subject to the conditions of subsections A1a through A1f, inclusive, of this section and to the terms, conditions, and
restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this code.
a. Class A1 licensee shall offer for sale all restaurant menu items for consumption on the premises during the
hours the kitchen is open as approved per the license.
b. A class A1 license shall not be issued to the applicant unless the premises for which the application is made is
operated as a business which collects at least fifty one percent (51%) of its gross retail sales revenue from the
sales of nonalcoholic beverages and food.
c. Should a class A1 license have been issued to the applicant for the premises in the preceding year for which the
applicant for a new or renewal license is made, a class A1 license shall not be issued to the applicant for the
premises unless the applicant submits to the local liquor control commission sufficient documentation to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 90/923
establish that at least fifty one percent (51%) of the gross retail sales at that location in the license period
immediately preceding that year, or a part thereof if the license had been issued after the first day of the license
period, were collected from the sales of nonalcoholic beverages and food.
d. The determination of the sufficiency of the documentation referred to in subsection A1c of this section, shall be
in the sole discretion of the local liquor control commission. The local liquor control commission may, in its
discretion, require an audit of the records of the establishment, which is operated by the applicant and for which
the license is sought, in order to prove compliance with subsection A1c of this section. The audit shall be
prepared by a certified public accountant and shall cover the time period as ordered by the local liquor control
commission. The cost of producing any documentation, including the audit, shall be borne by the applicant.
e. An establishment issued an A1 license shall be furnished with kitchen facilities and equipment sufficient for food
preparation and service as defined herein.
f. Any class A1 licensee, upon application to and approval by the local liquor control commission, may make retail
sales of beer and wine in their original package only, with food only, for consumption off the premises, subject to
the following conditions:
(1) No beer or wine may be sold by any class A1 licensee without the simultaneous sale of any item listed in the
entree section of its menu for consumption off the premises. The class A1 licensee shall not sell beer or wine
with the simultaneous purchase of an item listed in the appetizer, dessert, or side order section of its menu for
consumption off the premises; and
(2) The class A1 licensee shall submit a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the fee required
pursuant to this title.
g. Any class A1 licensee, upon application to and approval by the local liquor control commission, may
manufacture and sell at retail microbrewed beer by the drink for consumption on the premises and by the
package for consumption off the premises, provided that the beer is brewed on the premises and the licensee
submits a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to all fees as required pursuant to this title.
2. Class A2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquor, by the drink and not by the package, and
wine where it may be sold in its original package, with food for consumption on the premises only subject to the
conditions of subsections A2a through A2f, inclusive, of this section and to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of
this and all other pertinent sections of this code.
a. The class A2 licensee shall offer for sale all restaurant menu items for consumption on the premises during the
hours the kitchen is open as approved per the license.
b. A class A2 license shall not be issued to the applicant unless the premises for which the application is made is
operated as a business which collects at least fifty one percent (51%) of its gross retail sales revenue from the
sales of nonalcoholic beverages and food.
c. Should a class A2 license have been issued to the applicant for the premises in the preceding year for which the
applicant for a new or renewal license is made, a class A2 license shall not be issued to the applicant for the
premises unless the applicant submits to the local liquor control commission sufficient documentation to
establish that at least fifty one percent (51%) of the gross retail sales at that location in the license period
immediately preceding that year, or a part thereof if the license had been issued after the first day of the license
period, were collected from the sales of nonalcoholic beverages and food.
d. The determination of the sufficiency of the documentation referred to in subsection A2c of this section, shall be
in the sole discretion of the local liquor control commission. The local liquor control commission may, in its
discretion, require an audit of the records of the establishment, which is operated by the applicant and for which
the license is sought, in order to prove compliance with subsection A2c of this section. The cost of producing any
documentation, including the audit, shall be borne by the applicant. The audit shall be prepared by a certified
public accountant and shall cover the time period as ordered by the local liquor control commission.
e. An establishment issued an A2 license shall be furnished with kitchen facilities and equipment sufficient for food
preparation and service as defined herein.
f. Any class A2 licensee, upon application to and approval by the local liquor control commission, may make retail
sales of beer and wine in their original package only, with food only, for consumption off the premises, subject to
the following conditions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 91/923
(1) No beer or wine may be sold by any class A2 licensee without the simultaneous sale of any item listed in the
entree section of its menu for consumption off the premises. The class A2 licensee shall not sell beer or wine
with the simultaneous purchase of an item listed in the appetizer, dessert, or side order section of its menu for
consumption off the premises; and
(2) The class A2 licensee shall submit a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the fee required
pursuant to this title.
g. Upon application to and approval by the local liquor control commission, a class A2 licensee may manufacture
and sell at retail microbrewed beer by the drink for consumption on the premises and by the package for
consumption off the premises, provided that the beer is brewed on the premises and the licensee submits a fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to all fees as required pursuant to this title.
3. Class A3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquor, by the drink and not by the package, subject
to the conditions of subsections A3a and A3b of this section, and to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this
and all other pertinent sections of this code.
a. A class A3 license shall not be issued to an applicant unless the premises for which the application is made is
operated as a business which collects at least eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from off track parimutuel
wagering.
b. The holder of a class A3 license shall not allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to enter or
remain upon the premises for which the license is held.
The total number of class A3 licenses, including all subclassifications, issued by the local liquor control
commission will not exceed one.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a class A1 or A2 licensee may permit a patron to remove one
unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption provided that the patron has
purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the licensee's premises. A
partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises pursuant to this section shall be securely
sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal from the premises and placed in a transparent
onetime use tamperproof bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the bottle of
wine to the patron.
B. Class B Licenses:
1. Class B1 licenses shall authorize retail sale of beer and wine only, by the drink, for consumption on the premises
only, subject to the terms, conditions and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this code. The holder
of a B1 license shall not allow any person under the minimum entry age to enter into or remain upon the premises
for which the license is held.
Except that any class B1 licensee, upon application to and approval by the local liquor control commission, may
manufacture and sell at retail microbrewed beer by the drink for consumption on the premises and by the package
for consumption off the premises, provided that the beer is brewed on the premises and the licensee submits a fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to all fees as required pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2007-38)
2. Class B2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors, by the drink, for consumption on the
premises only, subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code.
The holder of a B2 license shall not allow any person under the minimum entry age to enter into or remain upon the
premises for which the license is held.
Except that any Class B2 licensee, upon application to and approval by the Local Liquor Control Commission, may
manufacture and sell at retail microdistilled spirits or microbrewed beer by the drink for consumption on the
premises and by the package for consumption off the premises, provided that the beer or spirits are brewed on the
premises and the licensee submits a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to all fees as required
pursuant to this title.
The total number of Class B1 and B2 licenses issued by the Local Liquor Control Commission will not exceed
twenty (20). (Ord. 2015-3)
3. Class B3 licenses shall authorize retail sale of alcoholic liquors, by the drink, for consumption on the premises only,
subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code, and as a
secondary business to the business of video gaming. This license shall be issued only to a business that operates
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 92/923
primarily for the purpose of video gaming with at least fifty one percent (51%) of its gross revenue from video
gaming. Any applicant or licensee who receives at least fifty one percent (51%) of their gross revenue from video
gaming shall apply for a Class B3 license and is not eligible to receive or retain a Class B1 or B2 license. Any
current B1 or B2 licensee licensed for license year 2014-2015 who receives at least fifty one percent (51%) of their
gross revenue from video gaming, shall be converted to a B3 license. Should a Class B3 license have been issued
to the applicant for the premises in the proceeding year for which a renewal application is made, a Class B3 license
shall not be issued to the applicant for the premises unless the applicant submits to the Local Liquor Control
Commission sufficient documentation to establish that at least fifty one percent (51%) of the gross revenue was
collected from video gaming. The determination of the sufficiency of documentation shall be at the sole discretion
of the Local Liquor Control Commission.
The total number of Class B3 licenses issued by the Local Liquor Control Commission will not exceed five (5). No
Class B3 license shall be issued for any location within the City that is within five hundred feet (500') of any other
Class B3 liquor licensed establishment. No Class B3 license shall be located in the Primary Business District
(BPR) as it is now, or may in the future, be designated. (Ord. 2015-30)
4. Class B4 licenses shall authorize retail sale of alcoholic liquors, by the drink, for consumption on the premises only,
subject to special terms, conditions, and restrictions as set by the Liquor Control Commission, based upon the
criteria listed below and all other pertinent sections of this Code, the sale of liquor shall be ancillary to the primary
business function. The holder of a B4 license shall comply with the entry age requirements as described in section
2-5-10 of this title, except a modified entry age may be established by the commission, but in no event may the
commission authorize an exemption for persons under the age of sixteen (16) years of age unless accompanied by
a parent or legal guardian.
a. Criteria for consideration:
(1) The business plan presented,
(2) The need or demand as determined by the commission,
(3) The character and nature of the proposed establishment,
(4) Whether the issuance of said license would be in the "best interests" of the City of Carbondale, and
(5) The recommendation of City staff.
The total number of B4 licenses authorized shall be one; no new license shall be issued unless the City
Council approves an increase in the cap upon the receipt of a new license application and based upon such
application meeting the criteria above, upon surrender, revocation, or non-renewal of a B4 license, the cap
shall be decreased so that there are no available licenses. (Ord. 2018-42)
C. Class C Licenses:
1. Class C1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors, in their original package only, for
consumption off the premises only, subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other pertinent
sections of this Code.
2. No Class C1 license shall be issued to an applicant whose principal business in the premises described in the
application is a retail sale of groceries or drugs, unless a permanent, opaque wall separates the area of sale of the
groceries and drugs and the area of sales of packaged alcoholic liquor and unless each area has a separate
entrance and separate checkout facility. The total number of Class C1 licenses issued by the Local Liquor Control
Commission will not exceed eight (8).
3. Class C2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale by grocery stores of beer and wine only, in their original package
only, for consumption off the premises only, subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other
pertinent sections of this Code.
Primary areas of display of beer and wine shall be located in a manner that customers do not have to pass through
the principal beer and wine display areas for access to food items.
The total number of Class C2 licenses issued by the Local Liquor Control Commission will not exceed eight (8).
(Ord. 2011-34)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 93/923
D. Class D Licenses:
1. Class D1 licenses shall authorize retail sale by bed and breakfast establishments of all alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises only, including all interior areas as well as exterior areas such as porches, decks,
patios, breezeways, spas and recreational areas which are located totally within the boundaries of the private
property subject to permission by the owner-operator of the bed and breakfast and subject to the terms and
conditions and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code.
The area in which alcoholic liquor may be sold pursuant to a Class D1 license shall be located within a building
housing the sleeping accommodations for the guests of the bed and breakfast establishment and may include
room service.
2. Class D2 licenses shall authorize retail sale by hotels and motels of all alcoholic liquors for consumption on the
premises only, subject to the terms and conditions and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this
Code.
The area in which alcoholic liquor may be sold pursuant to a Class D2 license shall be located within a building
housing the sleeping accommodations for the guests of the hotel or motel. The hotel or motel possessing the Class
D2 license may provide alcoholic liquor to its guests through room service for consumption only in the room of the
guests.
3. Class D3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors by a senior living facility for consumption on
the premises only, including all interior areas as well as exterior areas such as porches, decks, patios, breezeways,
spas and recreational areas which are located totally within the boundaries of the private property, subject to
permission by the owner-operator of the senior living facility, and subject to the terms and conditions and
restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code. At no time shall a licensee permit any person to
possess open alcoholic beverages upon the area designated for parking. Sales of alcohol shall be restricted to
residents of the facility and their guests.
The area in which alcoholic liquor may be sold pursuant to a Class D3 license shall be located within a building
housing the sleeping accommodations for the residents of the senior living facility. A holder of a Class D3 license
shall not be eligible to hold a video gaming license and shall not permit video gaming terminals as defined by
section 5-6-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2017-23)
E. Class E Licenses: Class E licenses shall authorize the retail sale by any fraternal organization of all alcoholic liquors,
by the drink only, for consumption on the premises of that fraternal organization only, subject to the terms, conditions,
and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code. The term "fraternal organization" means a civic,
service, or charitable organization in the State, except a college or high school fraternity or sorority, not for pecuniary
profit, which is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national or State organization and exists for the common business,
brotherhood, sisterhood, or other interest of its members. (Ord. 2007-38)
F. Class F Licenses:
1. Class F1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine by civic, service, charitable, or other not for profit
organizations incorporated or authorized to do business according to the laws of the State at a picnic, outing,
festival or other such similar occasions, subject to the conditions of subsections F1a through F1h of this section,
and to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code.
a. The retail sale of beer and wine shall be by the drink only for consumption on the premises or within an area
specifically designated in the application for the Class F1 license.
b. A Class F1 license shall be valid for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours as determined by the Local
Liquor Control Commission.
c. An applicant for a Class F1 license shall submit an application for such license in the manner provided by this
chapter at least thirty (30) days prior to the date for which the license shall be used. The applicant must show
evidence that dramshop liability insurance has been obtained for the period of the license.
d. The application for a Class F1 license shall state in the application for such license the hours during which beer
and wine are to be sold.
e. The applicant shall complete the appropriate application on a form approved by the Local Liquor Control
Commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 94/923
f. A Class F1 license, if issued, shall not in any manner be regarded to relieve the licensee of complying with any
other requirement of law.
g. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid at the time the license is issued. Said fee may be waived at
the discretion of the Local Liquor Control Commission for good cause shown.
h. A Class F1 temporary liquor license will be issued at the discretion of the Local Liquor Control Commission.
2. Class F2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquors by civic, service, charitable, or other not for
profit organizations incorporated or authorized to do business according to the laws of the State, at a picnic, outing,
festival or other such similar occasion, subject to the conditions of subsections F2a through F2h of this section, and
to the terms, conditions and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code.
a. The retail sale of any alcoholic liquor shall be by the drink only for consumption on the premises or within an
area specifically designated in the application for the Class F2 license.
b. A Class F2 license shall be valid for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours as determined by the Local
Liquor Control Commission.
c. An applicant for a Class F2 license shall submit an application for such license in the manner provided by this
chapter at least thirty (30) days prior to the date for which the license shall be used. The applicant must show
evidence that dramshop liability insurance has been obtained for the period of the license.
d. The application for a Class F2 license shall state in the application for such license the hours during which all
alcoholic liquor is to be sold.
e. The applicant shall complete the appropriate application on a form approved by the Local Liquor Control
Commission.
f. A Class F2 license, if issued, shall not in any manner be regarded to relieve the licensee of complying with any
other requirement of law.
g. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid at the time the license is issued. Said fee may be waived at
the discretion of the Local Liquor Control Commission for good cause shown.
h. A Class F2 temporary liquor license will be issued at the discretion of the Local Liquor Control Commission.
3. Class F3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on Southern Illinois University's property by not
for profit or for profit organizations and/or individuals. No license will be issued without proof that the applicant and
event has been sanctioned through the SIU approval process or the event is directly hosted by the university and
the applicant has received the requisite approval. A separate Class F3 license shall be required for each vendor of
alcoholic liquor associated with the event(s). The university's Department of Public Safety is authorized to enforce
the provisions of this title with respect to the conduct of the vendors and attendees at said event(s).
a. Approval of this classification will be handled administratively upon the submission of an application which shall
state the names and addresses of the individual applicant or all officers of the organization, the location of the
premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor will be made, and the estimated attendance upon the premises.
The applicant must either hold a State liquor license at the time of application or receive a special use permit
from the State of Illinois prior to conducting any sales of alcohol. A criminal background check must be passed if
the applicant does not hold a current State liquor license at the time of application.
b. Additional items for approval include a proposal for the special event(s) identifying the type of event, proposed
hours, security plan details, and any other information regarding the event or applicant as may be requested by
City staff.
4. Qualifying not for profit organizations may submit an annual application to receive an approval of up to ten (10)
Class F1 and/or F2 licenses per license year, subject to the following conditions of this section, and to the terms,
conditions, and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code:
a. In order to be considered a qualifying not for profit organization eligible to apply for the approval of up to ten (10)
Class F1 and/or F2 licenses through the submission of an annual application for such license, the organization
must have demonstrated, at minimum, a two (2) year history of holding either Class F1 and/or F2 liquor licensed
events in a manner in keeping with the provisions of this Code and without notable disruption to the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 95/923
b. Those qualifying not for profit organizations who wish to receive annual approval of up to ten (10) temporary
liquor licenses shall submit an application for an annual license in the manner provided by this chapter to the City
Clerk's Office. Upon approval by the Local Liquor Control Commission of up to ten (10) F1 and/or F2 temporary
liquor licenses, the organization must submit the license fee and provide notice at least fifteen (15) days prior to
each individual event, which notice shall include sufficient description and documentation to determine the
location of the event, that dramshop insurance will be in effect, that fencing, parking and restroom facilities will
be provided, that the primary beneficiary of any alcohol sales will be the license holder, the hours during which
alcohol will be sold, and that the event will be in compliance with all other aspects of this Code. Upon receipt of
the fifteen (15) day notice, the City Clerk will disseminate the notice of the event to the Chairman of the Local
Liquor Control Commission and the City Manager. The event details will be reviewed by City staff and if it is
determined that the event will be in full compliance, the individual Class F1 or F2 license will be issued at least
ten (10) days prior to the event, with no more than ten (10) events to be issued through the annual application for
license. (Ord. 2017-16)
G. Class G Licenses: Class G licenses shall authorize the retail sale by any person who operates a conventional golf
course consisting of at least nine (9) holes and having fairways, greens and other attributes common to the sport of
golf, of all alcoholic liquor by the drink only, for consumption upon any part of the golf course, subject to the terms,
conditions and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code. (Ord. 2007-38)
H. Class H Licenses:
1. Class H1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wines, beer, or spirits by any person who regionally produces,
bottles, or manufactures the wines, beer, or spirits. Said wines, beer, or spirits shall be sold for consumption off the
premises only, except that a tasting or other sampling of regionally produced products of the licensee may occur on
premises, and further except that a holder of a Class H1 license may, for an additional fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) which shall be paid at the time the license is issued or renewed, sell regionally produced wine by the
glass, or in its original packaging for consumption on premises and for beer or spirits, may sell regionally produced
products by the drink. The license shall be subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other
pertinent sections of this Code.
2. Class H2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine, beer, and spirits by any person who regionally produces,
bottles, or manufacturers the wine, beer, and spirits in a State licensed winery, microbrewery, and/or microdistillery.
Class H2 licenses shall be subject to the conditions of subsections H2a through H2h, inclusive, of this section and
to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this Code.
a. Class H2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of regionally produced wine, beer, and spirits by the drink, for
consumption on the premises.
b. Class H2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of regionally produced wine by the bottle for consumption off the
premises.
c. Class H2 licenses shall authorize winetastings for consumption of up to three (3) free samples which do not
exceed one (1) fluid ounce per sample.
d. Class H2 licenses shall authorize regionally produced beer tastings for consumption of up to three (3) free
samples which do not exceed two (2) fluid ounces per sample.
e. Class H2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of regionally produced beer to be dispensed into growlers for
consumption off the premises only, provided the growlers are properly sealed for transport in compliance with
state law.
f. Class H2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of regionally produced spirits for consumption off the premises
provided the container of spirits is greater than or equal to three hundred seventy five milliliters (375 ml) in
volume.
g. Class H2 licenses, as part of a microdistillery tour shall authorize the licensee to provide no more than three (3)
free samples, each of which shall not exceed one-fourth (0.25) fluid ounce, to any person in a day. Licensees
may sell samples, but the volume of any sample sold shall not exceed one fluid ounce, and the total volume of all
samples sold to a person in a day shall not exceed two and one-half (2.5) fluid ounces. The total amount of
samples provided and/or sold to a person may not exceed two and one-half (2.5) fluid ounces in a day.
h. Class H2 licenses permit the retail sale of beer, wine, or spirits produced off the premises provided that the
establishment collects at least sixty percent (60%) of its gross revenue from regionally produced wine, beer, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 96/923
spirits. The liquor control commission may, in its discretion, require an audit of the records of the establishment,
which is operated by the applicant and for which the license is sought, in order to prove compliance with this
subsection. The cost of producing any documentation, including the audit, shall be borne by the applicant. The
audit shall be prepared by a certified public accountant and shall cover the time period as ordered by the liquor
control commission.
3. For purposes of this subsection H, "regionally produced" shall mean produced in any area south of U.S. Route 50
within the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2013-9)
I. Class I Licenses:
1. Class I1 licenses held by a farmers' market shall authorize that farmers' market to conduct wine, beer, or spirits
tastings on its premises for the purpose of informing and educating the tasters about the regionally produced wine,
beer, or spirits being sampled. Class I1 licenses shall be subject to the conditions of subsections I1a through I1d,
inclusive, of this section and subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections
of the code.
a. At all times the tasting event area shall be separated from the remainder of the licensed premises by a wall,
rope, cable, chord, chain, fence, or other permanent or temporary barrier. The licensee shall prominently display
signage prohibiting persons less than twenty one (21) years of age from entering the tasting area.
b. Class I1 licensees shall not permit any consumer to leave the tasting area with an open container of alcohol.
c. A tasting event on the subject of wine, beer, or spirits shall be limited to not more than three (3) samples per
person, per day and shall be limited to a single type of alcoholic beverage. A single tasting of wine shall not
exceed one ounce; a single tasting of beer shall not exceed two (2) ounces; and, a single tasting of spirits shall
not exceed one-fourth (0.25) ounce.
d. Tastings shall be limited to one vendor per event date.
2. Class I2 licenses shall authorize the retail sales of regionally produced beer, wine, or spirits by the package, for
consumption off the premises, at a farmers' market. Retail sales shall be limited to one vendor of regionally
produced beer, wine, or spirits per event date. (Ord. 2016-42)
J. Class J Licenses: A class J license shall authorize the retail sale of all alcohol by the drink for consumption upon the
specified premises during scheduled functions by a bona fide corporation that is organized under the laws of this
state not for pecuniary profit and primarily for the public presentation of theatrical or musical performances, art
exhibits, or oral presentations. (Ord. 2014-31)
K. Class K Licenses:
1. A class K license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the premises only, incidental
to the operation of a movie theater.
2. Alcoholic liquor may be consumed throughout the movie theater, including in the movie theater auditorium, but may
not be taken off the premises. (Ord. 2015-55)
L. Class L Licenses (One Day Extended Premises): A class L license shall authorize a license holder in good standing of
a class A, B, E, H, or J liquor license to sell alcohol for consumption upon the controlled premises, as defined in
section 2-1-2 of this title, covered by the primary liquor license on a date certain. The license fee for class L licenses
shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day. Following the issuance of a class L license, the licensee will be required
to obtain a state special use license prior to holding the event.
The local liquor control chair will review the application, required documentation, and recommendations from city staff
prior to making a determination of whether or not to issue the temporary extended premises license. The approval of
such license may be dependent upon the applicant complying with requirements identified by the local liquor control
chair for the erection of tents, fences, or other barricades, provision of sufficient waste receptacles and outdoor restroom
facilities, requirements for utilizing nonglass beverage containers, providing additional security, requirements for the
removal of barricades, temporary signage, and litter within a specified time following the completion of the event for
which the license has been issued, and past performance in conducting such temporary extended premises events. A
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 97/923
determination for a minimum age requirement will be made based upon the classification held by the applicant and the
nature of the event to be held. The licensee shall comply with section 14-4-7 of this code as it relates to the use of
amplified sound devices and general noise restrictions.
A denial of a class L license shall not be considered a denial of a liquor license for the purpose of an application for
renewal or for a new primary liquor license. (Ord. 2016-37)
2-4-10: BEER GARDENS OR OUTDOOR GARDEN/CAFE AREA:
A. Approval Required: No licensee shall operate a beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area except upon application to
and approval by the local liquor control commission, subject to the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this and all
other pertinent sections of this code.
B. Application; Fee: Any licensee desiring to operate a "beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area" as defined in section
2-1-2 of this title, pursuant to this title, shall submit an application and the following fees with said application to the
local liquor control commission in addition to the fees required under this chapter, as follows:
1. One hundred dollars ($100.00), if there will be no entertainment offered to the patrons of the licensee in the beer
garden.
2. Four hundred dollars ($400.00), if any entertainment is offered to the patrons of the licensee in the beer garden.
Any person(s) using or operating sound amplifying devices, as defined in section 14-4-7 of this code, as a part of a
beer garden, shall be exempt from restrictions contained herein for use of sound amplifying devices.
C. Sought In Conjunction With Liquor License Fee: The application for a beer garden or any outdoor garden/cafe area
shall be filed with the local liquor control commission at the time of application for a liquor license, the time for
renewal of a liquor license or at any time during the license year. A drawing identifying the designated area and its
proposed use shall accompany the application. All applications shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in this
section and other pertinent sections in this title, as follows:
1. The application, drawing and proposal shall be forwarded to the planning services division for a determination of
whether a site plan is necessary and recommendations as to lighting and/or fencing requirements.
2. The area designated as the beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area shall be reviewed by the building and
neighborhood services division and the fire and police departments for health and safety purposes. An occupancy
rate shall be established pursuant to title 4 of this code. The occupancy rate shall be considered in calculating the
license fee.
3. Any licensee, who operates a beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area pursuant to this title, shall implement any
and all conditions which the local liquor control commission may impose upon the operation of said beer garden or
outdoor garden/cafe area.
4. The boundaries of the beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area shall be clearly delineated so that there is no
question as to whether alcoholic liquor may be sold, delivered or consumed in the area.
5. At the time of application or any time during the license year, after consideration of the location of the beer garden
or outdoor garden/cafe, the nature of the business operations, the record of prior violations of the liquor code, if
any, and public safety, health and welfare, the local liquor control commission may impose specific requirements
upon the beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area, which may include, but are not limited to, lighting, fencing and
prohibition of entertainment.
D. Compliance: Any beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area shall be subject to all provisions of this title, and all other
applicable ordinances and State Statutes. (Ord. 2007-38)
E. Sound Amplifying Devices: Any person using or operating a sound amplifying "device" as defined in section 14-4-7 of
this Code, as a part of a beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe, shall be exempt from the provisions of title 14 of this
Code regarding use of sound amplified devices from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon Friday to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on
Sunday, during the hours of operation as established in section 2-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-33)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 98/923
F. Violation; Consequences: A violation of this title or any other applicable ordinance or State Statute may result in the
closing of the beer garden or outdoor garden/cafe area in addition to the penalties as otherwise provided in this title.
(Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-11: CATERING OPTION FOR LOCAL LICENSEES:
A. Qualifications; Restrictions: A catering option is available as an addition to any classification of alcoholic liquor license
available under this title. The option allows licensees to serve and sell alcohol for consumption off the licensed
premises while catering any event.
B. Compliance: No licensee shall serve or sell alcoholic liquor at an off premises, catered event except upon application
to and approval by the Local Liquor Control Commission, or its designee. Approval is subject to the terms, conditions,
and restrictions of this and all other pertinent sections of this code.
C. Types Of Catering Options Available:
1. Civic Center And Southern Illinois University Carbondale Catering Option: Licensees who wish to cater alcohol at
the Carbondale Civic Center or at designated Southern Illinois University Carbondale properties may do so upon
application to and approval by the local liquor control commission, or its designee. Functions being held at the civic
center or at designated Southern Illinois University Carbondale properties may be by invitation only or may be open
to the public. The sale of alcohol is permitted at civic center functions and events at designated Southern Illinois
University Carbondale properties for consumption on the premises only. Packaged beer or wine may be sold when
the sale is in conjunction with a preapproved beer or wine tasting event except, however, the seal of said packaged
beer or wine may not be broken while on the premises. To obtain a catering license for events at Southern Illinois
University Carbondale properties, the licensee must be approved by Southern Illinois University Carbondale
authorities prior to the application to the local liquor control commission.
2. Private Function Catering Option: Licensees who wish to cater alcohol at private functions may do so upon
application to and approval by the local liquor control commission, or its designee. The private function must be by
invitation only and not open to the public. The sale of alcohol to guests or invitees is not permitted at the private
function. (Ord. 2012-49)
3. Limitations On Locations: A catering license for events on Southern Illinois University Carbondale properties shall
be limited to the following locations: Lesar Law Building, Stone Center, Student Center, Student Health Center,
Dunn Richmond Economic Development Center, Communications Building, Morris Library, Glove Factory, Shryock
Auditorium, Arena, Saluki Stadium, Charlotte West Stadium, and Richard "Itchy" Jones Stadium. (Ord. 2013-38)
D. Sought In Conjunction With Liquor License Application: An application for the catering option may be filed in the city
clerk's office at the time of application for a liquor license, at the time of renewal of a liquor license, or any time during
the license year. There is no fee required.
E. Dramshop Insurance: Licensees applying for either the private function catering option or the civic center catering
option shall obtain dramshop liability insurance in the amounts required as set forth in this title. A certificate of
insurance must be filed with the city clerk's office at the time of application for the catering option. The certificate must
document that the licensee is covered by dramshop liability insurance at all catered events to be held off the licensed
premises. In addition, if the licensee is applying for the civic center catering option, the certificate of insurance must
also name the city of Carbondale as an additional insured. Further, if the licensee is applying for a license to cater on
Southern Illinois University Carbondale properties, the certificate of insurance must also name Southern Illinois
University Carbondale as an additional insured.
F. Designee Of The Local Liquor Control Commission: For purposes of this section, the city clerk is hereby named the
designee of the local liquor control commission. (Ord. 2012-49)
2-4-12: SPECIAL USE PERMIT LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 99/923
A. Transfer From Inventory: A licensee may submit a request for a special use permit license. Special use approval shall
allow a licensed retailer to transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its retail licensed premises to the
premises specified in the request, and to sell or offer for sale at retail, only in the premises specified in the request,
the transferred alcoholic liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. Special use approval may be
granted for the following time periods: one day or less; two (2) or more days to a maximum of fifteen (15) days per
location in any twelve (12) month period. An applicant for special use approval must also submit with the letter of
request, proof satisfactory to the local liquor control commission that the applicant will provide dramshop liability
insurance as required under state and local law.
B. Criteria: The request shall be considered by the city council, and may be approved by resolution adopted by the city
council subject to the following criteria:
1. The proposed activity shall be for the benefit of a civic, service, charitable, educational or other not for profit
organization.
2. The location must be a place historically and commonly known as a location used for housing banquets,
receptions, special events, etc.
3. The licensee shall submit a letter of request for the special use approval to the local liquor control commission
thirty (30) days prior to the date of the proposed activity. The letter of request shall include:
a. The name, address, telephone number, and contact person of the civic, service, charitable, educational, or other
not for profit organization to benefit from the special use approval, accompanied by written verification from the
organization to benefit that they have given approval for the event.
b. The name, address, and telephone number of the licensee.
c. The name and address of the premises upon which the proposed activity is to occur, accompanied by written
verification from a person in control of the premises that approval has been given for the event to take place at
the proposed location.
d. A detailed description of the proposed activity.
e. The date and hours the proposed activity is to occur.
4. Failure to include any of the requested information may result in denial of the request.
5. Any additional criteria or restrictions may be imposed by the city council that the council finds to be desirable for
the event.
C. Violation; Penalty: Any violation of the restrictions set forth in this section will result in the immediate termination of the
activity and is subject to the penalty provision as provided in this title. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-13: DURATION:
A. Maximum Term: All licenses shall be issued for a term not to exceed one year.
B. Expiration Date: All licenses shall expire on June 30 following the effective date of such license, unless otherwise
stated.
C. Fee Prorated: When a license is issued at some time other than July 1, the fee shall be reduced in proportion to the
full calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the issuance of a license. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-14: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. Not Transferable By Holder: A license shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not constitute property. Nothing in
this title shall be construed to grant a right to transfer or accept the transfer of any license. Applicants for the transfer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 100/923
of an existing liquor license shall follow the same procedures as those for the issuance of a new liquor license as
contained in this chapter.
B. Commission Discretion: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the local liquor control commission, upon receipt
of completed transfer application and a transfer fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), may authorize
the transfer of any license issued under this chapter.
C. Relocation Of Business: If the applicant seeks to transfer the license to a new location, the proposed location must
comply with all rules, regulations, city ordinances and state statutes applicable to the operation and maintenance of a
licensed premises.
D. New Ownership: The transfer of a license issued hereunder from one person to another may only be made in the
case of a bona fide sale or transfer for valuable consideration of the business, and upon the determination by the
local liquor control commission that the purchaser possesses the qualifications as required of an applicant for the
original license.
E. Change In Ownership: In the event the licensee is a nonpublicly traded corporation, limited liability company, or a
partnership, any change in ownership of five percent (5%) or more of the licensed corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership shall constitute a transfer of the license and shall require the applicant to follow the
procedures for issuance of a new liquor license as contained in this chapter, consistent with the requirements of
subsection 2-4-16A of this chapter.
F. Old License Returned To City: No transfer shall be effective and no new license shall be issued until the former license
is submitted to the office of the city clerk and all monies due the city have been paid. (Ord. 2015-38)
2-4-15: CESSATION OF BUSINESS:
A. Death; Insolvency; Bankruptcy: A license issued under the provisions of this title shall not be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be subject to being encumbered. The license shall not descend by the laws of
testate or intestate devolution but shall cease upon the death of the licensee except that the administrator or executor
of the estate of any deceased licensee or the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee may continue the business
of the sale of alcoholic liquor upon the entry of the appropriate court order and submission of the order to the city
clerk until the expiration of the license but no longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of
the licensee. Upon the death of the licensee, if the administrator or executor does not continue the business, there
shall be a refund as provided in this title.
B. Written Notice Required: A licensee who ceases to do business or who closes its place of business for more than ten
(10) days shall give the local liquor control commission written notice of such cessation or closing as soon as
practical after the decision to close or cease business is made, but in any event before the cessation or closing. Such
notice shall state the reason therefor and the date of closing or cessation. Any licensee who ceases to do business or
closes its place of business for a period of more than thirty (30) successive days, and who fails to show good cause,
shall be subject to having the license suspended, revoked or a fine imposed.
C. Timely Commencement Of Business: Any licensee who obtains a transfer of an existing license pursuant to this title,
and who fails to commence business operations before the date specified in the application for transfer, shall give the
local liquor control commission written notice specifying the reasons for the failure to commence business operations.
Any licensee who fails to show good cause shall be subject to having the license suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2007-
38)
2-4-16: CHANGES IN INTEREST OR OWNERSHIP:
Changes in the interest or ownership of any licensed premises are subject to the following requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 101/923
A. Any changes in partners, officers, directors, persons holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the
stock or ownership interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this title, shall be reported in writing to the
liquor advisory board and shall require the approval of the local liquor control commission; provided, however, that
changes in stock ownership need not be reported where the stock is publicly traded if the stock transfer is less than
twenty five percent (25%) of the stock. All such persons shall meet all the requirements of this title and must
otherwise qualify to hold a license. A change in ownership that is simply a reduction in the number of owners (e.g.,
from 5 owners to 4 owners) shall require notification to the city, but shall not require the local liquor control
commission's approval.
B. When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest
by one who is not eligible to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate effective on the date of said change.
C. When a license has been issued to a corporation or limited liability company and a change has taken place in the
officers, directors, managers, members, or shareholders of more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership
interest resulting in the holding of office or such shares by one who is not eligible for a license, said license shall
terminate, effective on the date of said change. (Ord. 2015-38)
2-4-17: CHANGES IN OPERATION:
A license issued under the provisions of this title shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only within the licensed premises
described in the application, the nature of business described in the application and as presented to the liquor advisory
board and local liquor control commission, and under the conditions imposed in this title on the particular class of license
described therein. Any proposed change or alteration which varies in any manner from that on the date of the approval of
the license shall be reported in writing to the liquor advisory board and the local liquor control commission. Furthermore,
a licensee may not materially or substantially alter the licensed premises or operations without first receiving approval by
the local liquor control commission. Examples of such material or substantial changes which must be reviewed by the
local liquor control commission include, but are not limited to:
Addition of entertainment to a licensed establishment including a dance floor, runway, platform, entertainment devices
such as pool tables, video gaming, live music and/or performances, and amplified sound;
Elimination or substantial reduction of food service or food service hours for class A licenses;
Any temporary or permanent change in the configuration of an establishment that would facilitate its ability to exceed its
authorized occupancy;
Rental of liquor licensed facilities to outside businesses, organizations, or promoters;
Interior or exterior structural modifications which would result in the change of occupancy or create, remove, or relocate
doors and passages;
Changes in operation which would necessitate additional hiring, contracting, or utilizing security detail; and
Changes that may be or are contrary to the basic rights, restrictions, and nature of the license class under which a
licensee operates.
Those changes which are not substantial or of a material nature do not require approval by the local liquor control
commission. If a licensee requires clarification as to whether a proposed alteration requires approval or only notification,
the licensee should submit an inquiry in writing to the city clerk detailing the proposed changes. The city clerk shall
forward the inquiry to the appropriate city staff members, and the city clerk shall provide a response within two (2) weeks
of receiving the inquiry. Failure to report any proposed change in the premises or operations may result in a suspension
or revocation of the license. (Ord. 2015-38)
2-4-18: HEALTH AND SAFETY LAWS:
A. All premises licensed pursuant to this title shall be in compliance at all times with the city building, fire and zoning
ordinances, and all state statutes pertaining to health, sanitation and public safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 102/923
B. Licenses shall comply at all times with all other applicable ordinances of the city and statutes of the state. (Ord. 2007-
38)
2-4-19: DISPLAY AUTHORIZATION:
A. License Displayed: Every licensee under this chapter shall cause its license to be framed under glass and posted
without obstruction in a conspicuous place within the premises licensed, so that any person entering such premises
may easily locate and read the license.
B. Occupancy Permit Displayed: The city occupancy permit determined and issued pursuant to title 4 of this code shall
be framed under glass and posted without obstruction in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 2007-
38)
2-4-20: RENEWALS:
A. The local liquor control commission may renew a license at the expiration thereof; provided, that the applicant meets
the eligibility requirements as specified in this title; the licensed premises complies with all ordinances of the city and
specifically health, building, maintenance, zoning and fire safety ordinances.
B. The renewal privilege provided in this section shall not be construed as a right which shall preclude the denial of a
renewal request or preclude the local liquor control commission from decreasing the number of licenses in the city.
(Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-21: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church or
school, other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, civic centers, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or grocery stores, nor shall it
apply to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any
church or school where such church or school has been established since the issuance of the original license. In the
case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for
worship services or educational programs and not to the property boundaries. (Ord. 2015-3)
2-4-22: PERMITS FOR LICENSES:
A. Postponement Of Approval Date: Whenever an applicant is not ready to begin immediate operation, the application
shall be considered in the manner set forth in this title. Upon approval by the local liquor control commission, there
shall be created a permit for a license which shall entitle the holder to a liquor license when the holder is ready to
begin operations subject to all other requirements of this title.
B. Expiration: Permits for licenses shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of approval or when
exchanged for a license.
C. Failure To Obtain: In the event holder fails to obtain the license prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall
expire. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-4-23: NONALCOHOLIC HOURS OPTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 103/923
A. Modification Of Entry Age: A nonalcoholic hours option is available as an addition to the B classification of alcoholic
liquor licenses available under this chapter. The option allows a licensee to submit a request for temporary
modification of the liquor license to provide for an adjusted entry age for nonalcoholic hours of operation.
B. Application In Conjunction With Liquor License Application: The application for nonalcoholic hours option shall be filed
with the local liquor control commission at the time of application for a liquor license, the time for renewal of a liquor
license or any time during the license year, with said application submitted for review by the liquor advisory board and
approval by the local liquor control commission. The option runs concurrently with the liquor license and expires upon
expiration of the liquor license.
C. Approval By City Manager: Upon approval of the nonalcoholic hours option by the local liquor control commission, the
licensee shall submit an application for approval by the city manager for a nonalcoholic hours permit to the city clerk's
office at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the proposed nonalcoholic hours.
1. Contents: The application shall include:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the licensee;
b. The name of the licensed premises;
c. The date and hours the proposed activity is to occur;
d. A certification that no alcoholic liquor will be possessed, sold, delivered, and/or consumed by any person upon
the licensed premises during the hours of the proposed nonalcoholic hours. All beer dispensers shall be
disconnected and the liquor displayed behind the bar shall be screened from view or removed during the
nonalcoholic hours.
2. Criteria: In determining whether there is reason to refuse to approve a permit for nonalcoholic hours, the city
manager shall consider the following criteria:
a. The location of the licensed premises;
b. The reputation of the licensee;
c. Potential impact on city service;
d. Proximity to other liquor establishments;
e. The number of other nonalcoholic hours applications approved for the same time period.
3. Display Of Permit: The permit shall be displayed in a prominent place within the establishment.
D. Temporary Closure Of Operations: Upon the conclusion of the nonalcoholic hours, the licensee shall, within fifteen
(15) minutes, remove all patrons from the licensed premises. Any individual, other than the licensee, an employee
(who is actually on duty) or independent contractor who remains in a licensed premises after the conclusion time of
the nonalcoholic hours, after having been advised or requested to leave by the licensee, shall be subject to arrest
and fine.
E. Premises Cleared Of Patrons: It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, to admit the public or permit the public to
remain within, or to permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverages by any person in or upon the licensed
premises fifteen (15) minutes after the nonalcoholic hours conclude. No person except the licensee and its
employees or independent contractors shall enter or be upon the licensed premises between the conclusion time of
the nonalcoholic hours and the reopening of the licensed establishment.
F. Age Restriction: The licensee shall not permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to enter the licensed
premises.
G. Violation; Consequences: Any violation of the provisions set forth in this section may result in the immediate closing of
the licensed premises and the termination of the nonalcoholic hours. (Ord. 2007-38)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 104/923
Chapter 5
REGULATION OF OPERATION
2-5-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE:
Each and every part of "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", enacted by the general assembly of the state of Illinois,
approved January 31, 1934, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder, which relate in any manner to the
sale at retail of alcoholic liquors, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this title. In any case where a
conflict exists between the laws of the state of Illinois and the ordinances of the city of Carbondale, this code shall prevail
unless specifically preempted by state statute. Any violation of such applicable and adopted provisions of said act shall
be deemed a violation of this title and be subject to penalties as herein provided. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-2: PENALTIES:
A. Imposed By Local Liquor Control Commission: Any licensee violating any provision of this title or any applicable
provision of this code or the state statute may be ordered to pay all costs of the city in holding the hearing and shall
be subject to any or all of the following penalties by the local liquor control commission unless otherwise provided
pursuant to the provisions of this title:
1. A letter of reprimand;
2. A fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period;
3. A fine of not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve (12)
month period;
4. A fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a
twelve (12) month period; and/or
5. Suspension of license;
6. Revocation of license.
B. Imposed By Court: Any licensee found violating any provision of this title or any applicable provision of this code or
the state statute by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), unless otherwise provided
pursuant to the provisions of this title.
C. Violations; Penalty: Any individual person violating any provision of this title or any applicable provision of this code or
the state statute shall be subject to a minimum fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
A. Responsibility Of Licensee For Acts Of Employees: Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation
of any provision of this title or the Illinois liquor control act1 by any officer, director, manager, member, or other agent
or employee of the licensee, shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee or employer. The licensee or employer
shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission has been done or omitted by the licensee
personally.
B. Responsibility Of Owner Of Property Permitting Violation: If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from
whom the licensee derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person, shall
knowingly permit the licensee to use said licensed premises in violation of the terms of this title or the Illinois liquor
control act, said owner, agent, or other person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this title or the Illinois liquor
control act to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to the same penalty.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 105/923
C. Responsibility Of Persons In Control Of Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person in control of a premises located
within the city to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to possess or consume alcoholic
liquor on the premises or to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to remain on such
premises while possessing or consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this title or state law.
1. Obligation To Verify Age: The person in control of a premises has the affirmative obligation to verify that all persons
on the premises in possession of or consuming alcoholic liquor are above the age of twenty one (21) years or
otherwise doing so legally.
2. Validity Of License: It shall be unlawful for any person in control of a premises to sell alcoholic liquor on the
premises without a valid liquor license or to knowingly allow any other person to sell alcoholic liquor on the
premises without a valid liquor license.
3. Persons In Control Of A Premises: "Persons in control of a premises" for the purpose of this section includes, but
is not limited to, the following persons:
a. In the case of an owner occupied premises, the person in control is the owner(s). In the event the owner is not a
natural person, but a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, trust, or similar entity, the person in
charge shall be that natural person(s) who is authorized to control and occupy the premises.
b. In the case of a leased or rented premises, the person in control is that person or those persons who have a
lease, a rental agreement, or other form of control of the premises which has been conveyed by the owner or
owner's agent. In the event the lessee or renter is not a natural person, but a corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, trust, or similar entity, the person in charge shall be that natural person who is in the day
to day control of the premises, such as a manager.
c. In the case of property such as a fraternity or sorority house, the person in control shall be the person who has
been designated in charge of the day to day operation of the local organization. In the absence of a designation
of another responsible person, the president of the local chapter shall be considered to be the person in control
of the premises.
4. Exceptions: The provisions of this subsection do not apply to the following circumstances:
a. Possessing, dispensing, or consuming small quantities of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of twenty
one (21) years in the performance of a religious service or ceremony by a religious group.
b. The consumption of small quantities of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of twenty one (21) years under
the direct supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such under twenty one (21) year persons in
the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home.
c. Subsection C1 of this section shall not apply to premises which are owned or otherwise controlled by a
governmental or private entity when said premises is usually open to use by the general public such as rights of
way, parks, and nature preserves or to situations of trespass or unauthorized entry onto a premises.
D. Responsibility Of Licensee For Acts On Control Premises: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow or permit upon
the licensed premises or control premises any activity that is prohibited by the ordinances of the city.
E. Penalties: Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. Specific Days, License Classification: It shall be unlawful to sell, to offer for sale or deliver at retail, or to give away in
or upon any licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor except during the following hours:
1. From eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday until one fifty nine
o'clock (1:59) A.M. of the next day, for all licenses with the exception of C2, and for the liquor licenses that were
issued as C2 licenses, from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and
Saturday until eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. the same day; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 106/923
2. From eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on Sunday until one fifty nine o'clock (1:59) A.M. on Monday, for all licenses
issued, with the exception of those issued as C2 licenses, and those C2 licenses from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M.
on Sunday until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday; and
3. Except and provided that on New Year's Day, the closing time shall be three o'clock (3:00) A.M. regardless of the
day on which it may fall, with the exception of Class C2 licenses, for which closing time will always remain the
same. (Ord. 2011-34)
B. Time Margin:
1. Thirty Minute Time Margin: It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, to admit the public or permit the public to
remain within, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person in or upon the licensed premises in
which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail, thirty (30) minutes after the required closing time. No person except the
licensee and his employees shall enter the licensed premises between the closing hour as set forth hereinabove
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. for all licenses with the exception of A1, A2 and C2.
2. C2 License Holders Also Offering Other Sales: Any licensed premises, issued a C2 license, for which the sale of
alcoholic beverages is not the principal business, may remain open to the public during the hours that the public
would otherwise be prohibited from being on the premises, providing the following conditions are observed:
a. All alcoholic beverages, during the hours when alcohol is not permitted for sale, must be placed in an area
clearly visible by the license holder to prevent shoplifting, and which area must remain supervised, and which
must also be in a place with signs and other apparatus closing off such area to customers and clearly indicating
such alcoholic beverages are not presently offered for sale.
b. A sign shall, during such hours, be displayed prominently in conjunction with all alcohol sales displays, that shall
read:
Closed hours, no alcoholic liquors sold or served.
c. No alcoholic liquors shall be sold, donated, bartered, exchanged, served or consumed therein during such hours.
d. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any licensee the privilege to sell alcoholic liquor during
the aforesaid closed hours and any licensee, not licensed under C2, must keep its doors locked and the public
barred therefrom during the said closed hours.
3. A1 And A2 License Holders: Any licensed premises, issued an A1 or A2 license, for which the sale of alcoholic
beverages is incidental to the selling of meals, may remain open to the public during the hours that the public
would otherwise be prohibited from being on the premises, providing the following conditions are observed:
a. No person in the licensed premises shall be allowed to be in possession of alcohol during the otherwise
prohibited hours.
b. A sign shall, during such hours, be displayed prominently that shall read:
No alcoholic liquors sold or served between the hours of 1:59 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday
and 1:59 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on Sunday.
c. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any licensee the privilege to sell alcoholic liquor during
the aforesaid closed hours and any licensee, not licensed under A1 or A2, must keep its doors locked and the
public barred therefrom during the said closed hours. (Ord. 2013-32)
4. Class K License Holders: Any licensed premises, issued a K license, for which the sale of alcoholic beverages is
incidental to the operation of a movie theater, may remain open to the public during the hours that the public would
otherwise be prohibited from being on the premises, providing the following conditions are observed:
a. No person in the licensed premises shall be allowed to be in possession of alcohol during the otherwise
prohibited hours.
b. A sign shall, during such hours, be displayed prominently that shall read:
No alcoholic liquors sold or served between the hours of 1:59 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday
and 1:59 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on Sunday.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 107/923
c. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any licensee the privilege to sell alcoholic liquor during
the aforesaid closed hours and any licensee, not licensed under K, must keep its doors locked and the public
barred therefrom during the said closed hours. (Ord. 2015-55)
C. Arrest Of Unauthorized Persons: Any individual, other than the licensee or employee who is actually on duty for
cleaning and maintenance purposes only, who remains in a licensed premises after the closing time specified
hereinabove, after having been advised or requested to leave by the licensee, shall be subject to arrest and fine.
D. Modification Of Hourly Restrictions: The hourly restrictions set forth in subsection A of this section may be temporarily
modified on special occasions, by resolution, adopted by the city council, which shall set forth the conditions of the
modification. Such modification of the hourly restrictions may be permitted only after compliance with the following
stated conditions:
1. The proposed activity shall be sponsored by a civic, service, charitable, educational, or other not for profit
organization.
2. Applications for modification of hours shall be available in the city clerk's office. The sponsor of the proposed
activity and the licensee of the premises where the proposed activity is to occur shall jointly apply for the
modification thirty (30) days prior to the date of the proposed activity.
3. The application shall be submitted in the office of the city clerk and shall include:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the sponsor, and the name, address and telephone number of the
authorized agent of the sponsor.
b. The name, address and telephone number of the licensee.
c. The name of the licensed premises upon which the proposed activity is to occur.
d. A detailed description of the proposed activity.
e. The date and hours the proposed activity is to occur.
f. The approximate number of persons expected to attend the proposed activity.
g. Failure to include any of the requested information will result in denial of the request.
4. The sponsor and the liquor licensee shall certify that no alcoholic liquor will be sold, delivered and/or consumed by
any person upon the licensed premises during the hours of the proposed activity.
5. The licensed premises shall be closed to the public during the hours of the proposed activity, and no one will be
permitted to enter or exit the premises during the stated hours except in case of emergency.
6. Any modification of hours permitted in accordance with the terms of this subsection shall only apply to the licensed
premises specified in the resolution.
7. Any violation of the restrictions set forth in this subsection will result in the immediate closing of the licensed
premises and the termination of the activity.
E. Special Event Hours: The hourly restrictions set forth in subsection A of this section may be temporarily modified for
special events, by resolution, adopted by the city council, which shall set forth the conditions of the modification. Such
modification of the hourly restrictions may be permitted only after compliance with the following stated conditions:
1. The licensed establishment shall apply for the modification at least thirty (30) days prior to the event.
2. The application shall be submitted in the office of the city clerk and shall include:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the licensee and sponsor of the special event.
b. The name of the licensed premises upon which the proposed special event is to occur.
c. A detailed description of the proposed special event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 108/923
d. The date and hours the proposed special event is to occur.
e. The approximate number of persons expected to attend the proposed special event.
3. Failure to include any of the requested information may result in denial of the request.
4. The liquor licensee shall certify that no alcoholic liquor will be sold, delivered and/or consumed by any person upon
the licensed premises during the hours of the proposed special event and at least three (3) hours prior to the
special event.
5. The licensee and/or sponsor shall not allow persons to enter the premises for the special event after eleven fifty
nine o'clock (11:59) P.M., except in case of emergency.
6. The licensee and/or sponsor shall not permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to enter the premises for
the special event.
7. The licensee and/or sponsor shall not admit or allow to remain at the special event any person who is visibly
intoxicated or visibly under the influence of illegal drugs.
8. Any modification of hours permitted in accordance with the terms of this subsection shall only apply to the licensed
premises specified in the resolution.
9. Any violation of the restrictions set forth in this subsection may result in the immediate closing of the licensed
premises and the termination of the special event.
F. After Hours Package Sales Prohibited: No licensee shall allow the pick up of alcoholic liquor by the package for
consumption off the premises after the hours for sale set forth in this section. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-5: POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR CONTROL PREMISES:
A. Prohibited: No person shall possess any open container of or consume alcoholic liquor upon any public property,
public street, alley, sidewalk, public way, or parking lot and other areas adjacent to licensed premises that a licensee
controls or is responsible for within the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale.
B. Exceptions: Exceptions are made for the following events:
1. In the event of a city fair, alcoholic liquor may be consumed during said fair from nonglass containers, in a publicly
owned or controlled space, if such space is designated by resolution by the city council of the city as the space at
which the city fair is to be conducted.
2. Events allowed in the city hall/civic center as otherwise provided in this title.
3. For events where such possession or consumption has been authorized pursuant to the approval of a class F1 or
F2 liquor license. (Ord. 2015-10)
4. For areas where a permit has been issued pursuant to subsection 17-1-5F of this code for license holders with
permits for the permitted area. (Ord. 2016-03)
C. Removal From Premises: Except as provided in subsection 2-4-9A4 of this title, no licensee shall allow or permit any
individual to transport or carry any alcoholic liquor out of the premises of the licensee. This section shall not apply to
liquor licenses which allow for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the original package and with the seal unbroken, pursuant
to chapter 4 of this title.
D. Penalties:
1. Any person, other than licensee, who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
2. Any licensee who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to any penalties
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 109/923
which may be imposed by the local liquor control commission as allowed pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2015-10)
2-5-6: POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION IN UNLICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or any person owning, maintaining, or operating any business or restaurant
which does not possess a liquor license issued pursuant to this title to permit persons to bring alcoholic liquor upon the
premises and there possess and consume the same. This provision shall not apply to "private functions" as defined in
section 2-1-2 of this title, or during events where no entry fee, admission fee, or ticket is required to go upon the
premises. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-7: CLOSING ENTRANCES TO ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES:
No licensee shall suffer or permit, upon any premises described in the license, any door, window, aperture to remain
open, or any other means of ingress or egress to any room, cellar, basement, structure, building, or other premises,
where there is conducted at any time any business or activity prohibited by the ordinances of the city or the law of the
state of Illinois, including, but not limited to, games of chance, gambling, brothels, or houses of ill fame. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-8: GAMBLING:
No licensee under this title, or any manager, agent, or employee of such licensee, shall allow "gambling", as defined in
section 14-4-3 of this code, upon any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors; provided, however, that this
prohibition shall not apply to any activity authorized by and regulated under the laws of the state or by this title. (Ord.
2007-38)
2-5-9: ENTERTAINMENT:
A. No licensee, or any manager, agent, or employee of the licensee, shall permit or allow any employee, agent, or patron
to engage in any topless or bottomless act, demonstration, dance, or exhibition upon the licensed premises.
B. No agent, employee, representative, or patron of any licensed premises shall be topless or bottomless or perform any
topless or bottomless act, demonstration, dance, or exhibition upon the licensed premises.
C. For the purpose of this section, "bottomless" means naked or substantially without clothing or covering on an area of
the body from the waist downward to an area on the body which area would cover the buttocks and the genital area
of the body. "Topless" means being naked or without clothing or covering of the breast below a horizontal line across
the top of the areola. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. For the purpose of this section a thong or g-string style
bottom would be in violation of this section. Body paint shall not be considered a covering. For purposes of this
section, clothing or covering shall be opaque.
D. No licensee, or any manager, agent, or employee of the licensee, shall permit or allow any employee, agent, or patron
to engage in an adult use upon the licensed premises; adult use shall have the meaning prescribed in section 5-12-2
of this code.
E. Actual display of pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals, buttocks or the breast below a horizontal line across the top of the
areola shall be prima facie evidence of a licensee permitting a violation of this section. (Ord. 2016-49)
2-5-10: RESTRICTIONS AS TO PERSONS UNDER AGE OF TWENTY ONE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 110/923
A. Licensee, Agent, Representative, Employee Liability: Except as provided below, no licensee, or any agent,
representative, or employee of such licensee, shall permit or allow any person under the age of nineteen (19) years
to enter or remain upon any premises licensed pursuant to this title. The following additional restrictions shall apply to
licensees and any person under the age of twenty one (21):
1. No licensee, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic
liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person; and
2. No licensee, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of such licensee shall permit or allow any person
under the age of twenty one (21) to remain on the licensed premises while in the possession of or consuming
alcoholic liquor. This section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of twenty one (21) making a
delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance of his employment; and
3. In an action for any violation of this section, evidence may be presented, which will be considered in mitigation,
that the licensee, or agent, representative or employee of such licensee, demanded and was presented
identification of the type as specified in this chapter.
B. Patron Liability: Except as provided below, no person under the age of nineteen (19) years shall enter or remain upon
any premises licensed pursuant to this title. The following additional restrictions shall apply to any person under the
age of twenty one (21):
1. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
2. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase, attempt to purchase, accept delivery, accept as
a gift, consume or possess in any manner, including by consumption, alcoholic liquor.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing, accepting, or receiving
alcoholic liquor.
4. Any person upon whom such demand is made shall display at least one photo identification card of the type as
specified in this chapter which contains a birth date. If any person fails to produce evidence of age upon request,
he shall be considered to be a person who is not entitled to be served alcoholic liquor.
C. Penalties: The penalties for a violation of this section shall be as follows:
1. A fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
violation of subsection A of this section; and
2. A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for a violation of subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-38)
D. Exceptions: The legal entry age requirement under this section for persons to enter and/or remain upon a premises
licensed pursuant to this title shall not apply under the following circumstances:
1. The licensed premises is a grocery store, bowling alley, hotel or motel, conventional golf course, indoor athletic
facility, banquet hall facility, nonprofit arts center, packaged liquor store, or movie theater. "Indoor athletic facility"
shall be defined as a facility in operation for the main purpose of providing an indoor arena for the performance of
sporting or athletic events (and related practices) including, but not limited to, one or more of the following
activities: soccer, basketball, tennis, volleyball, golf, baseball, softball and/or football. The licensed premises shall
be exempt from the entry age only during those periods in which the licensed premises is actually in use as a
grocery store, bowling alley, hotel or motel, conventional golf course, indoor athletic facility, banquet hall facility,
nonprofit arts center, packaged liquor store, or movie theater. (Ord. 2016-58)
2. The person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
3. The licensed premises obtains fifty one percent (51%) of the annual gross revenue from the sale of nonalcoholic
beverages and food, and only during the period of time when the kitchen facilities are fully operational and full
menu service is available as indicated on the licensee's application and on the license; provided, however, that
those individuals on the premises at the time the kitchen ceases operation shall be allowed to remain on the
premises only for the purpose of consuming food up to one hour following the kitchen closing, and except those
premises licensed under chapter 4 of this title; for the purposes of this subsection, the licensee shall submit to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 111/923
local liquor control commission documentation sufficient to prove that fifty one percent (51%) of the annual gross
revenue is derived from the sale of food. The local liquor control commission, at its discretion, may request
additional documentation or an audit of any establishment's records conducted in accordance with generally
accepted accounting procedures, by a certified public accountant, in order to prove compliance with this
subsection. The cost of the audit shall be borne by the licensee.
4. Persons employed by a licensee, other than one holding a C2 or K license, under this title that are at least
eighteen (18) years of age while the employee is actively engaged in employment duties, including, but not limited
to, employees hired for delivery, building maintenance and independent contractors. Persons employed by a
licensee holding a C2 or K license, must be at least sixteen (16) years of age while the employee is actively
engaged in employment duties, but such person between the age of sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) shall not
handle alcoholic liquor containers or beverages.
5. Persons employed by a licensee under this title for live entertainment who are under the immediate supervision of
a parent or legal guardian of at least one member or agent of the entertainment band at all times. Upon completion
of the live entertainment and loading of band equipment, any person(s) under the legal entry age shall no longer be
allowed to remain upon the licensed premises.
6. The licensed premises is operating under modified entry age requirements according to a nonalcoholic hours
permit pursuant to section 2-4-23 of this title or special event hours pursuant to subsection 2-5-4E of this chapter.
The person(s) charged with a violation of this section in any court or administrative hearing who claims an
exception under the provisions of this subsection D, shall have the burden of proving that said person(s) or
business(es) met the above stated exception(s) at the time of the offense. (Ord. 2015-55)
E. Temporary Modification: The age restrictions set forth in subsections A and B of this section may be temporarily
modified by resolution, adopted by the city council, which shall set forth the conditions of the modification. Such
modification is conditioned upon the following requirements:
1. The licensee shall submit an application for permission to sponsor an "alcohol free night" to the city clerk's office
thirty (30) days prior to the date(s) of the proposed "alcohol free night".
2. The application shall include:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the licensee;
b. The name of the licensed premises;
c. A detailed description of the proposed activity;
d. The date and hours the proposed activity is to occur.
3. The licensee shall certify that the bar shall be closed during the activity and that no alcoholic liquor will be
possessed, sold, delivered, and/or consumed by any person upon the licensed premises during the hours of the
proposed activity. All beer dispensers shall be disconnected and the liquor displayed behind the bar shall be
screened from view or removed during the activity.
4. The licensee shall not permit any person, other than employees and chaperons of the event, to enter the licensed
premises on "alcohol free night" except those persons between the ages of thirteen (13) and twenty (20), unless
otherwise set by the council upon review of the application.
5. Any violation of the requirements set forth in this subsection may result in the immediate closing of the licensed
premises and the termination of this activity.
F. Verify Age: The person and/or licensee in control of a premises has the affirmative obligation to verify that all persons
on the premises are of the legal age to be upon the premises and, if in possession of alcoholic liquor, are twenty one
(21) years of age or older, or are otherwise acting legally. (Ord. 2007-38)
G. Employee Age: No licensee under this title holding a B1, B2, C1, or E license shall employ any person under the age
of nineteen (19) years. (Ord. 2011-34)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 112/923
2-5-11: ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION:
Only the following types of identification shall be accepted for purposes of entering a licensed establishment and/or
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor: vehicle operator's license; state photo identification card for nondrivers; visa or
passport; and military identification card. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-12: WARNING POSTED IN LICENSED PREMISES:
Every licensed establishment within the city where alcoholic liquor is sold shall display in a prominent place a printed
warning, framed and under glass, which shall read as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER LEGAL DRINKING AGE
You are subject to a fine of up to Seven Hundred Fifty dollars ($750.00) under the ordinances of the City of
Carbondale, Illinois, if you consume or possess alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the purpose of obtaining or
purchasing alcoholic liquor.
Only the following types of identification will be accepted for the purpose of entering a licensed establishment and/or
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor: vehicle operator's license; State Photo Identification Card for non-drivers; visa or
passport; and military identification card.
(Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-13: HAPPY HOUR:
A. Statute Requirements: 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-27.5, 28 and 28.5 are hereby adopted by reference as
amended, except for such provisions as are specifically hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and except when
this code is more restrictive. In addition to the requirements of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-28, the licensee
shall provide the same information concerning planned happy hours by either written or electronic communication to
the Carbondale police department within the same time period provided in the state statute.
B. Violation; Consequences: A violation of this section shall be grounds for fine, suspension, or revocation of the license
as provided herein. (Ord. 2015-39)
2-5-14: FEES:
There shall be no cost, fee, or charge assessed by the building and neighborhood services division or the fire
department for inspection of any liquor establishment pursuant to this title and the first reinspection of the liquor
establishment should violations of the standards and regulations of this code be found. However, should such violations
not be corrected by the time of the first reinspection, the licensee shall be subject to a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
second reinspection and each subsequent reinspection until such violation is corrected. Any reinspection fees remaining
unpaid after two (2) weeks shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as such, may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Upon failure to pay, the local liquor control commission may take action to suspend, revoke, or not renew
any license. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-15: EDUCATION FOR LICENSEES AND EMPLOYEES:
A. Initial and renewal liquor license applications, except for classes C1, C2, F1 and F2, shall be accompanied by a
complete listing of all employees and proof of each manager's or server's completion of a state certified beverage
alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program. This requirement extends to anyone whose
job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to that license.
B. For class C1, C2, F1, and F2 licensees, all original or renewal applications shall be accompanied with a complete
listing of all employees and proof that not less than fifty percent (50%) of their employees who serve or distribute
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 113/923
alcoholic beverages have completed an ILCC approved BASSET program and possess a valid BASSET certification.
C. A "state certified BASSET training program" shall be defined as a BASSET program licensed by the state of Illinois
liquor control commission (ILCC) as required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12(11.1) and 6-27 and title 77 of
Illinois administrative code, chapter XVI, section 3500.
D. Beginning July 1, 2017, all licensees must be in compliance with public act 099-0046, and thereafter any new
manager or "alcohol server", as previously defined, shall complete an ILCC approved BASSET training program
within ninety (90) days from the start of their employment. Until such training is complete, new managers or servers
shall work under the direct supervision of a person who possesses current and valid BASSET certification. The liquor
license establishment which hires new staff shall be required to submit an updated roster of employees with the
requisite proof of completion of BASSET training on a quarterly basis.
E. A photocopy of certificate of completion for all managers, employees, or agents required by this section to have
BASSET training shall be maintained by the establishment, in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand, by
any designee of both the state and local liquor control authorities.
F. Municipalities and establishments must honor all state of Illinois liquor control commission (ILCC) BASSET approved
programs. (Ord. 2017-02)
2-5-16: SALE, TRANSPORTATION AND POSSESSION OF KEGS OF BEER:
A. Hours Of Delivery Set: No keg of beer may be sold or transported in the city after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or before
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and no keg of beer shall be brought into the city after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or before
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., except by authorized licensed liquor distributors.
B. Purchaser Liability: The purchaser of the keg of beer is responsible for the unlawful possession and/or consumption of
beer from the keg. No purchaser shall knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) to possess or
consume beer from a keg or allow beer to be sold from the keg. If such a circumstance occurs, the purchaser of the
keg of beer may be cited for violation of this title and be fined as provided in this title.
C. Seller To Provide Information: The seller shall provide to the purchaser at the time of sale of the keg a pamphlet to be
provided by the city which contains information pertaining to the sale and consumption of alcohol and responsible
partying. (Ord. 2007-38)
D. Authorized Possession; Certain Days Prohibited: (Rep. by Ord. 2015-35)
E. Class C2 License Holders: License holders holding a class C2 license shall not sell kegs of beer. (Ord. 2011-34)
2-5-17: MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL SOLD ON LICENSED PREMISES:
No liquor license, except for C2 license as set out below, shall be issued to any person for the purpose of selling
alcoholic liquor upon the same premises or site where fuel (including gasoline, diesel fuel, ethanol, or any other fuel) for
motor vehicles is sold or offered for sale at retail. For the purposes of this section, factors to be considered when
determining the boundaries of the premises or site shall include, but need not be limited to, the following: the locations
where gasoline and liquor are to be stored or dispensed or payments made therefor; the locations of buildings and other
structures such as canopies and storage areas; the locations of areas used by persons, including the public, for access
and circulation such as parking locations, driveways, walkways, and doorways; and the location of fencing, landscaped
areas, signage, and lighting. In a planned business development established pursuant to section 15.2.21 of this code,
the sale of liquor at a location more than two hundred fifty feet (250') from the sale of motor fuel shall be presumed not to
be on the same premises or site if the liquor applicant or licensee is not related to, controlled by, commonly owned, or
otherwise affiliated with the person selling or offering motor fuel for sale.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 114/923
The holder of the C2 liquor license, may sell beer and wine, so long as the sale of all alcoholic beverages is at least two
hundred fifty feet (250') from the sale of any motor fuel distribution points. This distance shall be measured from the exit
of the facility holding the C2 license, which shall constitute the location for the sale of liquor, to the actual distribution
pumps or the point of distribution of motor fuel, and the minimum distance shall be at least two hundred fifty feet (250').
(Ord. 2011-34)
2-5-18: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
A license may be granted within one year after a license was revoked at a premises if the revocation order is vacated or
if the revocation is entered as to the licensee only. If a license is revoked, a new license, for the same location, may not
be issued for one year after the revocation. However, a new licensee, who is not related to the revoked licensee, may
petition the local liquor control commission for a liquor license for the same location before the required one year
revocation period ends. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-5-19: DELINQUENT PAYMENT OF CITY DEBT:
No licensee shall become delinquent on payments for any services, loans, or other contractual agreements received by
the licensee or the licensed establishment from the city of Carbondale. For the purpose of this section, a licensee shall
be considered to be delinquent if the licensee is currently in arrears for more than fifteen (15) days on an outstanding
debt owed to the city, or has been in arrears for more than fifteen (15) days on a payment to the city for services, loans
or other contractual agreements, two (2) or more times within a two (2) year period. For the purpose of this section,
"licensee" shall refer to the liquor license applicant, its officers, directors, members, registered agents, and any
stockholders or members owning five percent (5%) or more of the corporate stock or membership interest and any
individual or partner as listed on the application currently in effect. (Ord. 2007-38)
Chapter 6
SALE OF LIQUOR IN TERRITORY ANNEXED TO CITY
2-6-1: CHANGE OF STATUS:
Upon the filing of any verified petition with the city council, the council, by ordinance may, after consideration of the
criteria in this chapter, provide that the status of the area annexed into the city shall be changed so as to allow the sale of
alcoholic liquor within said annexed area, subject to the same restrictions, rules, regulations, and laws in effect on all
other land within the city. Said verified petition must contain the following information:
A. The legal description of the annexed property;
B. The date of said annexation;
C. A statement that there are no legal voters residing within the described area;
D. Proof that said area is zoned for retail or commercial purposes. (Ord. 2007-38)
2-6-2: ORDINANCE CHANGING STATUS:
A. Council Discretion: In the event the council finds that the statements contained in said petition are true, the city council
may enact an ordinance authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor within said annexed area. Said change in status shall
allow the sale of alcoholic liquor within said annexed area, subject to the rules, regulations, ordinances and laws of
the city affecting all other land within the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 115/923
B. Consider All Provisions: In determining whether to enact an ordinance, the city council shall consider all applicable
criteria as listed in this title.
C. License From City Required: No sale of alcoholic liquor shall be authorized unless a license therefor has been issued
by the city.
D. Request For Ordinance: A request for an ordinance authorizing the change in status for said territory is required. (Ord.
2007-38)
Title 3
ANIMALS
Chapter 1
PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to
ensure the humane treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the city, by guarding against
annoyance and injury caused by animals, to protect animals from neglect and abuse, to license animals which have a
tendency to run at large, to discourage the unnecessarily excessive multiplication of animals, and to license domestic
animals which have the propensity to become rabid. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise specified, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
ANIMAL: Any live creature. Every living creature, both domestic or wild, excluding human beings, including, but not
limited to, dog, cat, horse, pig, cow, fowl, fish or reptile.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: An employee or agent of the city, performing such duties as prescribed by the city
manager, or his designee, to administer and enforce the licensing, inspection and enforcement of the requirements
contained within this title. A Carbondale police officer shall have the same authority under this title as the animal control
officer.
BUSINESS DAY: Any day the animal control facility is open to the public.
CAT: All members of the Felidae family.
CHICKEN: An individual animal maintained for the production of eggs, of the species Gallus gallus, specifically not
including roosters, which are the male of the species.
CHICKEN COOP: A structure suitable to house chickens that is enclosed on all sides with a roof, door, and windows.
CONFINED: Restriction at all times in a building, house or enclosure.
CRUELTY: Any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or
permitted, including failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and
safe living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in sufficient quantity.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner, or a
member of the owner's family, when on any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or private property which is not owned
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 116/923
by the owner of such dog, that behaves in such a manner that poses an imminent threat of serious physical injury or
death to a reasonable person or their companion animal.
DOG: All members of the Canidae family.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any dog, cat, domesticated sheep, horse, cow, goat, swine, fowl, duck, goose, turkey, confined
domestic hare and rabbit, pheasant, chicken, and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent
the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a dangerous dog in conjunction with other measures that may be
taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the dangerous dog within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be
securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be capable of preventing the
animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within a residence, the door must be locked.
FERAL CAT: A cat that is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat, and is not socialized, or a formerly
owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized, or lives on a farm.
IMPOUNDED: The taking into custody by the public animal control facility.
LIVESTOCK: Any ass, bison, calf, cattle, chicken, donkey, duck, fowl, goat, goose, horse, mule, pony, sheep, swine, or
turkey.
OWNER: Any person who:
A. Has a right or interest in an animal,
B. Keeps or harbors an animal,
C. Has an animal in his care or custody, or
D. Who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him without taking steps to
remove said animal within three (3) days.
PEACE OFFICER: As defined in section 2-13 of the criminal code of 1961.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, public or private institution, partnership, trust, society, or association, state of
Illinois or municipality, or any legal entity.
PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of a physical condition.
POLICE ANIMAL: An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department, fire department, or other enforcement
agency in the course of the department's or agency's work.
POUND: An animal control facility approved by the city manager and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless,
abandoned or unwanted animals.
PUBLIC ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: Any animal control facility approved by the city manager and used as a shelter
for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals.
PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL: Any animal that unreasonably annoys or endangers the life or health of persons or other
animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of persons, other than the owners of the animal, to enjoyment of life or
property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any property other than that of its owner;
B. Any animal that makes repeated, unreasonable, and disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued,
repeated and excessive howling, barking, whining, or other utterances which cause unreasonable annoyance,
disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others of ordinary sensibilities who are in close proximity to the premises
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 117/923
where the animal is kept or harbored;
C. Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable
annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or
harbored.
RUN AT LARGE: To be free of any restraint, leash, cord, chain, or otherwise not in the control or custody of a person
physically capable of restraining the animal when the animal is not upon the owner's premises.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: Physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death, or that causes death, serious or
protracted disfigurement, protracted impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or plastic
surgery.
VICIOUS DOG: Any individual dog that:
A. When unprovoked and without justification, inflicts a bite to a human being or any other animal whether on public
or private property;
B. Attacks a human being or domestic animal without justification and causes serious physical injury or death; or
C. Has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions. (Ord. 2006-64; Ord. 2012-08)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
3-2-1: AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER:
The city manager is responsible for the administration of this title. He may delegate any and all necessary and
reasonable powers to appropriate city departments to effectuate the purposes of this title. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-2-2: AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND POLICE:
The animal control officer, and/or any peace officer, shall be the enforcement official for this title. This officer shall have
the authority to act on behalf of the city to investigate complaints, impound and destroy animals, issue citations, and take
other necessary and lawful actions as required to enforce the provisions of this title. The animal control officer or any
peace officer is entitled to use nonlethal weapons and tranquilizer guns in order to fulfill their duties. The animal control
officer or peace officer may pursue an animal onto private property provided that they do not seek entrance into a
residence. It shall be a violation of this title to interfere with the animal control officer or any peace officer in the
performance of his duties. (Ord. 2006-64)
Chapter 3
LIVESTOCK
3-3-1: NO LIVESTOCK WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
A. No person shall keep or maintain any livestock within the city limits.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 118/923
1. Any person involved in the interstate or intrastate transportation of livestock to market; provided, however, such
person does not remain within the city limits for more than two (2) hours;
2. Any person operating a zoological park, circus, carnival, scientific or educational institution, research laboratory,
veterinary hospital or animal refuge;
3. Any person maintaining livestock in compliance with title 15 of this code; and
4. Chickens maintained for egg production and properly licensed with the city. Chickens, with the exclusion of
roosters and crowing hens, are limited to a maximum of six (6) chickens per household. Property zoned AG,
general agriculture and RR, rural residential as defined in title 15 of this code are not subject to this limitation. (Ord.
2012-08)
3-3-2: RUNNING AT LARGE OF LIVESTOCK AND CHICKENS PROHIBITED:
A. No livestock or chickens shall be permitted to run at large within the city limits. Chickens may be maintained in a
designated chicken coop or fenced area, and shall be allowed to run freely within that area, although chickens must
be secured within the coop between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
B. The animal control officer and/or any peace officer shall take all reasonable and necessary action to capture any
livestock or chickens found to be running at large.
C. The owner of any livestock or chickens found to be running at large shall be liable for any and all costs incurred by the
city as a result of any action taken by the animal control officer and/or any peace officer to capture such livestock or
chickens. (Ord. 2012-08)
3-3-3: CHICKENS AND CHICKEN COOPS:
A. Number And Type Of Chickens Allowed: Chickens, with the exclusion of roosters and crowing hens, are limited to a
maximum of six (6) chickens per household. Property zoned AG, general agriculture and RR, rural residential as
defined in title 15 of this code, and keeping fowl in accordance with title 15 of this code, are not subject to this
limitation or the requirements specific to chicken coops and enclosures as described below in subsection B of this
section.
B. Items Specific To Chicken Coops And Enclosures:
1. Opening in windows and doors must be covered by wire mesh with one-half inch (1/2") or smaller openings to
discourage predators. The materials used to make the coop must be uniform for each element of the structure, for
example the walls shall be made of the same material. Chicken coops shall be constructed in a manner to avoid
weathering.
2. Chickens must be kept in a coop or fenced enclosure at all times.
3. Coops and enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor free, and sanitary manner at all times.
a. No person or owner shall keep, or allow to be kept in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy condition, any chicken
coop or fenced enclosure containing chickens.
b. Odors from chickens, manure, or related substances shall not be detectable from property lines.
c. The chicken owner must provide for the storage and disposal of chicken waste. Composting of the chicken
waste is encouraged. No more than three (3) cubic feet of chicken waste may be stored. All other chicken waste
not composted shall be removed.
4. Coops must provide adequate ventilation, shade, and be resistant to predators, wild birds, and rodents.
5. Access door(s) to any coop must be latched and secured with chickens inside during the hours between nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 119/923
6. Coops shall be located to the rear of the residential structure, and may be allowed in the backyard, but not the side
or front yards as defined by title 15 of this code.
7. Coops and enclosures must be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the property line and the residential structure
on the property, and twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring residence, business, church, etc. A coop or
enclosure may be maintained five feet (5') from a public alley adjoining the owner's property.
8. Chicken coops are required to have at least four (4) square feet of coop floor area per chicken and must be well
maintained. In no case shall the floor area of a chicken coop exceed forty (40) square feet. Chicken coops shall not
exceed eight feet (8') in height. Enclosures must have at least eight (8) square feet of outdoor run space per
chicken. The enclosure must be constructed of wooden slats or wire fencing and shall be constructed to a
minimum height of five feet (5'). The enclosure must be adequate to maintain the chickens within the enclosed
space.
9. Chickens are to be raised for egg consumption only and shall not be slaughtered within the city limits.
a. Deceased chickens shall be properly disposed of.
10. Chicken feed must be stored in a fully enclosed container resistant to rodents and other animals.
11. The provisions of this section shall not apply to property zoned AG, general agriculture or RR, rural residential.
(Ord. 2012-08)
3-3-4: CHICKEN COOP LICENSING:
A. Required: All chicken coops maintained in accordance with this title shall be licensed by the city of Carbondale.
B. Conditions: The city's designee may issue licenses to the owner of any chicken coop upon meeting all conditions of
this section.
1. The application for a chicken coop license shall state the name and address of the owner, the specific proposed
location of the chicken coop, and all other applicable information requested by the administrative official. A license
will only be issued after the chicken coop and enclosure have been inspected and have been determined to meet
all requirements of this title.
2. The number of licenses for chicken coops shall not exceed thirty (30) at any one time. The number of licenses may
be increased only upon city council approval. Licenses will be issued based on the order of the applications
received.
3. Each chicken coop license shall be renewed on an annual basis. The license will only be renewed after the
chicken coop has been determined to be in compliance with all provisions of this section.
4. Only property containing one single-family residence, except zero lot line townhouses, shall be eligible for a
chicken coop license.
5. Only one chicken coop license will be issued per property. A homesite consisting of multiple lots shall be
considered one property. Each license allows one chicken coop.
6. Chicken coop licenses may not be transferred from one individual to another unless the coop is located on the
same lot as the previous license holder. Individuals will have thirty (30) days to transfer the license to the new
occupants of the residence, and the coop will be subject to reinspection. If a license is transferred to a new
occupant, the original license holder shall apply for a new license if they wish to continue raising chickens. A
license holder may relocate a chicken coop to a new location upon notifying the city and passing inspection.
C. Costs For Licensing: The costs for licensing a chicken coop shall be as follows:
1. Chicken Coop: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per chicken coop license. The fee shall be paid at the time the
application is submitted. An annual renewal fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed for each chicken coop.
2. Transferring A Chicken Coop License: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per transfer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 120/923
D. Exceptions: The provisions of this section relating to licensing shall not apply to:
1. Chicken coops located on property zoned AG, general agriculture or RR, rural residential as defined in title 15 of
this code.
E. License Term: All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for a term not to exceed one year, January 1
to December 31 of the calendar year.
F. When Due: Chicken coop license renewals shall be submitted annually, prior to December 31. A late fee of ten dollars
($10.00), shall be charged if the renewal is not received by December 31. Any renewal fee not received by January
31 shall render the permit null and void, and the license available to another applicant.
G. Nonrefundable: No refunds shall be made on any chicken coop license or application.
H. Penalty: The owner of any chicken coop, which is subject to licensing and registration pursuant to subsection A of this
section, but who does not comply with those provisions, shall be subject to the penalties provided in chapter 8 of this
title.
I. Cost Of Administration: The license fees charged pursuant to this section are charged to defray the administrative
costs and are not to be deemed a penalty or tax. The license fees shall not be construed as relieving the owner from
any penalty imposed for any violation of this title. (Ord. 2014-52)
Chapter 4
DOGS AND CATS
3-4-1: LICENSES AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR DOGS:
A. Applicability: All dogs four (4) months of age or older, kept or maintained by their owners in the city shall be licensed
and registered. (Ord. 2006-64)
B. Conditions For Licensing: The police department may issue licenses to the owner of any dog upon meeting the
following conditions:
1. The making of an application for license, which application shall state the name and address of the owner, the
name, breed, color and gender of the dog owned or kept by the owner, whether the owner has been convicted of a
violent felony, and whether the owner has ever been an owner of a dog declared either dangerous or vicious;
2. Evidence that the owner has complied with the requirements of section 3-4-3 of this chapter relating to rabies
vaccination for each dog to be licensed and registered;
3. If the dog has been surgically spayed or neutered, a written certificate signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice
veterinary medicine in the state of Illinois describing the dog in question and indicating that the dog had been
previously spayed or neutered;
4. The payment of the license and registration fee; and
5. That any owner of a dog determined to be dangerous or vicious, shall also provide proof of insurance covering the
actions of said dog and any and all liability created by the dog, in the amount of not less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence.
C. Costs For Licensing: The costs for licensing a dog shall be as follows:
1. Altered dog: Five dollars ($5.00).
2. Unaltered dog: Twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2008-36)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 121/923
D. Exceptions: The provisions of this section relating to licensing shall not apply to:
1. Dogs whose owners are temporarily visiting within the city for a period of thirty (30) days or less;
2. Dogs which are brought into the city for the purpose of participating in a dog show, exhibition or demonstration;
3. "Seeing eye" dogs which have been properly trained to assist the visually impaired when such dogs are actually
used to aid the visually impaired;
4. Any dogs which are used to assist the disabled; and
5. Law enforcement agency dogs.
E. License Term: All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for a term not to exceed one year, from each
January 1 to December 31 of the calendar year.
F. When Due; Late Fee: Applications for dog licenses shall be made from December 1 to December 31 each year. For
any application made subsequent to December 31 for any dog subject to licensing prior to December 31, a late fee of
ten dollars ($10.00) for altered dogs, and twenty dollars ($20.00) for unaltered dogs shall be charged for each dog
license to be issued.
G. Nontransferable; Nonrefundable: The license for any dog shall not be transferable to any other dog. No refunds shall
be made on any dog license.
H. Penalty: The owner of any dog, which is subject to licensing and registration pursuant to subsection A of this section,
but who does not comply with those provisions, shall be subject to the penalties provided in chapter 8 of this title.
I. Cost Of Administration: The license fees charged pursuant to this section are charged to defray the administrative
costs and are not to be deemed a penalty or tax. The license fees shall not be construed as relieving the owner from
any penalty imposed for any violation of this title. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-4-2: TAGS:
A. Tag Issued: Upon meeting all of the conditions set forth in subsection 3-4-1B of this chapter, the police department
shall issue to the owner of a dog a license certificate and metallic tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall bear a
stamped impression reflecting the year for which it was issued and a number corresponding with the number noted
on the license certificate.
B. Tag Worn By Dog: The owner of each dog licensed shall provide his dog with a collar, chain, or similar device to which
the license tag must be affixed. The owner shall ensure that the collar, chain, or similar device with the license tag is
constantly worn by his dog.
C. Replacement: If a license tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall immediately report this matter to the police
department and obtain a replacement tag. The police department shall issue a replacement tag at no charge upon
presentation of the current license certificate.
D. Evidence Of Vaccination: In addition to the license tag issued pursuant to this section, the owner shall affix the tag
issued by the Illinois department of agriculture to the collar, chain, or similar device worn by each dog, showing that
the vaccination requirements of section 3-4-3 of this chapter have been met.
E. Illegal To Remove Tag: It shall be unlawful for any person other than the animal control officer, a police officer,
licensed veterinarian, or owner, to remove the license tag from any dog within the city limits without the consent of the
owner of such dog. (Ord. 2006-64)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 122/923
3-4-3: VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS:
Each calendar year, every owner or keeper of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older shall cause such dog or cat to
be inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Every dog or cat shall have a second vaccination within one year
of the first, subsequent vaccinations and duration of immunity must comply with USDA licenses of vaccines used. Every
owner shall affix the tag issued by the department of agriculture to the collar, chain or similar device worn by each dog or
cat, showing that the requirements of this section have been met. Every vaccination must be accompanied by a
certificate of inoculation which must be signed by a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-4-4: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
A. Dogs: It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in control of a dog to permit such dog, except on a leash, cord,
chain, or other similar restraint, to use or be upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway, public area or unenclosed
premises within the city. No leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint shall be longer than eight feet (8') in length.
B. Redemption: Any dog running at large may be impounded in an animal control facility by the animal control officer or
peace officer. The owner or person in control of such dog may obtain the release of his dog upon payment of the fees
set forth in section 3-8-1 of this title and pursuant to the procedures for such return under section 3-4-8 of this
chapter.
C. Cats: It shall be unlawful for any cat to run at large unless it has been spayed or neutered and inoculated for rabies.
The animal control officer or peace officer may impound any cat that is running at large in order to determine whether
it has been spayed or neutered and inoculated for rabies. Upon concluding that the cat is in compliance with the
provisions of this section, the cat shall be released upon the owner's request at no charge. If the cat has not been
spayed or neutered or the cat has not been inoculated for rabies, then the owner or person in control of such cat may
obtain the release of his cat upon payment of the fees set forth in section 3-8-1 of this title and pursuant to the
procedures for such return under section 3-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-4-5: DOGS ON SCHOOL GROUNDS OR RECREATIONAL AREAS AND CEMETERIES:
A. School Grounds; Recreational Areas: No person shall permit his dog on any school ground when school is in session
or on any public recreation area when an organized activity is being conducted, unless the dog is controlled by a
leash or similar device. Any dog not so controlled shall be deemed to be running at large.
B. Cemeteries: No person shall permit his dog to be present upon the grounds of any cemetery within the city limits. Any
dog found upon the grounds of any cemetery shall be deemed to be running at large and impounded accordingly.
(Ord. 2006-64)
3-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT:
The owner or any person in control of any dog or cat shall be responsible for the immediate removal and sanitary
disposal of any excrement deposited by his animal anywhere within the city limits. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-4-7: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
A. Prohibited Acts: No owner shall permit his dog or cat to:
1. Molest or threaten persons or vehicles by chasing, barking, biting or clawing;
2. Damage any property of another in any manner;
3. Bark, whine, howl, or make any other sound excessively; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 123/923
4. Create noxious or offensive odors.
B. Biting: The animal control officer shall be notified of all bites. It shall be unlawful to sell, euthanize, give away, or
otherwise dispose of an animal known to have bitten any person or companion animal.
C. Nuisance Declared; Destruction Of Animal: Any dog or cat which is found to have committed any of the actions stated
in subsection A of this section on three (3) or more separate occasions shall be considered a public nuisance and
may be destroyed in a humane manner or the owner may be required to remove such animal from the city limits.
D. Impoundment: The animal control officer may impound any dog or cat committing any action stated in subsection A of
this section. The owner of any dog or cat impounded may obtain the return of his animal upon payment to the city of
the fees set forth in section 3-8-1 of this title and pursuant to the procedures of section 3-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord.
2006-64)
3-4-8: IMPOUNDING:
A. Conditions For Impoundment: The animal control officer may impound an animal committing any act in violation of
sections 3-4-4 and 3-4-7 of this chapter, or an abandoned animal.
B. Record Of Impoundment: Upon impoundment, the animal control officer shall make a record of the animal impounded.
Such record shall include the breed, color, and gender of the animal, whether or not the animal is licensed, and, if so,
the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag.
C. Notice To Owner; Content: Upon impoundment, the animal control officer shall make all reasonable and feasible
attempts to notify the owner of the impounded animal by either telephone or letter. The animal control officer shall
record any attempt to notify in the log used to record the impoundment of the animal. Such notice to the owner shall
inform him of the procedure to regain custody of the animal.
D. Cost Set: The cost of impoundment shall be set by ordinance and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
E. Unclaimed Animals: Any animal not recovered by the owner within seven (7) days after notification is attempted or
any animal whose owner cannot be ascertained may be destroyed in a manner as directed by the humane
euthanasia in animal shelters act unless the animal can be placed for adoption, placed with a humane society
licensed under the animal welfare act of the state, or a rescue group. Any animal which has bitten any person or has
been declared a dangerous or vicious animal shall not be placed for adoption, but shall be destroyed in a manner as
directed by the humane euthanasia in animal shelters act. (Ord. 2006-64)
F. Conditions Of Redemption: If an owner of an impounded animal desires to make redemption thereof, the owner may
do so upon the following conditions:
1. Present proof of current rabies inoculation for the animal, or pay for the animal's rabies inoculation, if animal has
not been inoculated;
2. Present proof that the dog is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or license the dog in
accordance with this chapter;
3. Pay any outstanding fines, fees or penalties imposed by the city and/or a court of law;
4. For animals found running at large, present proof that the animal is spayed or neutered in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
5. Comply with the requirements of the Jackson County Humane Society for release of such animal; and
6. If the dog has been declared dangerous or vicious, prior to the dog's release to the owner, the dog shall be
identified by the placement, at the owner's expense, of a microchip identification chip, permanently identifying the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 124/923
dog as the dog declared dangerous or vicious. (Ord. 2008-36)
3-4-9: DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS:
A. Dangerous Dog: Any individual dog, which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner or member
of the owner's family, when on any street, sidewalk, or any public place or upon private property which is not owned
by the owner of the dog that behaves in such a manner that poses an imminent threat of serious physical injury or
death to a reasonable person or their companion animal may be declared "dangerous" by the animal control officer.
To be considered a dangerous dog there must be a thorough investigation within three (3) days of becoming aware of
the alleged violation. The animal control officer must initiate the investigation and the owner will be notified and
afforded the opportunity to meet with the animal control officer prior to making a determination. The animal control
officer must also gather all medical and veterinary evidence, interview witnesses, and make a detailed written report.
The animal control officer must then present the report to the chief of police for the final determination of whether or
not the dog should be deemed dangerous. No dog shall be deemed a dangerous dog without clear and convincing
evidence. The owner shall be sent immediate notification of the determination by certified mail that includes a
complete description of the appeal process. A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the animal control officer
determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
1. The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or
custodian of the dog;
2. The threatened person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
3. The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring;
4. The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian or member of its household,
kennel, or offspring.
B. Possible Actions When Dog Deemed Dangerous: If deemed dangerous the chief of police may order the dog to be
spayed or neutered and microchipped, if not already, within fourteen (14) days at the owner's expense and one or
more of the following as deemed appropriate:
1. Evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or another
recognized expert in the field and completion of training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert.
The owner of the dog will be responsible for all costs associated with evaluations and training; or
2. Direct supervision by an adult, eighteen (18) years or older, whenever the animal is on public grounds; or
3. The chief of police may order a dog to be muzzled whenever it is on public premises, but the muzzling shall not
injure the dog, or interfere with its vision or respiration; or
4. The chief of police may order the dog restrained so as not to come into contact with anyone on private property,
including the property of the owner, except the owner or members of the owner's household; or (Ord. 2006-64)
5. The chief of police may order that the owner of said dog be required to provide proof of insurance covering liability
created by said dog, in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); or
6. The chief of police may order the dog to be held in an "enclosure", as defined by this title, during those times that
the dog is not in the immediate control of its owner and outside of the owner's house; or
7. The chief of police may order such other reasonable and additional items as the chief determines is appropriate to
protect the safety of the citizens of Carbondale, for any dog classified as dangerous, as a condition for remaining
within the limits of the city of Carbondale. (Ord. 2008-36)
C. Dog Not Permitted To Remain Within City: The owner of the dog shall not keep or maintain the dog within the city if
the animal control officer finds two (2) or more of the following factors present:
1. The incident which led to the dog being declared dangerous was unprovoked;
2. The incident occurred in an area in which there reside children under the age of thirteen (13) years, senior citizens,
and/or persons possessing a physical or mental impairment;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 125/923
3. The dog in question has previously been found to have run at large; or
4. The nature of and the circumstances surrounding the incident requires that the dog be banned from the city in
order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens.
D. Owner Informed Of Impoundment: The animal control officer shall impound the dog and shall inform its owner, within
twenty four (24) hours of impoundment, that two (2) or more of the factors enumerated herein exist. The owner shall
not allow or permit the dog declared dangerous to return to the city under any circumstances. (Ord. 2006-64)
E. Dog Permitted To Remain In City: Any dog declared to be dangerous pursuant to subsection A of this section, but for
which two (2) or more of the factors enumerated in subsection C of this section do not exist, shall be permitted to
remain within city limits. However, such animal shall be restrained so that while on the premises of its owner the
animal cannot come into physical contact with anyone who is lawfully on the premises other than its owner and
members of the owner's household. Further, the owner of such animal shall not permit the animal to leave his
premises unless such animal is muzzled or caged, and the animal may not be tethered at any time within the city
limits as the principal means of restraint. (Ord. 2008-36)
F. Exemptions: Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, guard dogs,
and police dogs are exempt provided an attack or injury to a person or companion animal occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for the exemption, the dog must be inoculated against rabies. The city shall
be made aware of all dogs under exemption and their addresses. In the case of a guard dog, the owner shall keep
the animal control officer advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The animal control officer shall
provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of all the exempted dogs within Carbondale. It is unlawful
for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not
under control by leash or other recognized control method. (Ord. 2006-64)
G. Appeal: The owner of a dog found to be dangerous may file a complaint against the city in the circuit court within thirty
five (35) days of notification of the determination for a de novo hearing on the determination. The proceeding shall be
conducted as a civil hearing pursuant to the Illinois code of civil procedure. The city must prove by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog is dangerous. The final order of the circuit court may be appealed pursuant to the
civil appeals provisions of the Illinois supreme court rules. The owner of a dog found to be dangerous may, within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of notification, request an administrative hearing to appeal the determination. An owner
desiring a hearing shall make his or her request for a hearing to the city manager of the city of Carbondale. A final
administrative decision by the city manager may be judicially reviewed by a judge in the circuit court of Jackson
County. Until the order has been reviewed, and at all times during the appeal process, the owner shall comply with
the requirements set by the chief of police. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all fees associated with the
appeal and/or holding of the animal while the appeal takes place. (Ord. 2008-36)
H. Vicious Dog: Any individual dog that when unprovoked and without justification, inflicts a bite to a human being or any
other animal whether on public or private property, attacks a human being or domestic animal without justification and
causes serious physical injury or death, or any individual dog that has been found dangerous on three (3) separate
occasions is a vicious dog. Vicious dogs shall not be classified "vicious" only on the basis of breed. In order to have a
dog deemed vicious the animal control officer must give notice of infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the
owner, conduct a thorough investigation, interview witnesses, including the owner, gather any existing medical
records, veterinary medical records or behavioral evidence, and make a detailed report recommending a finding that
the dog is a vicious dog and give the report to the city attorney's office and the owner. The city attorney or any citizen
of Carbondale may file a complaint in the circuit court to deem a dog to be a vicious dog. The petitioner must prove
the dog was a vicious dog by clear and convincing evidence. The animal control officer shall determine where the
dog shall be confined during the pendency of the case. A dog shall not be declared vicious if the court determines
that the conduct of the dog was justified because:
1. The threat, injury, or death, was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or offense upon the
owner or custodian of the dog, or upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog; or
2. The injured, threatened, or killed person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting or physically threatening the dog or
its offspring or has in the past tormented, abused, assaulted, or threatened the dog or its offspring; or
3. The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring;
or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 126/923
4. The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian or member of its household,
kennel, or offspring; or
5. Is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement, fire, or guard duties; or
6. Is a guide dog for the blind or hearing impaired, or a support dog for the physically handicapped, provided an
attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected.
I. Confinement; Disposition; Exemptions: The animal control officer shall determine where the dog shall be confined
during the pendency of the case. If the burden of proof has been met, the court may deem the dog to be a vicious
dog. It shall be unlawful to keep any dog which has been declared vicious pursuant to this section or the Illinois
animal control act within the city. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be released to the owner until the animal
control officer approves the removal of the dog, if the dog is not euthanized. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog
shall sell or give away the dog without court approval. Any dog which is found to be a vicious dog and has not been
removed from the city shall be impounded by the animal control officer. If the owner has not appealed the
impoundment order to the circuit court within fifteen (15) working days, the dog may be euthanized. Upon filing a
notice of appeal, the order of euthanasia shall be automatically stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner
shall bear all costs of the appeal and costs associated with caring for the dog. The owner shall bear the burden of
timely notification to animal control in writing of the appeal. Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support
dogs for the physically handicapped, and guard or police owned dogs are exempt from this subsection, provided an
attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this
subsection, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies. It is the duty of the owner of such exempted
dog to notify the animal control officer of changes of address. In cases of guard dogs, the owner shall keep the
animal control officer advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The animal control officer shall provide
police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs and shall promptly notify such departments
of any address changes reported to them.
J. Impoundment: Any dog found to be in violation of this section may be impounded by the animal control officer
pursuant to the provisions of section 3-4-8 of this chapter.
K. Dogs Destroyed; Certain Carcasses Delivered To Laboratory: Any dog within the city which cannot be safely taken up
and impounded pursuant to this chapter may be slain by any police officer; provided, however, that in all cases where
any dog so slain has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any person, it shall be the duty of the
police officer slaying such dog to immediately deliver the dead dog to the state department of public health for
determination of whether the dog is rabid.
L. File Complaints: The city attorney may file a complaint in the name of the city to enjoin any or all persons from keeping
or maintaining any dangerous or vicious dog, to abate the same, and to enjoin the owner of a dangerous dog from
permitting the same to leave his premises when not under control by leash or other reasonable control method. The
city attorney may request an order that any vicious dog be humanely dispatched, if such disposal is not otherwise
granted herein. (Ord. 2006-64)
M. List Of Dangerous Or Vicious Dogs: The police department shall maintain a list of all dogs declared dangerous or
vicious, the names and addresses of their owners, and the dog's last known location. This list shall be made available
to the public to allow the public to be better informed as to the location of any dogs previously declared vicious or
dangerous, or any owners of dogs which have been declared vicious or dangerous at any time. (Ord. 2008-36)
Chapter 5
EXOTIC ANIMALS
3-5-1: EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
A. Animals Enumerated1: No person may keep or maintain within the city limits any live lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar,
cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena, wolf, wolf hybrid, fox, mink, coyote, falcon,
condor, eagle, or any other raptor, monkey, gorilla, ape, or other nonhuman primate, crocodilian reptile, poisonous
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 127/923
snake or poisonous lizard, nonpoisonous snake exceeding five feet (5') in length, or nonpoisonous lizard exceeding
five feet (5') in length.
B. Exceptions: Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any person operating a zoological park, circus, scientific or
educational institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital or animal refuge. Further, subsection A of this section,
as it relates to nonhuman primates other than gorillas and apes only, shall not apply to mercantile establishments
whose primary purpose is to sell pets and pet supplies.
C. Proper Enclosure: Any person who keeps or maintains within the city limits any live nonpoisonous snake or
nonpoisonous lizard shall at all times keep or maintain such snake or lizard in an enclosed cage or vivarium to
prevent escape. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-5-2: DOMESTICATION NO DEFENSE; IMPOUNDMENT; USE OF FORCE:
A. It is no defense to a violation of subsection 3-5-1A of this chapter that the person violating such subsection has
attempted to domesticate the animal.
B. If there appears to be imminent danger to the public, the animal control officer shall impound the animal prohibited by
subsection 3-5-1A of this chapter.
C. The animal control officer or any police officer may use any force, including deadly force, which he reasonably
believes is necessary to effect the capture and/or impoundment of any animal prohibited by subsection 3-5-1A of this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-5-3: REMEDIES:
The city attorney may file a complaint in the name of the city to enjoin any and all persons from keeping or maintaining or
permitting such exotic animals within the city limits and to abate the same. The city attorney may request an order that
such exotic animals be humanely dispatched, if such authority is not otherwise granted herein. (Ord. 2006-64)
Chapter 6
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
3-6-1: ANIMAL CARE:
Each owner shall provide his animals:
A. Food And Water: Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and clean, fresh water;
B. Shelter: Adequate safe and sanitary shelter, such shelter to be sufficient to provide natural light or artificial
illumination, protection from weather, and of a sufficient size for the animal to stand in an upright position and lie
down stretched out so that no part of its body need touch any wall or roof of the structure. This shall not include
animal carriers, recycled chemical drums, or other personal property which is not intended to provide animal shelter;
C. Veterinary Care: Veterinary care when needed to prevent pain or suffering; and
D. Humane Care: Humane care and treatment. (Ord. 2011-14)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 128/923
3-6-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
A. No person or owner may abandon, cruelly beat, torment, overload, overwork, molest, starve, refuse water to, or
otherwise abuse an animal in any manner.
B. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or give away as a pet any rabbit or fowl which has been dyed, colored, or
otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto. Baby chicks, ducklings, goslings, or turtles shall not be sold,
offered for sale, bartered or given away as pets or novelties.
C. No person shall give away animals, other than fish, as a prize, or as an inducement to enter any competition, contest
or place of amusement, or offer such as an incentive to any business agreement for the purpose of attracting trade.
D. No person shall expose an animal to any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the
same may be digested by the animal; provided, that it shall not be unlawful for a person to use poison mixed with
vegetable substances for the purpose of exterminating rats or mice.
E. No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places it in a life or health
threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without ventilation or other protection
from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, the animal control officer or peace
officer, who has probable cause to believe this subsection is being violated, may enter such motor vehicle by any
reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person. (Ord.
2006-64)
3-6-3: LIMITATION ON ANIMALS PER HOUSEHOLD:
A. Three Dogs Allowed: No person shall keep or maintain more than three (3) dogs in or about any single-family
residence or building, or more than one dog in any unit of a multi-family residence within the city except in a
zoological park, circus, scientific or educational institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital, animal refuge, or
pet shop.
B. Five Cats: No person shall keep or maintain more than five (5) cats in or about any single-family residence or building,
or more than two (2) cats in any unit of a multi-family residence within the city except in a zoological park, circus,
scientific or educational institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital, animal refuge, or pet shop. (Ord. 2006-
64)
C. Total Allowed: No person shall keep or maintain more than ten (10) animals (excluding fish and chickens) in a singlefamily
residence or five (5) animals in any unit of a multi-family residence. (Ord. 2012-08)
3-6-4: REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
If an animal dies within the city limits, the owner shall remove or cause the animal to be removed from the city limits and
disposed of in a reasonable, nonhazardous, humane manner, within twenty four (24) hours after having received
knowledge or information of the animal's death. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-6-5: SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to slaughter any animal within the city limits except in conformity with the humane
slaughter of livestock act. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-6-6: POLICE DOGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 129/923
It shall be unlawful for any person to torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or kill any dog used by any law
enforcement agency or fire department in the performance of the functions or duties of such agency, or to interfere with
or meddle with any such dog while being used by said agency or any officer thereof. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-6-7: DISEASED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domestic animal afflicted with or suspected of being afflicted with a contagious or
infectious disease to allow such animal to run at large or be exposed to any public place so that the health of other
animals or human beings may be affected. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-6-8: BIRDS AND SQUIRRELS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound any squirrel, chipmunk, or
other animal or bird, or for any person to take the eggs or young of any bird within the city limits. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-6-9: ABANDONMENT; ENDANGERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an animal anywhere, or place an animal in a situation where it may
become a stray, suffer exposure or hunger, or place the animal anyplace where injury could occur to the animal. (Ord.
2006-64)
3-6-10: LEASH OR CHAIN:
Animals shall be kept by use of leash and/or chain, specifically made for the containment of animals when the animal is
not on the owner's premises while accompanied by the owner, or is on the owner's property if the animal is not in an
enclosure. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-6-11: IMPOUNDMENT:
The animal control officer may impound an animal on a first offense of section 3-6-1, 3-6-2, 3-6-3, 3-6-5, 3-6-7, 3-6-9 or
3-6-10 of this chapter. The animal seized will remain under the animal control officer's custody until such time as a court
can determine the disposition of the issue. Upon conviction or plea of guilty the animal will be placed for adoption or may
be humanely euthanized, whichever is deemed appropriate and the owner of the animal shall pay all costs associated
with the hearing and caring for the animal. (Ord. 2006-64)
Chapter 7
RABIES
3-7-1: ANIMAL BITES:
A. Investigation: The animal control officer shall investigate or cause to be investigated all reports of animal bites.
B. Notice; Confinement: If the animal has bitten a person or other animal, the animal control officer shall notify the owner
of the animal of such fact, and inform that owner of the necessary confinement procedures pursuant to subsection C
of this section. The animal that has bitten a person or other animal must be confined by a veterinarian for observation
for ten (10) days if the animal has not been inoculated against rabies. If the animal has been inoculated against
rabies, it may spend the confinement period within the home of the owner, under observation. Police dogs are not
subject to this stipulation and may continue working after the event. After the first twenty four (24) hours of
confinement, the veterinarian must inform the animal control officer, in writing, of the animal's condition and at the end
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 130/923
of the confinement period must provide a written report regarding the animal's condition and further instructions to the
owner. If an animal has had contact with another animal with signs of rabies and has not been inoculated, they too
must undergo the same ten (10) days of confinement. The owner of an animal who has undergone the ten (10) day
confinement period must comply with the veterinarian's instructions which are included with the veterinarian's report.
The owner of an animal which has had to undergo observation will bear the responsibility of payment for any and all
costs related to the bite and confinement. The owner of an animal that bites may not attempt to sell or give the animal
to a new owner during a period of mandatory confinement.
C. Compliance With Statutes: Any animal which has bitten a person shall be confined pursuant to the animal control act,
as amended.
D. Reporting: Any owner of an animal which has bitten a person or other animal must report the incident to the animal
control officer. (Ord. 2006-64)
3-7-2: SIGNS OF RABIES:
The owner whose animal exhibits clinical signs of rabies, whether or not inoculated, shall notify the animal control officer
and confine their animal, under observation, for ten (10) days. If the animal has not been inoculated, the confinement
must occur onthe veterinarian's premises, but if the animal has been inoculated, the confinement may occur within the
owner's home. Any animal in direct contact with the animal displaying clinical signs of rabies and that has not been
inoculated must also undergo confinement and observation in a veterinarian's care. (Ord. 2006-64)
Chapter 8
PENALTIES
3-8-1: FINES AND FEES:
A. Within the time period provided by the animal control officer, any person may settle a claim by the city against that
person for a violation of sections 3-4-4 and 3-4-7 of this title by making payment to the city in accordance with the
following schedule:
Neutered/
Spayed
Unneutered/
Unspayed
First occurrence
(Each violation)
$ 20.00 $ 40.00
Second occurrence
(Each violation)
40.00 80.00
Third occurrence
(Each violation)
60.00 120.00
All subsequent occurrences 200.00 200.00
B. Any person may settle any claim by the city against that person for a violation of sections 3-3-1, 3-4-1 through 3-4-3,
inclusive, 3-4-5 and 3-4-6, inclusive, of this title, by making payment to the city in accordance with the following
schedule:
1. If paid within five (5) days of commission of the violation, twenty dollars ($20.00).
2. If paid between six (6) and fourteen (14) days of commission of the violation, forty dollars ($40.00).
3. If paid between fifteen (15) days of the commission but before the filing of a complaint, seventy dollars ($70.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 131/923
4. After the filing of a complaint, pursuant to section 3-8-2 of this chapter.
C. Any person may settle any claim by the city against that person for a violation of section 3-4-9 of this title, by making
payment to the city of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine for the first offense and a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00)
fine for each subsequent offense.
D. The fees or fines assessed to the owner under this section shall be applicable only if they are paid within the time
periodprovided by the animal control officer. Otherwise, penalties for any violation of this title shall be imposed
pursuant to section 3-8-2 of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city attorney's office from filing a
complaint in city court for any violation of this title, and imposing the penalties in section 3-8-2 of this chapter. (Ord.
2006-64)
3-8-2: PENALTIES IMPOSED BY COURT:
A. The city attorney's office may file a complaint against any person who violates the provisions of this title at any time, in
order to prosecute such violations in city court, subjecting the person to the penalties as stated in subsections B and
C of this section.
B. Except as provided in subsection 3-8-1B of this chapter, any person who is found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating
any provision of this title shall be fined in an amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to any other costs or charges authorized by this title.
C. Any person who is found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating subsection 3-5-1A of this title shall be fined in an amount
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to any
other costs or charges authorized by this title.
D. Any person who is found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating section 3-6-1, 3-6-2, 3-6-3, 3-6-4, 3-6-5, 3-6-6, 3-6-7, 3-
6-8, 3-6-9 or 3-6-10 of this title shall be fined in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to any other costs or charges authorized by this title. (Ord.
2006-64)
Title 4
BUILDING, PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL AND HOUSING
REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING REGULATIONS
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE:
A. Adopted By Reference: The International Code Council ("ICC") international building code, 2003 edition (hereinafter
referred to as "building code for multi-family and commercial applications"), is hereby adopted by reference, except
for such portions as are specifically hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
B. Multi-Family And Commercial Application: ICC international building code, 2003 edition, is adopted for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use, occupancy,
locations and maintenance of all buildings except one- and two-family dwelling units within the jurisdiction of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 132/923
C. Copy On File: A copy of the ICC international building code, 2003 edition, including all amendments made by this
section shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated by this
chapter as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions hereof, including all amendments, shall be controlling the
construction of all buildings and structures except one- and two-family dwelling units within the jurisdiction of the city.
D. Exceptions And Modifications To Code: The ICC international building code is adopted as set forth hereinabove with
the following exceptions and modifications:
1. Any section which refers to "name of jurisdiction" is hereby modified by inserting "the city of Carbondale, Illinois."
2. All provisions contained in the ICC international building code, 2003 edition, referring to the following terms or
phrases are hereby deleted and this city code shall govern these items:
Accessibility
Board of appeals
Bond and liability insurance
Buildings with one exit
Department of building safety
Energy conservation
Exemptions
Fee schedule
ICC electrical code
Identification
Means of appeal
Physically handicapped and aged
Plumbing systems
Ramps
Rear yard
Rehabilitation
Unlawful continuance
Violation penalties (Ord. 2003-72)
E. Fire Districts Designated: Fire districts are designated and construction types therein are limited as follows:
1. The primary fire district is hereby designated, as all property zoned or hereafter zoned, primary business in
accordance with title 15 of this code.
2. The secondary fire district is hereby designated, as all property or hereafter zoned, professional administrative
office, secondary business, planned business, wholesale and automotive, neighborhood business, and light
industrial in accordance with title 15 of this code.
Any of the five (5) construction types defined in section 602.0 of the 2003 edition of the ICC shall be permitted in
the primary and secondary fire districts, except that type 5B construction shall be restricted to residential
construction within the secondary fire district. Any proposed building structure that will be located five (5) or fewer
feet from an existing building structure shall be required to be designed and constructed with a two (2) hour fire
resistant rating on the exterior portions of the structure.
Nothing in this subsection E is to be construed in order to abridge any zoning building setback requirements. (Ord.
2013-12)
4-1-2: PERMITS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, add to, alter, remove or demolish, or to commence the construction,
addition, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or structure or install equipment for the operation of a building
or structure without first filing with the city manager or his designee an application in writing and obtaining a formal
permit.
B. Fees: Fees for building permits to construct, add to or alter buildings or structures issued under this section shall be,
based on the estimated cost of such work, two-tenths of one percent (0.2%) with a minimum fee of five dollars
($5.00); provided, however, that fees for building permits issued to construct, add to or alter buildings or structures,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 133/923
when such work has been commenced without authorization of such building permit, shall be the administrative cost
to the city attributable to investigation inspection and issuing of permits for such work, but in no event shall such fee
be, based upon the estimated cost of such work, less than two-fifths of one percent (2/5%) of such cost, or twenty five
dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater.
C. Fees Waived: The city manager may waive the fee otherwise required herein for any work on grade schools or high
schools, and for work in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less to be conducted by religious or
charitable not for profit organizations. In addition, the city manager will waive the fee otherwise required herein for
any work that is designed and intended to meet any level of LEED certification as set forth by the U.S. green building
council (USGBC). (Ord. 1432 § 2; Ord. 1451 § 1; Ord. 2010-03)
4-1-3: MOVING BUILDINGS:
A. Permit Required: A person desiring to move or relocate a building or structure from within the corporate limits of the
city to a new location within said corporate limits to a location outside said corporate limits or from outside said
corporate limits to a location within said corporate limits must first obtain a moving permit.
B. Application Requirements: Before a moving permit will be considered by the city manager, the applicant for the permit
shall provide, in writing, to the building and neighborhood services manager the following:
1. Statement Of Purpose: A statement of purpose for the move which shall include:
a. The type of structure being moved including the size (1 story, etc.), approximate square footage, construction
material (wood, brick, etc.), and the type of foundation on which the structure will be placed.
b. The intended use of the structure at the new location.
c. The owner(s), including beneficial interest holder(s) of both the structures and the property where the structure
will be located.
2. Certificate Of Insurance: A certificate of insurance in the minimum amounts of:
General liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00);
Automobile liability: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); and
Excess liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
in the name of the "city of Carbondale" as certificate holder or additional insured. The certificate of insurance shall
be approved by the city attorney.
3. Route Plan: A written route plan which has been approved in writing by the public works director, the Carbondale
police department, the supervisors of all utilities operating in the city, and the supervisors of any other utilities which
are operating within the route plan. The route plan will indicate the route to be taken and the date and time of the
relocation.
4. Zoning Certificate: A zoning certificate issued for the site of the relocation. This requirement will be deemed
unnecessary if the relocation is outside the zoning jurisdiction of the City.
5. Building Permit: A building permit issued for the site of the relocation for footings, foundation construction and
other renovation necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the Building Code of the City. This
requirement will be deemed unnecessary if the relocation is outside the corporate limits of the City.
6. Electrical Permit: An electrical permit issued to a licensed electrician. This requirement will be deemed
unnecessary if the relocation is outside the corporate limits of the City.
7. Plumbing Permit: A plumbing permit issued to a plumber licensed by the State. This requirement will be deemed
unnecessary if the relocation is outside the corporate limits of the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 134/923
C. Evaluation Of Application; Decision: Once the applicant provides the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager
with notice and documentation of all the application requirements listed in subsection B of this Section, the Building
and Neighborhood Services Manager will provide the documentation to the City Manager. The City Manager shall
evaluate the application based upon compliance with the application requirements, the type of structure to be moved,
the intended use of the structure at the new location and the impact of the structure on the neighborhood where the
structure will be located. The City Manager will give a written notice of his decision to the applicant. The decision will
be mailed to the applicant at the address listed on the application.
D. Notice Of Denial; Appeal: An applicant who is denied a moving permit may appeal the decision of the City Manager to
the City Council. To initiate such an appeal, the applicant must notify the City Manager, in writing, within five (5) days
of receiving notice of the denial. The appeal will be placed on the agenda of the City Council. The applicant will be
allowed to address the Council and present relevant evidence regarding the application. Other evidence may be
presented as necessary to ensure a just and informed decision by the City Council. The decision of the City Council
shall be final.
E. Fee: The fee for a permit to move a building or structure into, out of, or within the corporate limits of the City shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00) per building or structure. (1998 Code)
F. Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall move or relocate, or cause to be moved or relocated, a building or structure
without having first obtained a permit therefor, or who shall fail or refuse to pay the fee therefor as herein provided
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 97-166)
4-1-4: MOBILE HOMES:
No mobile home shall be constructed, moved, or placed upon any lot, tract or parcel of land where the location of same
is herein authorized, except within a licensed mobile home park, until and unless a building permit has been obtained
therefor as provided in Section 4-1-2 of this Chapter. (1998 Code)
4-1-5: DEMOLITION OR REPAIR:
A. Action To Compel; Lien:
1. City Authority; Application To Circuit Court:
a. The corporate authorities of the City may demolish, repair or enclose or cause the demolition, repair or
enclosure of dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned buildings within the corporate
limits of the City, and may remove or cause the removal of garbage, debris and other hazardous, noxious or
unhealthy substances or materials from such buildings.
b. Application shall be made to the Jackson County Circuit Court for an order authorizing such action to be taken
with respect to any such building if the owner or owners thereof, including the lienholders of record, after at least
fifteen (15) days' written notice by mail have failed to put such building in a safe condition or to demolish it.
Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners of any such building including
the lienholders of record is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name such real
estate was last assessed is sufficient notice under this Section.
2. Board Up Building: It is not a defense to such cause of action that the building is boarded up or otherwise
enclosed, although the Court may order the defendant to have such building boarded up or otherwise enclosed.
(Ord. 91-20)
3. Lien For Costs:
a. The cost of such demolition, repair, enclosure or removal incurred by the City, or by a lienholder of record,
including Court costs, attorney fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this Section is recoverable
from the owner or owners of such real estate and is a lien thereon, which lien is superior to all prior existing liens
and encumbrances, except taxes; provided that, within one hundred eighty (180) days after such repair,
demolition, enclosure or removal, the City, lienholder of record who incurred such cost and expense shall file a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 135/923
notice of lien of such cost and expense incurred in the office of the Recorder of Jackson County, Illinois. The
notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof; 2) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred; and 3) the date or dates when the
cost and expense was incurred by the City, or the lienholder of record. Upon payment of the cost and expense
by the owner of or person interested in the property after the notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the City, persons in whose name the lien has been filed, or the assignee of the lien and the release
may be filed of record as in the case of mortgages or mechanics liens. An action to foreclose this lien may be
commenced at any time after the date of filing the notice of lien. All liens arising pursuant to this subsection A3
shall be assignable. The assignee shall have the same power to enforce the lien as the City, except that such
lien cannot be enforced pursuant to subsection A4 below. (Ord. 91-20; 1998 Code)
b. If the appropriate official of the City determines that any dangerous and unsafe building or uncompleted and
abandoned building within its corporate limits fulfills the requirements for an action by the Municipality under the
Abandoned Housing Rehabilitation Act1, the City may petition under that Act in a proceeding brought under this
subsection.
4. Enforcement Of Lien:
a. In any case where the City has obtained a lien pursuant to subsection A1, A2 or A3 above, the City may enforce
such lien pursuant to this subsection A4 in the same proceeding in which the lien is authorized.
b. The City, desiring to enforce a lien under this subsection A4, shall petition the Court to retain jurisdiction of
foreclosure proceedings under this subsection. Notice of the petition shall be served, by certified or registered
mail, on all person who were served notice under subsection A1, A2 or A3 of this Section. The Court shall
conduct a hearing on the petition not less than fifteen (15) days after such notice is served. If the Court
determines that the requirements of this subsection A4 have been satisfied, it shall grant the petition and retain
jurisdiction over the matter until the foreclosure proceeding is completed. If the Court denies the petition, the City
may enforce the lien in a separate action as provided in subsection A1, A2 or A3 of this Section.
c. All persons designated in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-1501 as necessary parties in a mortgage
foreclosure action shall be joined as parties prior to issuance of an order for foreclosure. Persons designated in
735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-1501 as permissible parties may also be jointed as parties in the action.
d. The provisions of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15 applicable to mortgage foreclosures shall apply to the
foreclosure of a lien pursuant to this subsection A4, except to the extent that such provisions are inconsistent
with this subsection. However, for purposes of foreclosures of liens pursuant to this subsection, the redemption
period described in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-1603 subsection (b) shall end sixty (60) days after the
date of entry of the order of foreclosure.
5. Petition To Declare Property Abandoned; Demolition:
a. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City may petition the Circuit Court to have property declared
abandoned under this subsection A5 if:
(1) The property has been tax delinquent for two (2) or more years, or bills for water service for the property have
been outstanding for two (2) or more years;
(2) The property is unoccupied by persons legally in possession; and
(3) The property contains a dangerous or unsafe building.
b. All persons having an interest of record in the property, including tax purchasers and beneficial owners of any
Illinois Land Trust having title to the property, shall be named as defendants in the petition and shall be served
with process. In addition, service shall be had pursuant to 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-206 as in other
cases affecting property.
c. If the City proves that the conditions described in this subsection exist, and the owner of record of the property
does not enter an appearance in the action, or, if title to the property is held by an Illinois Land Trust, if neither
the owner of record nor the owner of the beneficial interest of such trust enters such an appearance, the Court
shall declare the property abandoned.
d. If such determination is made, notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail to all persons having an interest
of record in the property, including tax purchasers and beneficial owners of any Illinois Land Trust having title to
the property, stating that title to such property will be transferred to the City unless, within thirty (30) days of such
notice, the owner of record enters an appearance in the action, or unless any other person having an interest in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 136/923
the property files with the Court a request to demolish the dangerous or unsafe building or to put the building in
safe condition. If the owner of record enters an appearance in the action within the thirty (30) day period, the
Court shall vacate its order declaring the property abandoned. In such case, the City may amend its complaint in
order to initiate proceedings under subsection A1 of this Section.
e. If a request to demolish or repair the building is filed within the thirty (30) day period, the Court shall grant
permission to the requesting party to demolish the building within thirty (30) days or to restore the building to safe
condition within sixty (60) days after the request is granted. An extension of such period for up to sixty (60)
additional days may be given for good cause. If more than one person with an interest in the property files a
timely request, preference shall be given to the person with the lien or other interest of the highest priority.
f. If the requesting party proves to the Court that the building has been demolished or put in a safe condition within
the period of time granted by the Court, the Court shall issue a quitclaim judicial deed for the property to the
requesting party, conveying only the interest of the owner of record, upon proof of payment to the City of all costs
incurred by the Municipality in connection with the action, including but not limited to Court costs, attorney fees,
administrative costs, and the costs, if any associated with building enclosure or removal, and receiver's
certificates. The interest in the property so conveyed shall be subject to all liens and encumbrances thereon. In
addition, if the interest is conveyed to a person holding as certificate of purchase for the property under the
Revenue Act of 1939, the conveyance shall be subject to the rights of redemption of all persons entitled to
redeem under that Act, including the original owner of record.
g. If no person with an interest in the property files a timely request, or if the requesting party fails to demolish the
building or put the building in safe condition within the time specified by the Court, the City may petition the Court
to issue a judicial deed for the property to the City. A conveyance by such judicial deed shall operate to
extinguish all existing ownership interests in, liens on and other interest in such property, including tax liens.
(Ord. 91-20)
B. Demolition Liens; Foreclosure; Reacquisition Of Property: No owner of property who held title to the property when
property taxes became delinquent and which taxes were still delinquent at the time of the foreclosure of a demolition
lien by the City or the acceptance of a deed of conveyance in lieu of foreclosing such lien and no person, firm,
association, corporation, or other entity related to or associated with any such owner shall, within ten (10) years after
title vests in the City, reacquire any right, title or interest in or to such property. (Ord. 87-77)
4-1-6: INJUNCTION TO REQUIRE COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
Upon due investigation by the City which determines that any building or structure within the corporate limits fails to
conform to the minimum standards of health and safety as set forth in the Housing Code, and the owner or owners of
such building or structure fails, after due notice, to cause such property to conform, the City, pursuant to the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring compliance with such ordinances or for such other order as the Court may deem necessary or
appropriate to secure such compliance pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 87-77)
4-1-7: ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE:
A. The State of Illinois "Illinois Accessibility Code" promulgated by the Environmental Barriers Act 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 25/1 et seq., which specifications are set forth in booklet form is hereby adopted by reference by the City.
1. Apartment and/or Dormitory Buildings not Located within a Complex.
Newly erected apartment or dormitory buildings or any buildings remodeled 50% or more for the purpose of an
apartment or dormitory or any building converted to an apartment or dormitory shall provide and design a minimum
of one (1) dwelling unit out of each eight (8) dwelling units so as to allow such units to be fully accessible for the
person confined to a wheelchair. Such units shall contain a minimum of one bedroom.
2. Apartment and/or Dormitory Buildings Located within a Complex.
Newly erected apartment or dormitory buildings or any building remodeled 50% or more for the purpose of an
apartment or dormitory or any building converted to an apartment or dormitory building shall provide and design a
minimum of one dwelling unit out of each ten (10) dwelling units so as to allow such units to be fully accessible for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 137/923
the person confined to a wheelchair. The proportion of apartment or dormitory units for the physically handicapped
which are studio, one, two (2), three (3) and four (4) bedroom units shall be the same as the proportion of said
units in the total complex. In the event that the number of apartment or dormitory units allocated for the physically
handicapped is not sufficient to cover the quality and size range offered in the complex-at-large, the units for the
physically handicapped shall reflect the quality, size and cost of the type of apartment or dormitory unit which is
predominant in the complex. (Ord. 80-03; 1998 Code)
B. Enforcement And Penalty:
1. Any required site plan approval or building permit shall not be granted unless all applicable provision of this
Chapter are provided for by the applicant or owner requesting same.
2. Any required occupancy permit for the use of a structure or other uses of this ordinance shall not be issued until
the applicable provisions of this Chapter are complied with. (Ord. 82-30 § 7)
3. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for such offense. Each day a
violation exists constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 82-30 § 7; Ord. 97-166)
4-1-8: THERMAL INSULATION STANDARDS REQUIRED:
A. Intent:
1. The requirements of this Code shall regulate the design of residential envelopes which will provide optimal thermal
resistance and minimal air infiltration for the effective utilization of energy regardless of the source of that energy
(See definition of "residential buildings").
2. Alternate materials - method of construction, design or insulating systems: the provisions of this Code are not
intended to prevent the use of any material, method of construction, design, or insulating system not specifically
prescribed herein, provided that such construction, design, or insulating systems meet the intent of the Code. Nor
is this Code intended to abridge any safety or health requirements.
3. Determination of the design thermal properties of building components, including insulating materials, shall be
based upon the values assigned to the materials in the most recent publication of the Handbook of Fundamentals
by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE).
4. This Code sets forth criteria for:
a. New residential buildings (type A-1).
b. Additions to existing residential buildings (type A-1).
B. Exempt Buildings: Buildings that are neither heated or cooled.
C. Application To Existing Buildings:
1. Habitable room additions to existing residential buildings may be made without making the entire building or
structure comply. The new work shall conform to the applicable provisions of this Code.
2. Any change in the use of a building that was constructed under this Code shall not be permitted unless such
building or structure is in compliance with the applicable requirements of this Code as determined by the new use.
D. Definitions:
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The elements of a building which enclose conditioned spaces through which thermal
energy may be transferred to or from the exterior.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The official authorized to act in behalf of the responsible government agency for the
enforcement of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 138/923
CONDITIONED FLOOR AREA: The horizontal projection of that portion of interior space which is contained within
exterior walls and which is conditioned directly or indirectly by an energy-using system.
ENERGY: The capacity for doing work; taking a number of forms which may be transformed from one into another
such as thermal (heat), mechanical (work), electrical, and chemical; in U.S. customary units, measured in kilowatthours
(kwh) or British thermal units (Btu).
ENERGY, NEW: See definition of New Energy.
ENERGY, RECOVERED: See definition of Recovered Energy.
EXTERIOR ENVELOPE: See definition of Building Envelope.
FUEL: A substance which may be used to give heat or generate electricity.
GRADE: The average of the finished ground level at the center of the walls of a building. In case building walls are
parallel to and within five feet (5') of a sidewalk(s), the grade shall be the average finished elevation of such
sidewalk(s) between side lot lines.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of areas of the several floors of the building, including basements, cellars,
mezzanine and intermediate floored tiers and penthouse of headroom height, measured from the exterior faces of
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating buildings.
GROSS WALL AREA: The vertical projection of the exterior wall area bounding interior space which is conditioned
by an energy-using system; includes opaque wall, window and door areas. The gross area of exterior walls
consists of all opaque wall areas, including foundation walls above grade, between floor spandrels, peripheral
edges of floors, and window areas including sash, and door areas, where such surfaces are exposed to outdoor air
and enclose a heated or mechanically cooled space including interstitial areas between two (2) such spaces.
HVAC: Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
HABITABLE ROOM ADDITION: Any room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living purposes
by human occupants including but not limited to bathrooms, furnace rooms, laundry rooms and enclosed
communicating corridors.
HEAT: The form of energy that is transferred by virtue of a temperature difference.
HEATED SPACE: Space, within a building, which is provided with a positive heat supply system.
HISTORIC BUILDINGS: Buildings which have been specifically designated as historically significant by the State or
local governing body, or listed in The National Register of Historic Places, or which have been determined to be
eligible for listing.
INFILTRATION: The uncontrolled inward air leakage through cracks and interstices in any building element and
around windows and doors of a building, caused by the pressure effects of wind and/or the effect of differences in
the indoor and outdoor air density.
MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure used or so constructed as to permit its being conveyed
upon the public streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling unit for one or
more persons, provided that any structure in whole on a permanent foundation, with wheels, tongue and hitch
permanently removed, shall not be construed as a mobile home.
NEW ENERGY: Energy, other than recovered energy, utilized for the purpose of heating or cooling.
NONDEPLETABLE ENERGY SOURCES: Sources of energy (excluding minerals) derived from incoming solar
radiation including photosynthetic processes; from phenomena resulting therefrom including wind, waves and tides,
lake or pond thermal differences; and energy derived from the internal heat of the earth, including nocturnal
thermal exchanges.
OPAQUE AREAS: All exposed areas of a building envelope which enclose conditioned space, except openings for
windows, skylights, doors and building service systems.
R: The thermal resistance of a-material, or a building(R-1).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 139/923
envelope section.u
RECOVERED ENERGY: Energy utilized which would otherwise be wasted from an energy system.
REHEAT: The application of sensible heat to supply air that has been previously cooled below the temperature of
the conditioned space by either mechanical refrigeration or the introduction of outdoor air to provide cooling.
RESET: Adjustment of the set point of a control instrument to a higher or lower value automatically or manually to
conserve energy.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING TYPE A-1: All dwelling units including multi-family buildings not exceeding thirty five feet
(35') in height. Mobile Homes are excluded from this definition.
ROOF ASSEMBLY: A. A roof assembly shall be considered as all components of the roof/ceiling envelope through
which heat flows, thereby creating a building transmission heat loss or gain, where such assembly is exposed to
outdoor air and encloses a heated or mechanically cooled space.
B. A gross area of a roof assembly consists of the total interior surface of such assembly, including skylights
exposed to the heated or mechanically cooled space.
C. When return air ceiling plenums are employed, the roof/ceiling assembly shall:
1. For thermal transmittance purposes, not include the ceiling proper nor the plenum space as part of the
assembly and,
2. For gross area purposes, be based upon the interior face of the upper plenum surface.
SERVICE SYSTEMS: All energy-using systems in a building that are operated to provide services for the
occupants or processes housed therein, including but not limited to HVAC, service water heating, illumination,
transportation, cooking or food preparation, laundering or similar functions.
SERVICE WATER HEATING: Supply of hot water for domestic or commercial purposes other than comfort heating.
SERVICE WATER HEATING DEMAND: The maximum design rate of energy withdrawal from a service water
heating system in a designated period of time (usually an hour a day).
SOLAR ENERGY SOURCE: Source of thermal, chemical or electrical energy derived directly from conversion of
incident solar radiation.
THERMAL TRANSMITTANCE (U): Overall coefficient of heat transmission (air to air) expressed in units of Btu per
hour per square foot per degree Fahrenheit. It is the time rate of heat flow. The U value applies to combinations of
different materials used in series along the heat flow path, single materials that comprise a building section, cavity
air spaces, and surface air films on both sides of building element (U-1/R).
THERMAL TRANSMITTANCE (Uo): Overall (weighted average) heat transmission of a gross area of the exterior
building envelope, expressed in units of Btu per hour per square foot of floor area per degree Fahrenheit.
THERMOSTAT: An instrument which measures changes in temperature and controls equipment for maintaining a
desired temperature.
E. Plans And Specifications: Plans and Specifications shall be submitted with each application for a building permit.
1. The plans and specifications shall show in sufficient detail all pertinent data and features of the building including
design criteria, exterior and interior envelope component materials, R-values of the envelope elements, and Rvalues
of the insulating materials to indicate conformance with the requirements of this Code.
2. Buildings designed with a value of overall thermal transmittance (Uo) equal to or smaller than one resulting from
the R-value requirements presented herein shall be considered to meet the Code requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 140/923
F. Building Classification For Purpose Of This Code: Same as residential definition (Type A-1). All dwelling units
including multi-family buildings not exceeding thirty five feet (35') in height.
G. Building Design By Acceptable Practice For Residential Buildings (Type A-1): Requirements contained in this Section
are applicable to only Type A-1 buildings. Such buildings, when constructed in accordance with this Section, are
deemed to comply with this Code.
1. Opaque Exterior Wall Assemblies: Opaque exterior wall assemblies shall have a combined minimum R-value of
nineteen (19), except when the overall heat transmission of the gross area of the exterior building envelope is
designed and constructed such that the overall transmittance (U9) is equal to or small than one resulting from the
other prescriptive R-value requirements of this Code. (See subsection E2 of this Section)
2. Walls:
a. The exterior wall envelope may be selected from but not limited to the types illustrated in subsection J, Table No.
1 of this Section. Depending on the kind of insulation, the R-value of that insulation and the type of glazing, the
maximum permissible percentage of exterior wall to be glazed shall be determined from the glazing chart in
subsection J, Table No. 2 of this Section.
b. The exterior wall area shall be calculated using:
(1) The horizontal distance of the perimeter of the exterior wall separating heated from unheated spaces.
(2) The vertical dimension shall be the distance from the finish ceiling of the roof/ceiling assembly to:
(A) The finish floor over an unheated area or
(B) Grade if the interior space is heated below or at that level. Uninsulated foundation walls shall not be
included in wall area.
3. Glazing Area: The glazing area shall:
a. Be calculated at the finish opening area.
b. Include all exterior doors.
c. Be unlimited if installed in a south facing wall provided:
(1) The glazing is dual or triple and
(2) The glazing is protected from summer sun intrusion with an opaque overhand protruding a minimum of thirty
inches (30") including guttering or one-third (1/3) the overhead to sill distance, whichever is greater, or other
appropriate shading is provided (south is defined as falling in a cone limited +30 degrees from true solar
south).
4. Roof/Ceiling: The roof/ceiling assembly shall have a combined minimum value of R-30 except under the condition
of subsection E2 of this Section. See typical roof/ceiling assemblies, subsection J3, Table No. 3 of this Section.
5. Floors Over Unheated Spaces: The floor assemblies shall be insulated with minimum R-19, except under the
condition of subsection E2 of this Section.
6. Foundation Walls: Foundation walls in heated basements shall be insulated with a minimum of R-10 from
underside of floor to two feet (2') below grade (see "grade" definition) on either the exterior or interior of the
foundation wall, except under the condition of subsection E2 of this Section.
7. Slab On Ground Floor: Slab on ground floor shall be thermally insulated under for a distance of two feet (2') from
the slab edge and down from the top of the slab to the bottom of the slab or two feet (2') from the top of the slab to
a depth two feet (2') below grade along its perimeter with a proven and accepted thermal insulation having a total
R-value of ten (10) or better.
8. Air Leakage: All openings or penetrations shall be caulked, gasketed, or weatherstripped including exterior joints
around windows and door frames; openings between walls and foundations, between walls and roof/ceilings and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 141/923
between wall panels; openings at penetrations of utility services through walls, floors, and doors; and all other such
openings.
9. Exterior Doors And Windows: All exterior doors and windows shall be designed to minimize air leakage into or from
the building envelope.
10. Foundations: Foundations shall have a sill sealer between the sill plate and supporting foundation wall.
11. Aluminum Windows: All aluminum windows shall have a thermal break between the interior and exterior walls.
H. Service Water Heating For Type A-1 Buildings:
1. Heat Efficient Method: Hot water for domestic, sanitary and swimming pool purposes shall be generated and
delivered in a manner conducive to saving heat energy.
2. Pipe Wrap: It is recommended that service hot water pipes be installed with a commercially available pipe wrap.
3. Temperature Controls:
a. Automatic: Service water heating systems shall be equipped with automatic temperature controls.
b. Shut Down: A separate switch shall be provided to permit turning off energy supplied to electric service water
heating systems. A separate valve shall be provided to permit turning off the energy supplied to the main
burner(s) of all other types of service water heating systems.
I. Building Mechanical Equipment And Control For Residential Buildings (Type A-1):
1. All HVAC devices, components and their elements shall conform to the requirements of this Section.
2. Combustion Heating Equipment: All gas and oil fired comfort heating equipment shall show a minimum combustion
efficiency of seventy five percent (75%) at maximum rated output. Combustion efficiency is defined at one hundred
percent (100%) minus stack losses in percent of heat input. Stack losses are:
a. Loss due to sensible heat in dry flue gas.
b. Loss due to incomplete combustion.
c. Loss due to sensible and latent heat in moisture formed by combustion of hydrogen in the flue.
3. Control:
a. Temperature: Each HVAC system shall be provided with at least one thermostat for the regulation of
temperature. It is recommended that each thermostat be set as follows:
(1) Where used to control heating, a maximum temperature of seventy two degrees Fahrenheit (72°F).
(2) Where used to control cooling, a minimum temperature of seventy six degrees Fahrenheit (76°F).
4. Thermostats: At least one thermostat for regulation of space temperature shall be provided for each separate
HVAC system and/or for each dwelling unit.
5. Duct Insulation: All ducts, plenums and enclosures not installed within the heated space by thermally insulated with
a minimum of R-6 and shall have all transverse joints sealed with tape or mastic.
6. Dampers: It is recommended that fireplaces have operable dampers and utilize outside combustion air. (Ord. 80-
118; 1998 Code)
4-1-9: MOBILE HOME TIE-DOWN REQUIREMENTS:
A. Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall for the purpose of this Section, have the
meanings indicated as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 142/923
ANCHORING EQUIPMENT: Straps, cables, turnbuckles, and chains, including tensioning devices, which are used
with ties to secure a mobile home to ground anchors.
ANCHORING SYSTEM: A combination of ties, anchoring equipment and ground anchors that will, when properly
designed and installed, resist overturning and lateral movement of the mobile home wind forces.
DIAGONAL TIE: A tie intended to primarily resist horizontal or shear forces and which may secondarily resist
vertical, uplift, and overturning forces.
DIVISION: Building and Neighborhood Services Division.
EXISTING MOBILE HOME: Any mobile home situated within the City of Carbondale, Illinois, prior to the passage,
approval, recording, and publication of this Chapter and which is designed to be a dwelling unit and connected to
the required utilities.
FROST HEAVE: An upthrust of ground or pavement caused by freezing of moist soil.
GROUND ANCHOR: A device designed to transfer mobile home anchoring loads to the ground.
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY: An organization which:
A. Primarily is interested in testing and evaluating equipment; and
B. Is qualified and equipped to conduct and evaluate experimental testing in accordance with approved
standards; and
C. Makes available a published report in which specific information is included stating that the equipment and
installations have been tested and found safe for use in a specific manner; and
D. Is not under the jurisdiction or control of any manufacturer or supplier of any industry.
INSTALLER: Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who ties down or anchors a mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width
and is thirty two (32) body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land which has been so designed and improved that it
contains three (3) or more mobile home lots available to the general public for the placement thereon of mobile
homes for occupancy.
MOBILE HOME SITE: The location where the mobile home is connected to the required utilities for habitation.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That area of a mobile home lot which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile
home.
PERSON: Any natural person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity.
REQUIRED UTILITIES: An approved electrical, sanitary sewer/plumbing and water system.
ROOF PROTECTOR: A device designed to prevent over-the-top straps from damaging or penetrating the roof
material of the mobile home.
TIE: A strap, cable or securing device used to connect the mobile home to ground anchors.
TIE-DOWN EQUIPMENT: Any fixtures or equipment which are used for the purpose of securing the mobile home
to the supporting foundation, to the ground, or to any other type of structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 143/923
VERTICAL TIE: A tie intended to primarily resist the uplifting and overturning forces. (Ord. 80-106; 1998 Code)
B. Compliance:
1. The owner of each mobile home installed and/or which may be relocated from one lot to another, after City Council
approval of this Chapter shall be responsible to ensure that approved tie-down equipment is obtained and used to
secure the mobile home to the surface upon which it is to rest, in accordance with the provisions of subsections B,
C, D, and E of this Section within thirty (30) days after the mobile home is set up.
2. In the case where frozen soil or set soil prevents the installation of ground anchors, this thirty (30) day limit shall
not apply. The home must, in this case, be anchored at the earliest possible date after the soil thaws or dries.
3. All existing mobile homes situated in Carbondale prior to City Council approval of this Chapter shall be tied down in
accordance with the provisions of subsections B, C, D, and E of this Section or the alternative tie-down standards
of Section 4-1-11 and Table No. 2 of this Chapter on or before September 1, 1982.
4. Mobile homes situated in areas annexed to the City, after City Council approval of this Chapter, shall be tied down
in accordance with the provisions of subsections B, C, D, and E of this Section or the alternative tie-down
standards of Section 4-1-11 and Table No. 2 of this Chapter within eighteen (18) months after such annexation
receives City Council approval.
5. Any person desiring to engage in the business of installing mobile home tie-down equipment in Carbondale, shall
first register with the Building and Neighborhood Services Division and annually, thereafter, if in the business of
installing such equipment.
C. Tie-Down Installation Requirements:
1. A diagonal tie is effected by tying to the frame member farthest from the anchor of each transportable unit.
2. All mobile homes shall have diagonal tie-downs and vertical ties installed in accordance with Section 4-1-11, Table
No. 1. Only diagonal ties are required for double-wide mobile homes in accordance with Table No. 1. Ties shall be
evenly spaced as practicable along the length of the mobile home with not more than eight feet (8') open-end
spacing one each end.
3. Vertical ties may pass over the top of the stud and rafter location near each end of the mobile home. Vertical tie
downs may be installed over the skin at the mobile home site. Any vertical tie may use the same anchors as the
end diagonal ties.
4. If steel strapping is used, it may be secured around the I-beam using an appropriate connecting device. Care
should be exercised to ensure that minimum bending radius is adhered to, so that the breaking strength of the
strapping is not reduced.
5. Ties shall not connect to steel outriggers, unless specifically stated in the manufacturer's installation instructions.
D. Anchors:
1. Anchors should be placed as evenly as practicable along the length of the home. Where a vertical tie and diagonal
tie are located at the same place, both ties may be connected to a single anchor, provided that the anchor used is
capable of carrying both loads.
2. Footers and the load carrying portion of the ground anchors shall extend below the frost line.
Note: Frost heave can have an adverse effect on the mobile home through displacement of the mobile home
anchoring system. Consequently, periodic maintenance shall be performed by the owner of the mobile home
through adjustment of the tie-down tension so as to ensure that tension does not build up.
E. Tie-Down Standards And Specifications:
1. Tie materials shall be capable of resisting a force of three thousand one hundred fifty (3,150) pounds with no more
than two percent (2%) elongation and shall withstand at least four thousand seven hundred twenty five (4,725)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 144/923
pounds without failure. Failure shall be considered to have occurred when the material is stretched beyond its
elastic limit, resulting in permanent deformation.
2. All cable ends shall be secured with at least two (2) U-bolt type clamps or other fastening device.
3. Anchor equipment and ties shall be weather resistant. Weather resistance shall be at least equal to that provided
by a coating of zinc on steel of not less than thirty one-hundredths (0.30) ounce per square foot of surface.
4. Ties must terminate with a D-ring, bolt or other tensioning device that will not lower the material strength below that
stated in subsection E1 hereof.
5. Sharp edges of the mobile home that would tend to cut the cable or strap (in over-the-top, on-site installations)
when the home is buffeted by the wind, must be protected by a thimble or other device that will prevent such
cutting.
6. Each ground anchor, when installed, shall be capable of resisting a working load at least equal to three thousand
one hundred fifty (3,150) pounds in the direction of the tie plus a fifty percent (50%) overload (4,725 pounds)
without failure. Failure shall be considered to have occurred when the point of connection between the tie and
anchor moves more than two inches (2") at four thousand seven hundred twenty five (4,725) pounds in the
direction of the vertical tie and more than four inches (4") horizontally at the point where the tie attaches to the
anchor. (Ord. 80-106)
4-1-10: ALTERNATIVE TIE-DOWN STANDARDS:
Alternative tie-down standards for existing mobile homes and/or mobile homes situated in areas annexed to the City,
after approval of this Chapter:
A. A minimum of two (2) approved over-the-top or under skin vertical ties and two (2) approved anchors per side shall be
provided on all existing single mobile homes not exceeding fifty feet (50') in length.
B. Existing single mobile homes exceeding fifty feet (50') in length shall be provided with one additional approved overthe-
top vertical tie and one additional anchor per side. (See Table No. 2 of this Section.)
C. All existing vertical ties and anchors shall be spaced as evenly as practicable along the length of the mobile home.
D. Each end of vertical ties shall be tied to an approved anchor with approved fasting devices.
E. All anchoring equipment shall be weather resistant.
F. All anchors shall be capable of withstanding the vertical tie-down load.
G. The footers of the anchors shall extend below the frost line.
H. Roof protectors shall be provided for all vertical ties.
I. Existing doublewide mobile homes shall not be required to comply with diagonal tie down requirements, table no. 1 of
this section, providing the home is fully skirted. (Vertical ties are not required for doublewides.)
TABLE NO. 1
Minimum Number Of Ties Required Per Side For Mobile
Homes Erected And/Or Relocated In The City Of Carbondale
After Approval Of Ordinance 80-106
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 145/923
Length Of Mobile
Home (Feet)
Single Doublewides
Number Of
Vertical Ties
Number Of
Diagonal Ties
Number Of
Diagonal Ties
32 - 50 2 2 2
51 - 75 2 3 3
76 - 2 4 4
TABLE NO. 2
Minimum Number Of Ties Required Per Side For Existing Mobile
Homes Situated In Carbondale Prior To The Approval Of Ordinance
80-106 And Mobile Homes Situated In Areas Annexed To
Carbondale After The Approval Of Ordinance 80-106
Length
Of
Mobile
Home
(Feet)
Single Doublewides
Number Of
Vertical Ties
Number Of
Diagonal Ties
Number Of Diagonal Ties
Required If Not Skirted
Number Of Diagonal Ties
Required If Skirted
32 - 50
2 0 2 0
51 - 75
3 0 3 0
76 - 3 0 4 0
(Ord. 80-106)
4-1-11: DEMOLITION PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS:
It is the intent of the city to provide for an orderly procedure and standards for the demolition of buildings and structures
located in the city in a manner that will protect the public health, safety, and welfare. In addition to demolition provisions
provided for in other sections of this code, the following requirements shall be met whenever a building or structure is
demolished unless a variance is granted as provided herein.
A. Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall demolish a building or structure or portion thereof
without a permit therefor in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Any entity seeking to demolish a building or structure shall file an application for demolition with the building and
neighborhood services manager or his designee. The application shall be on forms provided by the city.
2. The building and neighborhood services manager or his designee shall examine the application to determine
whether all the required information has been provided. If required information is incomplete or the fee required
pursuant to subsection B of this section has not been paid, the application shall be returned to the applicant for
correction and/or payment of the fee. An application shall be considered as "accepted" on the date the building and
neighborhood services division director or designee determines that the application is complete and the fee has
been paid.
3. If the building and neighborhood services manager or designee determines that the proposed demolition is in
conformity with this section and the remainder of this code, then he shall promptly issue the demolition permit
unless he determines that one or more of the provisions in subsection A4, A5, or A6 of this section apply. (Ord. 90-
122)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 146/923
4. If, upon examination of the application and records of the city, the building and neighborhood services manager or
his designee determines that the building or structure proposed to be demolished has been: a) designated by the
city council as being in a landmark district, in a historic district, or in a neighborhood preservation district pursuant
to section 15.2.5 of this code, or b) nominated for designation as such a district and subject to the provisions of
subsection 15.2.5.2D of this code, the building and neighborhood services manager or designee shall not issue the
demolition permit until a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic hardship provided for at subsection
15.2.5.4 of this code has been issued or the city council waives the requirement pursuant to subsection 15.2.5.2D
or 15.2.5.4 of this code.
5. If, upon examination of the application and records of the city the building and neighborhood services manager or
designee determines that the building or structure has been: a) listed by the city council on an inventory of potential
places to be considered for designation as a landmark district or part of a historic district, or b) nominated and
under consideration to be a landmark district or part of a historic district pursuant to subsections 15.2.5.2A through
C of this code, the building and neighborhood services manager or designee shall use the following procedure:
(Ord. 2013-21)
a. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the listing and advised of the following review procedure.
b. The written notice shall also be given to the preservation commission through the commission's executive
secretary.
c. The commission shall consider the demolition permit application. If the commission has no objection to the
demolition, the commission chairperson shall so notify the building and neighborhood services manager or
designee and a demolition permit shall be promptly issued if all other applicable city code requirements are met.
In the event the commission objects or takes no action within sixty (60) days from the date the demolition
application is accepted by the city, the building and neighborhood services manager or his designee shall
promptly, at the end of the sixty (60) day period, issue the demolition permit if all other applicable city code
requirements are met.
d. Provided, however, that when circumstances exist that pose an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the public, the city council may authorize by motion, the demolition of property without following steps in
subsections A5a, A5b, and A5c of this section. Prior to the city council taking action, it shall be provided with a
written report from an Illinois licensed structural engineer or architect or the city's building and neighborhood
services manager. The report shall describe the condition of the structure and identify factors which may
constitute an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public. When possible, notice of such
potential council action shall be sent to the preservation commission members.
6. If upon examination of the application and other information available to him, the building and neighborhood
services manager or designee determines that the building or structure may be historically or architecturally
significant but does not meet the criteria under subsection A4 or A5 of this section, the building and neighborhood
services manager shall promptly send a notice to the applicant and to the preservation commission. Unless the
building and neighborhood services manager or his designee determines that circumstances exist which pose an
imminent threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, no demolition permit shall be issued prior to ten (10)
days after city acceptance of the application. In the event such a threat exists or the ten (10) days have elapsed,
the building and neighborhood services manager or designee shall issue the demolition permit if all other
applicable city code requirements have been met.
B. Permit Fee: The fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per structure. The city or its agents need not pay a fee. (Ord. 90-
122)
C. Time Limitations: No wrecking or removal of any structure shall be commenced until every precaution for the
protection of the public has been taken. When such demolition has been instituted, it shall continue continuously
during ordinary working hours until completed. All requirements of this section pertaining to demolition shall be
completed within sixty (60) days from the date of the issuance of the permit.
D. Utility Disconnections: Before demolition of any building or structure is commenced, all utilities to such building or
structure shall be disconnected and the openings properly plugged or capped at the property line. Utility
disconnection, except for water and sewers, shall be performed or supervised by the proper utility company or
agency affected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 147/923
E. Burning Prohibited: Burning of paper, refuse, waste, or other materials at the site of any demolition operation is
prohibited.
F. Natural Soil Fill Required: In clearing a site, all excavations shall be filled with natural soil, so as to be level with
adjoining grade. The filling of such excavations shall not be required when a building permit has been issued for a
new building on the site and construction thereof is to be started within thirty (30) days after the completion of
demolition operations. Provided, however, if fill is made in the excavated area, it shall be made exclusively of natural
soil. If fill is not made, the owner of the building permit shall provide such excavation with a substantial fence
protecting the excavation on all sides.
G. Basements: Where a basement exists, all walls shall be removed from the basement excavation.
H. Open Wells: Open wells shall be sealed to prevent ground water contamination and filled with natural soil.
I. Removal Of Rubbish: All adjacent streets, alleys, and other public ways and places shall be kept free and clear of all
rubbish, refuse, and loose material resulting from the demolition and removal operations.
J. Variance:
1. A property owner may request a variance from the requirements of subsections F and G of this section and from
the requirement that demolition work be completed within sixty (60) days by submitting a request for a variance to
the building and neighborhood services division. The following information shall be submitted with the request for a
variance:
a. A statement explaining in detail the factual reason, if any, which make compliance with the requirements of this
section economically or physically impracticable or the manner in which compliance with these requirements
would endanger adjoining property not planned to be demolished.
b. A plan for demolition prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer indicating in detail the method
and extent of demolition proposed and the amount and location of any material other than natural soil proposed
to be used as fill or not removed from the demolition site. The plan shall also show existing contours and
elevations and proposed final grading contours. If any material other than natural soil is proposed to remain on
site or be buried on site, the elevation limits of such fill shall clearly be indicated.
c. The property owner shall submit a performance bond in favor of the city in sufficient amount to ensure that the
proposed demolition plan is carried out; except that the city need not obtain a performance bond for demolition
work to be performed by it.
2. The city manager shall appoint three (3) city employees to serve as the demolition board. This board shall consider
the request, if any, in the opinion of the board, it is economically or physically impractical to meet the requirements
of the above paragraphs of this subsection or if, in the opinion of the board, to do so would endanger adjoining
property not planned to be demolished and if the board finds that the demolition plan adequately protects the public
health and safety, then request for variance from the requirements of the above listed paragraphs of this
subsection shall be granted to the extent shown in the application.
3. If a variance request is granted, the property owner shall perform all work according to the approved demolition
plan. Any revision in this plan must be approved by the board. No building permit shall be issued for the cleared
site unless it conforms with the demolition plans.
4. If the request for a variance is denied, the board shall provide the applicant with a written statement which sets
forth the specific reasons for the denial. (Ord. 84-11)
K. Appeals: Any applicant for a demolition permit, or any permittee aggrieved by an administrative decision under this
section may appeal that decision to the building code of appeals or any successor of such board provided for by any
international building code adopted by the city. (Ord. 84-11; Ord. 2003-72)
4-1-12: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 148/923
Any person, firm, or corporation which is found to have violated any provision of the international building code, 2003
edition, or as it may be amended in the future, or any part of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not greater than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that any violation of
any provision of the international building code or any provision of this chapter shall occur, continue, or be permitted shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 91-68; Ord. 97-166; Ord. 2003-72)
Chapter 2
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE AND ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Code Adopted By Reference: The Illinois state plumbing code in its most current edition, as established from time to
time, hereinafter referred to as "code", is adopted by reference. All plumbing work shall be altered, repaired or
installed in accordance with this code.
B. Valve Installation: A sanitary lateral check valve shall be installed in the main building drain in all new construction; or
remodeling or repairs that affect the main building drain, within the city of Carbondale. Sanitary lateral check valves
shall be installed in the building drain to prevent backflow into the building, where backflow of sewage could occur.
The valves shall be installed in a manner that makes it readily available for maintenance or replacement. The sanitary
lateral check valve shall have at least the same capacity of the building drain it is installed into. All check valves shall
conform to ASME/ANSI A112.14.1-1975 (R1990) in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code. All check valves shall
be located on private property not on a city easement or right of way and maintained solely by the property owner.
C. Waiver Releasing City From Liability: In the event the owner(s) of a building chooses not to install a sanitary sewer
lateral check valve as required in subsection B of this section, a waiver shall be submitted releasing the city from any
liability should a problem occur in the future as a result of sewer surcharge and backups that may occur. (Ord. 2009-
01)
4-2-2: PERMITS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required; Fee: No work shall be done on the plumbing, private sewer or sewer drainage of any building until
the application and plans for such work shall have been approved by the building and neighborhood services
manager or his authorized representative, and a permit for such work issued by the city. The minimum fee for such
plumbing permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The total fee shall be computed on the following basis:
Item Fee
Each plumbing fixture $ 2.00
Air conditioning 2.00
Each floor drain 2.00
Each water tap 5.00
Each 4 inch sewer connection 3.00
Each 6 inch sewer connection 5.00
Each 8 inch sewer connection 10.00
Each 10 inch sewer connection 15.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 149/923
Each 12 inch sewer connection 20.00
Each water meter 2.00
Each automatic washing machine 2.00
B. Work Begun Without Authorization: Provided, however, that the minimum fee for such plumbing permit shall be twenty
dollars ($20.00) and the total fee for plumbing permits otherwise specified in this section and issued for work begun
without authorization of such permits shall be twice the amount otherwise specified in this section.
C. Reinspection Charge: Whenever more than two (2) trips shall be required by the plumbing inspector for the purpose
of making the tests required by this chapter on defective material, the person obtaining the said permit shall pay to
the city, in addition to the fees set forth, the sum of forty six dollars ($46.00) for each trip in excess of two (2) trips.
D. Minor Changes; Fee: Whenever any changes in soil, waste or ventilation pipe are made and no changes are made in
location or number of fixtures, the person obtaining the permit hereinabove mentioned shall pay to the city, in lieu of
fees above mentioned, the minimum fee of ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 1424 § 2)
4-2-3: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any of the provisions of the Illinois state plumbing code, adopted by this chapter, or any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day any violations of any provision of such plumbing code or the
provisions of this chapter shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1424 § 3; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of persons in the City
by establishing requirements for the inspection and regulation of electrical installations. (1998 Code)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words, phrases and terms shall have the following definitions and meanings:
CITY: The City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois.
CORPORATE LIMITS: The area of land located within the boundaries of the City.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Carbondale.
ELECTRICAL CODE: The current edition of the NFPA National Electrical Code, hereinafter referred to as "Code."
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT: Conductors and equipment installed for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or
power, but does not include radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds or signals, and does not
include apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which
are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation of public utilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 150/923
ELECTRICAL SERVICE COMPANY: Central Illinois Public Service Company, Egyptian Electric Cooperative, or any
other public utility distributing electricity within the City.
INSPECTOR: The Electrical Inspector of the City, or any of his duly authorized agents.
LICENSED ELECTRICIAN: An individual who has, by education, experience, and passing the Carbondale electrical
licensing examination, demonstrated an ability to safely make electrical installations in the City of Carbondale and who
has been granted an electrician's license by the City.
PERSON: A person, firm or corporation. (1998 Code)
4-3-3: ADOPTION OF NFPA NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
A. Code Adopted By Reference: The NFPA National Electrical Code, in its most current edition as published from time to
time, hereinafter referred to as "Code," is hereby adopted by reference. All electrical work shall be altered, repaired or
installed in accordance with this Code.
B. Compliance With Code: All electrical service entrances shall be installed and completed in accordance with the NFPA
National Electric Code in effect at the time of installation and with the rules and specifications for electrical service as
established from time to time by the electrical service company for sites to be served by the company. (1998 Code)
4-3-4: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Appointment: The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed and designated by the Building and Neighborhood Services
Manager with the approval of the City Manager. The designated Electrical Inspector shall not engage in the
occupation or business of electrical installations, or be interested directly or indirectly in any firm or corporation
engaged in such business.
B. Functions: The Electrical Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the installations, alteration and use of electrical
equipment and shall perform such other duties as shall from time to time be prescribed by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Manager. The Electrical Inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, shall have authority
to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. If the Electrical Inspector shall inspect and
examine any building, structure or premises and shall determine that such building, structure or premises is unsafe or
dangerous by reason of faulty, defective or deteriorated electrical services or wiring or by reason of improper and
unsafe electrical usages, the Electrical Inspector, upon consent from the Building and Neighborhood Services
Manager shall have full power and authority to order the public utility supplying electrical energy or service to said
property, by written order, to disconnect such electrical service until the unsafe or dangerous conditions found in such
building, structure or premises are corrected.
C. Charges; Hearing: If the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager and Electrical Inspector shall at any time be of
the opinion that any licensed electrician has wilfully or hasrepeatedly violated any of the provisions of this Chapter,
the Electrical Inspector shall prefer written charges with the Electrical Commission. Upon receipt of such written
charges, the Electrical Commission shall forthwith conduct a hearing, at which hearing the Electrical Inspector may
be present but shall not be permitted to cast a vote or to take part of the rendering of any decision by the
Commission. In the event the Electrical Commission shall, by a majority vote of those members present and qualified
to vote, find that the charges of the Electrical Inspector are true, the electrical license theretofore issued to such
licensed electrician may be suspended or revoked for such period of time as the Electrical Commission shall
determine and in the event of such revocation, no part of any fees for such license paid by such licensed electrician
shall be returned. (1998 Code)
4-3-5: ELECTRICAL COMMISSION:
A. Appointment; Term: The Electrical Commission shall consist of six (6) members as follows: the Building and
Neighborhood Services Manager who shall serve as secretary for the Commission, the Chief of the Fire Department
and four (4) other members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
The four (4) members appointed by the Mayor shall serve a four (4) year term and one shall be a registered
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 151/923
professional engineer, one an electrical contractor, one a journeyman electrician, and one a representative of an
electrical service company. The representative of an electrical service company shall be considered the chairperson
of the Electrical Commission and shall be designated as chairperson by the Mayor. (1998 Code; letter dated 2-25-
2000)
B. Functions Of Commission:
1. Administer Electrical Examination: The Electrical Commission shall administer and pass upon all electrical
examination tests given to applicants for the purpose of securing a Carbondale licensed electrician license. A
minimum of two (2) Electrical Commission members who must be qualified to vote on the Electrical Commission
shall administer the electrical examination.
2. Recommend Approval Or Denial Of License: The Electrical Commission shall recommend to the Building and
Neighborhood Services Manager approval or denial for the issuance of an electrician's license for an applicant who
has taken the required electrical examination.
3. Revision Of Electrical Examination: When in the opinion of the Electrical Commission or Building and
Neighborhood Services Manager, it becomes necessary to revise the electrical examination test, the Electrical
Commission and the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager shall concur on such revisions.
4. Quorum: A majority of the members of the Electrical Commissionshall constitute a quorum to transact business.
5. Meetings: The Electrical Commission shall meet upon the call of the chairperson, upon the written request of the
Building and Neighborhood Services Manager or upon the written request of two (2) or more members whenever a
meeting is desirable and necessary for proper and efficient discharge of the business of the Commission. (1998
Code)
4-3-6: REGISTRATION OF ELECTRICIAN:
A. License Required: No person shall engage as a licensed electrician within the corporate limits until a licensed
electrician license has been issued. A license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall entitle
any such person to engage as a "licensed electrician" as defined in Section 4-3-2 of this Chapter.
1. Application: Any person desiring to engage in the occupation of a licensed electrician in the City shall first make
written application to the Building and Neighborhood Services Division for registration, in the form as prescribed by
the Electrical Commission.
2. Review By Electrical Commission: The aforesaid application for registration as a licensed electrician, shall be
forwarded to the Carbondale Electrical Commission for its review prior to requesting the applicant to appear before
the Electrical Commission for the purpose of taking the required electrical examination test for a licensed
electrician license. Prior to authorizing a person to take the licensed electrician examination, the Commission shall
make suitable inquiries to ascertain the accuracy of the information contained in the applicant's application. No
person whose electrical license is currently suspended or revoked by another licensing jurisdiction may take the
Carbondale electrical examination. Evidence of incomplete or incorrect work done on previous electrical jobs in
Carbondale or other jurisdictions may be considered by the Commission in deciding whether or not a person may
take the electrical license examination.
3. Examination: The applicant for a Carbondale licensed electrician license shall answer to the satisfaction of the
Electrical Commission, in writing, within a two (2) hour time limit, not less than seventy percent (70%) of the
questions contained in the examination, in order to qualify for a licensed electrician license. If the applicant fails the
test the first time, there shall be a thirty (30) day waiting period from the test date before it can be retaken. Should
the applicant fail the second test, there shall be a six (6) month waiting period from the date of the last test before
being retested.
4. Approval By Commission: Upon approval from the Electrical Commission that a licensed electrician license be
issued, the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager shall cause theapplicant to be registered as a licensed
electrician, subject to the following:
a. Bond: The applicant shall first post a surety bond protecting the City in the amount of three thousand five
hundred dollars ($3,500.00). Said bond shall remain in full force and effect during the period of time that the
licensed electrician license is outstanding, authorized or issued by the City, and such bond shall be in full force
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 152/923
and/or be renewed during or for each fiscal year of the City. Further, such bond shall be recommended by the
City Attorney to the City Manager or his designee for final approval.
b. Insurance: No licensed electrician license shall be issued until a policy or certificate of insurance is provided to
the City. Said issuance shall insure the licensed electrician for public liability and property damage in an amount
of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one person injured, three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for all persons injured, and not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property
damage sustained in any one accident.
5. Supervision Of Unlicensed Persons: In the event that any person or persons are engaged in the installation or
alteration of electrical equipment at a location, only one person need be a Carbondale licensed electrician or
equivalent as long as all electrical work done at that location is done under the direct supervision of the said
licensed electrician and subject to that licensed electrician's insurance and bond.
B. Issuance Of License: Upon approval of the aforesaid bond and insurance, the Building and Neighborhood Services
Division shall issue to the applicant a licensed electrician license to do electrical work.
1. License To Individuals Only: Licensed electrician licenses shall be issued only to an individual, not the firm or
corporation.
2. Licenses Not To Be Loaned: Licenses issued by the Commission shall not be loaned, rented, assigned or
transferred.
3. Revocation Of License: Each and every license may, after hearing, be suspended or revoked by the Electrical
Commission upon recommendation of the Electrical Inspector upon failure or refusal of the licensed electrician to
comply with the rules and requirements of the Electrical Commission, or the provisions of this Chapter.
4. Term Of License: Licenses shall be issued from May 1 to April 30 of the following year and shall remain in force
and effect for such period of time unless revoked for cause.
5. Licensed Electrician's License Fees: Fee for the original license, and for each Carbondale fiscal year renewal,
shall be forty dollars ($40.00).
6. Exceptions: Subsection A3 of this Section shall not apply when the individual holds a valid licensed electrician
license issued by another city within the State of Illinois if, in the judgment of the Commission, the examination
required to be passed to obtain such other license is at least equivalent to the Carbondale examination. (1998
Code)
4-3-7: ELECTRICAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered in the City except upon a permit issued by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Division. Provided, however, no such permit shall be required for minor repairs and routine
maintenance, and further provided that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to public service agencies, power
companies, or temporary testing systems. All permits required under this Chapter shall be issued only upon the approval
of the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager or his designee, for such purpose. The Building and Neighborhood
Services Manager shall have the power to require plans and specifications be submitted concerning any electrical work
requiring a permit, if in the opinion of the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager the submission of such plans
and specifications is necessary or desirable. The licensed electrician to whom an electrical permit is issued, shall be
responsible for all electrical installations performed under such permit. (1998 Code)
4-3-8: ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES:
The fees for required permits shall include City services for inspection of the completed work.
Flat fee (total charge) for the following sized service with:
Up to 100 ampere service $ 10.00
101 ampere to 200 ampere service 15.00
201 ampere to 400 ampere service 20.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 153/923
401 ampere to 600 ampere service 30.00
601 ampere to 800 ampere service 40.00
801 ampere to 1,200 ampere service 60.00
1,201 ampere to 1,600 ampere service 85.00
1,601 ampere to 2,000 ampere service 145.00
2,001 ampere to 2,400 ampere service 200.00
2,401 ampere to 3,000 ampere service 260.00
3,001 ampere and up to maximum charge of 340.00
(1998 Code)
4-3-9: PENALTY:
No person shall do any work or perform any of the operations prescribed in any section of this Chapter without procuring
andhaving in force the permit and/or license required. Any person who shall fail or refuse to allow inspection or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and each day a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 89-40; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 4
HOUSING CODE
4-4-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT:
It is hereby found and declared there exists in the city, premises used, designed, or intended for human habitation which
are, or may become in the near future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance, and further that
such conditions together with inadequate provisions for light and air, insufficient protection against fire hazards, lack of
proper heating, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and
reasonable comfort of its citizens. It is further found and declared that the existence of such conditions, factors, or
characteristics has created and will continue to create, slum and blighted areas requiring large scale clearance, and
further that in the absence of corrective measures, such areas will experience a deterioration of social values, a
curtailment of investment and tax revenues, and an impairment of economic values. It is further found and declared that
the establishment and maintenance of minimum housing standards are essential to the prevention of blight and decay
and the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals and welfare. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-2: PURPOSE OF HOUSING CODE:
The purpose of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of
the people of the city by establishing minimum standards governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, multiple dwellings, rooming units and premises; establishing minimum
standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential to make dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units, rooming houses, multiple dwellings and premises safe, sanitary and fit for human
habitation; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of the owners, operators, agents and occupants of dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming houses, multiple dwellings and rooming units unfit for human habitation; and fixing penalties for the
violations declared to be remedial and essential to the public interest and it is intended that sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-
16 of this chapter be liberally constructed to effectuate the purposes as stated above. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-3: APPLICABILITY TO ALL DWELLINGS:
Every position of a building or premises, used, designed, or intended to be used for any dwelling purpose, except
temporary housing, shall comply with the provisions of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter, irrespective of when
such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired; and irrespective of any permit or license which shall have
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 154/923
been issued for that construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or of the facilities
prior to the effective date of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter. Sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter
establish minimum standards otherwise established for the use of building facilities or equipment except as provided in
section 4-4-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-4: CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES:
In any case where a provision of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of
any zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, or health ordinance, code or regulation of the city regulating
existing buildings, the provision which established the most restrictive standard shall prevail. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-5: CONFLICTS OF PERMITS AND LICENSES:
All departments and officials of the City having the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses in regard to the
construction, installation, or repair of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, multiple dwellings,
equipment, or facilities, shall conform to the provisions of Sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this Chapter and no such
permit or license shall be issued, if such would be in conflict with Sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this Chapter. (Ord. 84-
10)
4-4-6: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A detached structure which is not used and not intended to be used for living or sleeping
by human occupants and which is located on the same premises as a principal structure and the use of such accessory
structure is incidental to the principal structure.
APPROVED: Approved by the Building and Neighborhood Services Division of the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building partly underground by having more than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height above
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BATHROOM: Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which may also include toilets,
lavatories, or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BUILDING: A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof to form a structure affording shelter
for persons, animals or property. The word "building" shall be construed, when used herein as though followed by the
words "or parts thereof" unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
DWELLING: Any building which is wholly or partly used, designed, or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
occupants; provided that "temporary housing" as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used, designed, or intended to be used for living, sleeping, working, and eating.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS: Open spaces on the premises and vacant open space on adjacent premises.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborages; by
removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or
by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the proper authorities.
FLOOR AREA: The total horizontal area of habitable space.
GARBAGE: Anything that may decompose and become offensive or dangerous to health, including, but not limited to,
waste products resulting from the handling, storage, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GRADE (GROUND LEVEL): The average of the finished ground level. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet
(5') of a sidewalk, the said finished ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 155/923
purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, and utility rooms of less
than fifty (50) square feet, foyers, or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby
and recreation areas below ground level or in attics.
HOT WATER: Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) at the outlet.
HOTEL AND MOTEL: See definition of Rooming House.
INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, multiple dwelling,
rooming unit, or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin and other pests.
KITCHEN: Any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or any area of a room within three feet (3') of such
equipment: sink or other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cold
storage of food, cabinets or shelves for storage or cooking equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food
preparation.
LEAD BEARING SUBSTANCE: Any paint, plaster, or other material or substance containing more than six-tenths of one
percent (0.6%) by weight (calculated as lead metal) in the total nonvolatile content of liquid paints, or in the dried film of
paint previously applied.
MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS: Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling units", "rooming units", "premises",
"structure" are used in Sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this Chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof". Words used in the singular include the plural, and in the plural the singular,
the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
MOBILE HOMES: A factory-assembled, movable dwelling designed and constructed to be towed on its chassis,
comprised of frame wheels, to be used without a permanent foundation, and distinguishable from other types of
dwellings in that the standards to which it is built include provisions for its mobility on that chassis as a vehicle. Removal
of the tongue, wheels, or hitch, or placement of the structure upon a permanent foundation shall not be considered in
determining whether or not a structure is a mobile home.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units and/or rooming units.
OCCUPANT: Any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming
units.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple dwelling, hotel, motel or rooming house, in which
dwelling units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.
ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS: Outside design temperature is minus ten degrees Fahrenheit (-10°F).
OWNER: Any person or entity who shall have a legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the subject real estate, or any
improvements thereto; or a reversionary leasehold interest in the subject real estate, or any improvements thereto; or a
capacity to manage the subject real estate or any improvements thereto pursuant to an Order of Court, power, or
agreement.
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY: The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING: All of the following facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, installed clothes
washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar equipment and fixtures, and the installation thereof,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
POTABLE WATER: Water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for drinking by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any buildings or structures thereon.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewerage system operated by the City of Carbondale, Illinois, and available for public use.
RAT HARBORAGE: Any place where rats can live, nest or find shelter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 156/923
RAT PROOFING: A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of rats to or from a given space or
building, or gaining access to food, water, or rat harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every
opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings,
sidewalk openings, and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing or other methods,
by the use of materials impervious to rat gnawing and other methods approved by the appropriate authority.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling or part of a dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is rented by
the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not the husband and wife, father or mother, son or daughter,
grandparent or grandchild, brother or sister, uncle or aunt, nephew or niece or cousin of the first degree, of the owner or
operator.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms intended to be used for living or sleeping but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage.
SEWAGE: Waste from a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry machine, or the water carried waste
from any other fixture or equipment or machine.
STRUCTURE: A combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming construction, including buildings. The
word structure shall be construed as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof".
SUPPLIED FACILITIES: Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, recreational vehicle as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or other structure
used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another
structure or, to any utility system for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days.
VENTILATION: Supply and removal of air to and from any space by natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL: Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks
with wind-driven devices. (Ord. 84-103; 1998 Code)
4-4-7: STANDARDS FOR EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with
the following requirements;
A. Free From Hazards: Exterior property areas shall be free from conditions which might create a health, accident or fire
hazard, or which might endanger the public welfare, including but not limited to holes and excavations, sharp
protrusions, barbed wire (unless 6 feet above the ground), sheer embankments, inoperative or abandoned vehicles
or machinery, unused household goods or appliances and other objects or materials. Walks, steps, and driveways
that contain holes or tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired, or replaced as necessary. Open wells, cesspools,
septic tanks or cisterns shall be kept securely closed if in approved use. If they are not in approved use, they must be
filled with natural soil.
B. Free From Rubbish And Garbage: Disposal of rubbish and other refuse shall be done in accordance with all
regulations of the City.
C. Fences: All fences provided by the owner or agent on the premises and/or all fences erected by an occupant shall be
constructed of manufactured metal fencing material, wood, masonry or other material. Such fences shall be
maintained in good condition. Wood materials, other than decay-resistant wood, shall be protected against decay by
use of paint or other preservative. Any paint or other protective material must be maintained free of deterioration, in
sound condition and good repair. The permissible height and other characteristics of all fences shall conform to the
appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations of the City and State. Wherever any egress from the dwelling opens
into the fenced area, there shall be a means of egress from the premises to any public way adjacent thereto.
D. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures present or provided by the owner, agent or tenant occupant on the
premises of a dwelling shall be structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and free from insects and rats, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 157/923
such structures shall be removed from the premises. The exterior of such structure shall be made weather resistant
through the use of decay-resistant materials or the use of paint or other preservatives. Paint or other protective
coverings must be maintained free of deterioration, in sound condition and good repair.
E. Sewage: Sewage must be discharged into a public sewer system or an approved septic tank. Discharge of
inadequately treated sewage shall not be permitted upon the surface of the ground or into any natural or artificial
drainageway.
F. Noxious Weeds: Exterior property areas shall be kept free of all weeds which are detrimental to the public health,
including, but not limited to ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac.
G. Insect And Rat Harborage: Where insect, rat or vermin breeding areas, harborage, or infestation exist, the same shall
be eliminated.
H. Storage Of Materials: In the event that occupancy usages would result in stacking or piling materials, the materials
shall be so arranged as to prohibit the creation of a rat harborage area. Such shall be accomplished by orderly
stacking and elevating so that there will be at least a twelve inch (12") opening between the material and the ground
level. No stacking or piling of material shall take place against the exterior walls of the structure. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-8: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with
the following requirements:
A. Foundations, Floors, Walls, Ceilings And Roofs: Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, and ratproof, shall afford privacy, and shall be kept in good repair. The foundation elements shall
adequately support the building at all points; floors shall be free of hazard; every exterior wall shall be free of holes,
breaks, loose or rotting boards and timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rats, rain or dampness to the
interior portions of the walls, or the interior spaces of the dwelling; all exterior surface materials shall be protected
from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment, when required to prevent
deterioration. Any paint or other protective materials must be maintained free of deterioration, in sound condition and
good repair. Every interior wall shall be free of holes and large cracks, loose plaster and other structural material. The
roof shall be tight and shall have no defects which admit rain. All openings for pipes, conduits and other utility
services accessible to rats shall be closed solidly for the full thickness of the wall, floor, roof, etc., with an approved
ratproof material or fitted with a collar or shield, securely fastened to the wall or floor, of not less than twenty four (24)
gauge galvanized sheet metal or other approved materials, extending at least three inches (3") beyond all sides of
the opening.
B. Lead Bearing Substances: No person shall sell, use, or apply any substance in which the total nonvolatile ingredients
contain more than six-tenths of one percent (0.6%) of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic lead in or upon any
exposed interior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or temporary housing, nor in or upon any fixture or other object
used, installed or located in or upon such surface or intended to be so used, installed or located. Upon notice from
the City of the existence of any such substances herein prohibited, it shall be the responsibility for the owner to
remove or to securely and permanently cover such surfaces within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of such notice.
C. Windows, Exterior Doors And Basement Hatchways: Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably watertight, and rodentproof; and shall be kept in good working condition and good repair. Every opening
located at or within one and one-half feet (11/2') of ground level which might provide an entry for rats, shall be
adequately covered with screening or some other device so as to effectively prevent the entrance of rats, but so as
not to prevent emergency egress where such egress is appropriate.
D. Stairs And Porches: Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance to any of the foregoing shall
be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and all of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 158/923
aforesaid shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every inside and outside stair or step shall have uniform
risers and uniform treads.
E. Handrails: Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps containing five (5) risers or more. If steps are
not enclosed, handrails and balusters spaced no more than six inches (6") apart shall be provided. Porches and
balconies located more than three feet (3') higher than the adjacent area shall have structurally sound protective
handrails thirty inches (30") to thirty six inches (36") high and, if unenclosed, balusters spaced no more than six
inches (6") apart shall also be provided. Alternate systems providing at least the same degree of protection, if
approved by the appropriate authority, shall be acceptable.
F. Chimneys, Flues, And Vents: All chimneys, flues, and vents on every structure used for human habitation shall be
structurally sound, free from defects and capable of performing the function for which the same are designed or used.
Each shall have sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the equipment. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their
supports shall be structurally safe, durable, smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gasses.
G. Rubbish And Garbage: The interior of every structure used for human habitation shall be maintained free from rubbish
and garbage that might become a health, accident or fire hazard. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-9: STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit intended for the purposes of
living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Kitchen Equipment: A room or portion of a room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, such room or portion
thereof having adequate circulation area and being equipped with the following minimum equipment:
1. A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewerage system in accordance
with the applicable ordinances of the City and the Statutes of the State.
2. Cabinets or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does
not under ordinary summer conditions require refrigeration for safekeeping.
3. A counter or table for food preparation.
All of the foregoing equipment shall be of sufficient size and design so as to be adequate for the permissible
occupancy of the dwelling or dwelling unit and all shall have surfaces that are easily cleaned and that will not
impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.
4. A stove or similar device for cooking food and a refrigerator or similar device for the safe storage of food at
temperatures less than fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) but more than thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) under
ordinary maximum summer conditions must be provided by the owner or occupant. All must be properly installed
with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation. No stove, refrigerator or similar devices
aforesaid need to install, however, in any dwelling unit that is not occupied if sufficient space and adequate
connections are provided so that the same may be installed immediately by owner or occupant upon any
occupancy of such dwelling or dwelling unit.
B. Toilet Facilities: A room affording privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet
and lavatory basin, both in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewage system in
accordance with the applicable ordinances of the City and the Statutes of the State.
C. Bathing Facilities: A room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or
shower in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewage system in accordance with the
applicable ordinances of the City and Statutes of the State. The room containing the toilet facilities required by
subsection B of this section and the room containing the bathing facilities required by the provisions of this subsection
may be one and the same room.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 159/923
D. Water Supply: Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of this chapter
shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines, which must be connected and serviced by the City of
Carbondale's Water Department, or the water district that the property is serviced by.
E. Water Heating Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and
connected and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be
drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, tub or shower at a temperature of not less that one hundred
twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F).
F. Garbage Storage Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage storage containers, type and location of
which conform to the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City.
G. Rubbish Storage Facilities: Every dwelling unit shall have adequate rubbish storage facilities, type and location of
which conform to the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City.
H. Means Of Egress: Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space
at ground level, as required by the laws of the State and the ordinances of the City.
I. Drugs And Poisons Storage Facilities: Each dwelling unit shall provide for the safe storage of drugs and household
poisons.
J. Smoke Or Heat Detector: All dwellings and dwelling units, shall have an operable smoke or heat detector in the
immediate area of the bedrooms on and after January 1, 1986.
K. Locks: No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling units unless all exterior doors of the
dwelling or dwelling unit are equipped with safe, functioning locking devices, and are further made secure as set forth
in section 4-4-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-25)
4-4-10: STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit intended for the purpose of
living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Lighting: Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing outdoors or artificial lighting capable
of producing at least an average illumination of six (6) foot-candles over the area of the room at a height of thirty
inches (30") above the floor (3 foot-candles minimum requirement in bathrooms), excepting that such rooms that are
connected to another room or area and such other room or area is used only seasonally (such as, but not limited to,
porches) and adequate daylight enters the said habitable room through the interconnection, are not required to have
such windows or skylights. The minimum total window or skylight area shall be measured between stops and shall
be, for every room where required, equal to at least eight percent (8%) of the floor area of the room in which located.
No window shall be deemed to be facing outdoors if any light-obstructing structures are located less than three feet
(3') from such window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room in which such window is located,
and the same shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
B. Ventilation: Every habitable room, excepting those connected to another room or area that is used only seasonally
and adequate ventilation is provided through such interconnection and further excepting those rooms ventilated by
some other approved device, shall have at least one window or skylight facing outdoors which can be easily opened,
or provided mechanical exhaust of sixty (60) cfm, exhausted to the atmosphere above the roof line and away from
openable windows into which foul air might be blown. The total of openable window or skylight area required shall be
equal to at least four percent (4%) of the floor area of the room in which it is located.
C. Bathroom Ventilation: Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms as provided in subsection B of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 160/923
D. Electrical Service: Where there in usable electrical service available from power lines which are situated not more
than three hundred feet (300') from a dwelling, every dwelling unit situated in such dwelling and all public and
common areas of such dwelling shall be supplied with electrical service, outlets and fixtures, which shall be properly
installed with the use of temporary wiring being strictly prohibited, shall be maintained in good and safe working
condition, and shall be connected to a source of electrical power in a lawful manner. The minimum capacity of such
services and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
1. Every habitable room shall have an electrical service and outlets and/or fixtures capable of providing at least three
(3) watts per square foot of total floor area. Outlets should be distributed reasonably evenly around the room.
Extension cords may not be used for more than their UL rated capacity.
2. Every habitable room and every nonhabitable room used for food preparation shall have at least one floor-type or
one wall-type electrical convenience outlet for each sixty (60) square feet or fraction thereof total floor area, and in
no case less than two (2) such outlets.
3. Every bathroom, water closet compartments, kitchen or kitchenette, laundry room, furnace room and public hall
shall contain at least one coiling-type or one wall-type electrical light fixture.
Every public hall and every stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by natural or electrical
light at all times, so as to provide in all parts thereof at least ten (10) foot-candles of light at the tread or floor level.
Every public hall and every stairway in structures containing not more than two (2) dwelling units or not more than
two (2) rooms used as rooming units shall comply with the provisions of this subsection relating to multipledwellings,
or in the alternative, shall be supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate
lighting system to be turned on when needed with full-time lighting not being required.
E. Heating Facilities: Every dwelling shall have permanent heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained in
safe and good working condition with proper safety devices, and which are capable of safely and adequately heating
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein, to a
temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) at a distance of thirty six inches (36") above floor level
under ordinary winter conditions. Permanent, heating facilities are not capable of being readily moved around the
dwelling and are generally affixed directly to the building. Examples of permanent heating facilities include but are not
limited to oil, gas, electric and coal furnaces or boilers; electrical heat pumps; wood furnaces or stoves; electric
baseboard heaters, active or passive solar devices; or devices connected to a district heating system. Permanent
heating facilities can be used singly or in combinations to meet the performance standards contained herein. Any
auxiliary heater shall be UL approved and equipped with automatic shutoff. All auxiliary heaters must be used in
accordance with manufacturers instructions. Auxiliary heaters are intended to supplement the permanent heating
facilities. Auxiliary heating devices include but are not limited to portable electric space heaters and portable
kerosene or oil heaters. The capacity of auxiliary heaters shall not be counted in determining whether the
performance standards for heating are met in a dwelling.
F. Insect Protection: During that portion of each year between May 1 and October 1, both dates inclusive, every door
opening directly from a dwelling unit or rooming unit to outside space that is used for ventilation and every window
and other device with openings to outside space that is used or capable of being used for ventilation shall have
properly fitted screens having at least sixteen (16) mesh so as to afford protection against mosquitoes, flies, and
other flying insects. Screens must be on premises and available for inspection from October 2 through April 30, both
dates inclusive. Also between May 1 and September 30 all hinged screen doors shall be equipped with self-closing
devices. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-11: STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE AND LOCATION:
No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, intended for the purpose of
living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Minimum Space In Dwelling Units: The minimum habitable room space of any dwelling unit shall be not less than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area for the first occupant and not less than an additional one hundred (100)
square feet of floor area for every additional occupant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 161/923
B. Minimum Space In Sleeping Rooms: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a
minimum floor area of at least seventy (70) square feet. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant.
C. Access To Bathrooms And Sleeping Rooms: Any dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangement so as to provide access to a bathroom or water closet compartment so as to
permit persons using each of such sleeping rooms to have access to a bathroom or water closet compartment
without the necessity of passing through another sleeping room and shall further have such room arrangement so as
to provide access to each sleeping room so as to permit persons using such sleeping room to have access thereto
without the necessity of passing through another sleeping room or through any bathroom or water closet
compartment.
D. Height Requirements: At least one-half (1/2) the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at
least seven feet (7'). The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not
be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining
the minimum permissible occupancy thereof.
E. Rooms Below Grade: Basements may be used as dwelling units if they meet the light, ventilation, heating, egress and
all other applicable portions of the Housing Code. No basement space shall be deemed fit for or used as a habitable
room or dwelling unit unless the floor and walls thereof are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff
water and dampness. (Ord. 84-103; 1998 Code)
4-4-12: STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES:
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, no person shall operate a rooming house or occupy or let to
another for occupancy any rooming house except in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter and unless
such rooming house complies with the following requirements:
A. Bathing And Toilet Facilities: At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, in good working
condition and properly connected to sewer and water system in accordance with the applicable codes and
ordinances of the City and the laws of the State shall be supplied for each six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing
within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said facilities;
provided, however, that in the case where rooms are rented only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not
more than one-half (1/2) of the required number of water closets. Such bathing and toilet facilities shall be so located
within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hallway or passageway to all persons sharing
such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such
facilities as aforesaid that are located in a basement shall be considered to meet the aforesaid requirements unless
the same shall conform to the provisions of subsection 4-4-10E of this Chapter.
B. Bed Linen And Towels: Where bedding, bed linen or towels are supplied, the owner or operator shall maintain the
same in a clean and sanitary condition and shall furnish clean bed linen and towels at least once each week and in
any event prior to the renting of any room to any occupant.
C. Rooming Unit: Every room constituting or being a part of a rooming unit that is occupied for sleeping purposes shall
comply with the standards set forth in subsection B of this Section, and shall, in addition, contain not less than four
(4) square feet of closet space per occupant.
D. Means Of Egress: Every rooming unit shall have immediate access to not less than two (2) safe, unobstructed means
of egress, with minimum head room of six feet four inches (6'4") leading to safe and open space at ground level.
E. Maintenance: Every rooming house shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and full compliance with
those standards set forth in Section 4-4-8 of this Chapter and each subsections thereof of Sections 4-4-1 through 4-
4-16 of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 162/923
F. Hotels And Motels: Every provision of Sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 hereof applicable to rooming houses shall apply
equally to hotels and motels, except to the extent that any of the provisions of Sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 may be
found in conflict with and to the extent prohibited by the laws of the State or the unlawful rules and regulations of any
State board or agency. Provided, further, that the provisions of subsection 4-4-10A entitled "Lighting" does not apply
to hotels and motels if said hotels and motels meet the requirements of subsection 4-4-10B entitled "Ventilation".
G. Mobile Homes: Every provision of Sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this Chapter applicable to rooming houses shall
apply equally to mobile homes used for rooming houses.
H. Hot Air Heating System Returns: Where hot air heating systems are used, no return air shall be circulated directly
from one unit or sleeping room to another. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-13: STANDARDS FOR SECURITY:
A. Scope: All dwelling units within the city shall meet the minimum requirements as set forth herein except structures
which, although providing sleeping accommodations, are primarily used for:
1. Medical care or other treatment of individuals suffering from physical or mental illness, disease or infirmity;
2. The care of infants, convalescents, or the elderly;
3. Penal or corrective purposes; and
4. Hotel or motel purposes and which provide temporary sleeping accommodations for hire used by transients with or
without meals.
B. Alternative Materials And Methods Of Construction: The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use
of any material or method of structural design or analysis not specifically prescribed herein, provided any such
alternate is substantiated by suitable evidence.
C. Approval Of Alternate Material Or Method: The building and neighborhood services division may approve any such
alternate material or method provided the proposed design is satisfactory and the material or method of work offered
is, for the purposes intended, at least equivalent of that prescribed in this section.
D. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CYLINDER: The part of a lock set that has an entrance for the key which thereby activates the locking mechanism.
CYLINDER GUARD: A hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion of the lock cylinder or other device which is so
fastened as to protect the cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting or pulling at attack tools.
DEAD BOLT LOCK: A locking device with a bolt that has no automatic spring action and which must, therefore, be
operated manually by a key cylinder, thumb turn, or lever, and is positively held fast when in the projected position
(also known as deadlock).
DEAD BOLT SINGLE CYLINDER: A dead bolt that is activated from the outside by a key, and from the inside by a
knob, thumb turn, lever or similar mechanism.
DORMITORY: A building, not open to transients, where lodging is provided for ten (10) or more nonfamily persons,
and no kitchen facilities other than one central kitchen facility, are provided any dwelling unit occupied by persons
other than management personnel.
FLUSH OR SURFACE BOLT: A deadlock normally used on inactive door(s) that is attached to the top and bottom
and/or side of the door and engages in the frame and/or base of the door.
HOOK OR EXPANDING BOLT: A dead bolt lock in which the bolt or bolts interlock with the strike plate into which the
bolt or bolts are projected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 163/923
LOCKING DEVICE: A mechanical implement or combination of mechanical implements attached to the door, window
or other access points of a building or structure which is designed to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the
building or structure through the door, window, or other access point on which the locking device is activated.
THROW: The outward movement of a bolt or spring bolt which is measured by the distance which such a bolt travels,
i.e., when the bolt or spring bolt is moved from the open position to the locked position (extended), it is said to have
been thrown. (Ord. 92-77)
E. Multiple Dwellings, Dormitories, And Rooming House Security Standards: This section is not intended to require
exterior doors serving as the required means of egress to the exterior of a multiple dwelling, dormitory and rooming
house to swing inward. Such doors in that respect shall comply with the provisions of the 2003 edition of the
international building code. All other doors to individual dwelling units within a multiple dwelling, dormitory or rooming
house shall comply with the following provisions: (Ord. 92-77; Ord. 2003-72)
1. Doors to individual dwelling units shall swing inward and meet the following security standards:
a. Single doors shall be secured with a single cylinder dead bolt having a minimum throw of one inch (1"). A hook
or expanding bolt may have a throw of three-fourths inch (3/4"). Any dead bolt must contain hardened material to
repel attempts at cutting through the bolt.
b. On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type lock required for single doors in subsection E1a
of this section. The inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush or surface bolts protected by hardened material with
a minimum throw of three-fourths inch (3/4") at the head and foot of the door. Multiple point locks, cylinder
activated from the active leaf and complying with subsection E1a of this section and the requirements herein,
may be used in lieu of flush bolts. (Ord. 84-103)
c. Exterior doors to individual dwelling units shall have rabbeted jambs which are reinforced at the point where the
required lock engages the jamb.
d. Firmly secured metal strike plates are required on the jambs of all doors and are to be located at the point when
the required lock engages the jamb.
e. Locking devices and parts of locking devices shall not be used if they bear any numbers or letter which would
reveal a combination from which the key or similar control device could be fashioned or selected which could
deactivate the locking device.
2. All patio type of sliding doors opening onto patios or balconies which are accessible from the outside shall comply
with the following requirements:
a. Patio type or sliding doors shall not be used or installed as exterior doors for the main entrance of any individual
dwelling unit.
b. All single sliding patio doors shall have the movable section of the door sliding on the inside of the fixed portion
of the door, except as provided in subsection B of this section.
c. Deadlocks shall be provided on all single sliding patio doors. If the lock is operable from the outside, it shall be
activated by a key utilizing a cylinder of pin tumbler construction. Mounting screws for the lock case shall be
inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be of hardened steel or have hardened steel inserts and shall be
capable of withstanding a force of three hundred (300) pounds applied in any direction. The lock bolt shall
engage the strike sufficiently to prevent its being disengaged by any possible movement of the door within the
space or clearances provided for installation and operation. The strike area shall be reinforced to maintain
effectiveness of bolt strength.
d. Double sliding patio doors must be locked at the meeting rail and meet the locking requirements as specified in
subsection E1b of this section. (Ord. 84-103; 1998 Code)
e. Alternate methods for securing doors with movable sections of the door sliding on the outside of the fixed portion
of the door must be approved by the building official.
3. Any exterior door or other inside garage door leading to the common areas of any multiple dwelling, dormitory or
rooming house, which has outside hinge pins shall be secured by a minimum of two (2) safety hinge studs or
hinges having nonremovable hinge pins, one hinge above and one below the center of any locking device.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 164/923
4. Parking facilities either under or within the confines of the perimeter walls of any multiple-family dwelling, dormitory,
or rooming house which are equipped with any garage door shall be so equipped that such doors are capable of
being locked. Specific locking devices to be employed shall be of one or more of the following types: a) throw bolt
or flush bolt, b) dead bolt, c) cylinder type lock, d) padlock and hasp, e) or an electronic power operated
mechanism with automatic locking capabilities. When a padlock type locking device is used, the slide bolt or hasp
and shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of hardened steel and shall be installed so that it
cannot be removed when the door is closed and the padlock is activated.
5. All exterior windows other than fixed windows or those designed not to be opened, less than twelve feet (12') off
ground level or any other accessible exterior level shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked it cannot be lifted from the frame.
b. All windows shall be equipped with a locking device which shall be capable of withstanding a force of one
hundred fifty (150) pounds applied in any direction, and all locks should fully engage.
F. One- And Two-Family Dwelling Units Security Standards: All doors to individual dwelling units within one- and twofamily
dwelling units shall comply with the following provisions:
1. All swinging exterior doors and doors leading from garage areas into one- and two-family dwelling units shall swing
inward and meet the same requirements as set forth in subsection E of this section.
2. All patio type or sliding doors opening onto patios or balconies which are accessible from the outside shall meet
the same requirements as set forth in subsection E of this section.
3. All exterior windows shall meet the same requirements as set forth in subsection E of this section.
4. All garage doors shall meet the same requirements as set forth in subsection E of this section. (Ord. 84-103)
4-4-14: PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this section to establish primary responsibilities in certain areas of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Primary Responsibilities Of Occupants: In the absence of a binding agreement to the contrary between an occupant
and an owner, every occupant above the age of eighteen (18) years shall be primarily responsible as to that part of
any building, structure or premises over which such occupant shall have a right to possession or control, for the
following:
1. To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so as to create a rat harborage.
3. To dispose of rubbish, garbage and other material in the manner provided by City ordinances.
4. The extermination of insects and rats, after twenty one (21) continuous days of occupancy where: a) the dwelling
contains only one dwelling unit, or only the occupant's dwelling unit of a dwelling containing more than one dwelling
unit is infested, and b) infestation has resulted from some cause other than the failure of an owner to maintain the
dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insect proof condition prior to the commencement of the occupancy.
5. To maintain connection and service to any utility for which the occupant is liable.
6. To maintain and replace required screens after the owner has fulfilled all his primary responsibilities regarding the
same as hereinafter set forth in subsection C of this section.
7. To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery owned by the occupant as provided by City
ordinance.
C. Primary Responsibilities Of Owners: In the absence of a binding agreement to the contrary between the owner and an
occupant, every owner shall be responsible as to that part of any building, structure or premises over which such
owner has the right to possession or control, including but not limited to areas used by the public or used in common
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 165/923
by occupants of two (2) or more dwelling units, as hereinafter set forth (such responsibilities shall likewise apply to
any other part of a building, structure or premises where the content of any such responsibility so implies) as follows:
1. To provide and install all required screens once each calendar year.
2. To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
3. To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so as to create a rat harborage.
4. To provide adequate and suitable containers for rubbish, garbage or other waste materials where the premises in
question contain three (3) or more dwelling units.
5. "Ratproofing" as defined in section 4-4-6 of this chapter.
6. The extermination of insects and rats in all instances excepting those instances where the occupant is primarily
responsible therefor as hereinabove provided in subsection B of this section.
7. To keep and maintain all supplied facilities in good and proper condition and operation.
8. To provide and maintain in working order a permanent heating system as specified in subsection 4-4-10E of this
chapter. In structures in which the permanent heating system supplies heat to two (2) or more dwelling units, or
rooming units, the owner shall be responsible for supplying heat in accordance with the standard in subsection 4-4-
10E of this chapter. Where compliance is not reasonably possible because of general shortage of fuel or because
of some act of an occupant, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply until such causes have been
corrected.
9. To maintain connection and service to any utility for which an owner is liable.
10. To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery not owned by the current occupants from the
premises as provided by City ordinance. (Ord. 2018-25)
4-4-15: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Housing Surveys: The Building and Neighborhood Services Division is hereby authorized to make surveys in any area
of the City to determine the general condition of structures used for human habitation, the extent of any deterioration,
lack of facilities and maintenance, unsafe and unsanitary conditions, the extent of overcrowding and land use, and
any other matters relating to the provision and requirements of this chapter.
B. Inspection Of Dwellings; Access: In order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public, an officer,
employee or agent of the Division of Building and Neighborhood Services of the City is hereby authorized to make
exterior and interior inspections of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, hotels, motels, multiple
dwellings and premises, when the same shall appear necessary to determine the condition thereof and the
compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. Immediate access to and entry to any such
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, hotel, motel, multiple dwelling or premises, shall be afforded any
such officer, employee or agent in the case of an emergency determined by the Division of Building and
Neighborhood Services to exist. No such access and entry shall be required, however, unless such officer, employee
or agent shall first exhibit his identification to any person entitled to the same. Every owner, owner's agent, an
occupant of a rental dwelling(s) shall provide access to the rental dwelling(s) as required by section 4-4-16 of this
chapter. If any owner of any owner occupied dwelling unit fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the
structure or premises under his control, or any part thereof, with respect to which an inspection authorized by this
chapter is sought to be made, the Division of Building and Neighborhood Services may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection
requirements of this section with respect to such dwelling unit or premises, petition and obtain such order from a
court of competent jurisdiction. Whenever inspections of any rental dwelling units are made by the Division of
Building and Neighborhood Services and there are no violations, a Housing Code certificate of compliance shall be
issued to the property owner or owner's agent and should be made available by the owner or the owners' agent to
tenants and prospective tenants. If upon subsequent inspections, violations of this Code are found, this certificate
shall be surrendered to the City. The certificate of compliance shall be substantially in the following form:
CITY OF CARBONDALE
HOUSING CODE CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 166/923
On , the undersigned conducted an inspection of , unit then owned by and found no violations of the Housing
Codes of the City of Carbondale. Under the Zoning Title of the City Code, permitted occupancy as of that date of .
Housing Inspector
(Ord. 93-73)
C. Notice Of Violations: Except as hereinafter in this section provided, in those instances where the division of building
and neighborhood services shall determine that there exists a violation of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, written notice of such violation shall be given the person
alleged to have committed the same. In the case of rental dwellings, notice of violation shall be given to the owner or
the owner's agent and the occupant of the rental dwelling or unit. Such written notice shall state the alleged violation
and a legal description or local address of the structures in violation. It shall state that such violation must be
corrected within a reasonable time period specified by the building and neighborhood services division based on the
nature and severity of the violation, and shall inform the person to whom the notice is directed of the right to apply for
a hearing before the building board of appeals, as hereinafter provided. Such notice may be personally served on the
person to whom addressed or may be sent by first class, registered, or certified mail, to the last known address of the
addressee. Such service by mail shall be deemed to have been served at the time of the posting thereof. In the event
notice by personal service or by mail in the manner aforesaid is not possible, service may be had by posting a
placard copy of such notice in a conspicuous place in or about the building, structure or premises in question.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, notice may be given in any other manner permitted by law in the service of
process in civil cases. Any notice given under the provisions of this section shall operate as and shall become a final
order without further action being necessary upon the expiration of fourteen (14) days from and after the effective
date of service of such notice unless, within such fourteen (14) day period, a request for an appeal thereon is filed in
the manner provided in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 2003-38)
D. Housing Board Of Appeals: (Rep. by Ord. 2003-38)
E. Unfit Dwelling Units: In addition to any other rights and powers granted the building and neighborhood services
division under the provisions of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter, the building and neighborhood services
division may designate and find unfit for human habitation any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, hotel, motel,
rooming unit, multiple dwelling or premises and may so placard the same, in the manner described in subsection C of
this section upon determining that one or more or all of the following conditions exist:
1. The building, structure or premises lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or other facilities adequate to
protect the health and safety of the occupants or of the public;
2. The building, structure or premises is damaged, decayed, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested in such a manner
and to such extent as to create a serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or of the public;
3. The building, structure or premises, because of the location thereof, the general conditions existing, the state of the
premises or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe, overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to the health and
safety that it creates a serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or of the public.
F. Notice Of Intent To Vacate: Whenever the building and neighborhood services division determines that a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling, is unfit for human habitation as provided in
subsection E of this section, it shall include such findings within the notice of violations provided for in subsection C of
this section, and it shall also include a statement of its intent to vacate and placard the dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling, if compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation has not
been secured.
G. Order To Vacate: Whenever a notice of violation, as provided for under subsection C of this section, has not been
complied with or where an appeal has not been requested, the building and neighborhood services division may
order the dwelling to be vacated. A copy of such notice to vacate shall be served on the owner, agent, operator or the
occupant, as provided in subsection C of this section.
H. Vacating An Unfit Dwelling: Any dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling
designated as unfit for human habitation pursuant to subsection E of this section and ordered vacated as provided in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 167/923
subsection G of this section, shall be vacated within such reasonable time as the building and neighborhood services
division may specify in the order. No such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or multiple dwelling shall again be
used for human habitation and the placard removed until written approval is secured from the building and
neighborhood services division.
I. Removal Of Placard: No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit, or multiple dwelling which has been designated as unfit for human habitation, except as provided in
subsection H of this section.
J. Vacated Dwellings Made Secure: The owner, agent, or operator of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit, or multiple dwelling shall make such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple
dwelling safe and secure in whatever manner the building and neighborhood services division shall deem necessary.
Any vacant building, open at the door and windows, if unguarded shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a
nuisance within the meaning of this provision.
K. Power To Act In Emergencies: Notwithstanding the notice of violation provisions of this section, as provided by
subsection C of this section, whenever the building and neighborhood services division, at any time, shall determine
that a violation of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter exists and that such violation is of such a nature as to
require immediate action to abate a hazard or immediate danger to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the
occupants of any building or structure or of the public, the building and neighborhood services division may, without
any notice and without any hearing, issue an order citing the violation and ordering the immediate abatement or
removal or correction of such hazard or danger as the building and neighborhood services division appears
necessary and proper. Such order may include, but is not limited to, an order to vacate the building, structure or
premises in question. Any order issued under the provision of this subsection shall be and become effective
immediately upon the issuance thereof. The powers granted by this subsection shall be in addition to any and all
other rights and powers granted by law.
L. Transfer Of Interest In Certain Property: No person having any interest in any property that is described in any notice
of any violation of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-16 of this chapter or any order issued under sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-
16 of this chapter shall sell, transfer, grant, convey, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of any such interest in said
property so long as any such violation continues to exist, unless, such person having the right to sell, transfer, grant,
convey, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such interest in said property shall first furnish to the intended
purchasee, transferee, grantee, donee, mortgagee, lessee or other intended recipient of such property interest a true
and exact copy of such notice in order and concurrently therewith furnish the building and neighborhood services
division with the names and addresses of all such parties. (Ord. 84-103)
M. Records: All requests to inspect and/or copy records or documents prepared, maintained as under the control of the
city shall be made in accordance with city ordinance 2010-04, freedom of information act1. (Ord. 84-103; Ord. 2010-
04)
4-4-16: MANDATORY RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTION PROGRAM:
A. Registration Required: Effective January 1, 2009, it shall be unlawful for any person, individual, firm, trust, partnership,
association, corporation or other legal entity to rent, lease or allow occupancy of any "dwelling unit", as defined by
section 4-4-6 of this chapter, for any consideration within the corporate limits of the city without first registering with
the city of Carbondale as provided in this chapter. (Exceptions: Registration requirements under this section shall not
apply to the following: hotels; motels; bed and breakfast establishments; nursing homes; retirement homes; rest
homes; assisted living facilities; home occupied only by immediate family members including parents, grandparents,
sons, daughters, grandsons, or granddaughters of the owner, or dwellings owned or controlled by government
agencies and public housing authorities.) (Ord. 2010-34)
B. Validity: Registration is valid from January 1 until December 31 of the same year in which issued. No registration shall
be valid for a period exceeding one year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 168/923
C. Inspection Required: Registered residential rental units shall be inspected by an agent of the building and
neighborhood services division for compliance with the Carbondale revised codes. No person shall lease, let, or
otherwise allow in exchange for any consideration the use of any property for residential purposes, hereinafter "rental
dwellings", within the city, unless that property has been inspected by employees or agents of the division of building
and neighborhood services. After the initial inspection, following the effective date hereof, which must not reveal any
violations presenting an imminent threat to the life, health and/or safety of the residents of the rental dwelling, a rental
dwelling may continue to be leased until the next mandatory inspection.
D. Inspections Authorized:
1. The division of building and neighborhood services is hereby authorized and obligated to conduct inspections of
any and all rental dwellings, or units thereof, within the city to determine compliance with the standards and
regulations set forth in this code, as amended.
2. The employees and agents of the division of building and neighborhood services are hereby authorized to enter,
examine and survey all rental dwellings within the city. All inspections shall occur at reasonable hours except in
emergency situations where the life, health, and/or safety of any individual is threatened.
E. Frequency, Access For And Notice Of Inspection:
1. All rental dwellings shall be inspected by the employees or agents of the division of building and neighborhood
services at least once every three (3) years. Inspections may occur more frequently provided there is:
a. Reasonable suspicion to believe that there exists within such rental dwelling conditions which present a threat to
the health, safety, welfare or general comfort of the resident(s) of such rental dwelling; or
b. A complaint lodged by the resident(s) of the rental dwelling to be inspected; or
c. A request made by a prospective resident accompanied by the consent of the owner (or owner's agent) of the
rental dwelling to be inspected; or
d. A request made by the owner or owner's agent.
2. Every owner or owner's agent of any rental dwelling shall provide access to such rental dwelling, or any unit
thereof, to the employees or agents of the division of building and neighborhood services for purposes of
inspecting the rental dwelling or unit thereof for compliance with all applicable standards and regulations set forth in
this code, as amended. Either the owner, the owner's agent, or the occupant shall accompany the inspector during
the inspection.
3. Notice shall be given to the owner or the owner's agent and the occupant of the rental dwelling or unit thereof at
least one hundred twenty (120) hours in advance of such inspection except in those situations described in
subsections E1a, E1b, and E1d of this section.
4. Notice of inspection shall be provided to both the owner or owner's agent and occupant and may consist of a letter
sent by first class mail, personal service, telephone call or, for occupants only, the posting of a door hanger upon
the doorknob of the rental dwelling. The form of notice shall be the city's sole discretion; provided, however, the
form used substantially achieves the purpose of this "notice" requirement. Where a rental dwelling is occupied by
more than one person, notice to one occupant shall be deemed notice to all occupants of the rental dwelling.
F. Identification Of Rental Dwelling And Designation Of Owner's Agent:
1. Any person owning, managing, or supervising any rental dwelling shall, within thirty (30) days of assuming
ownership, management or supervision of any rental dwelling inform the city on a form approved by the city of such
residential dwelling.
2. Every owner of any rental dwelling, or unit thereof, who does not reside on the premises of such rental dwelling
shall appoint and designate an individual to act as an agent in his behalf. Every owner shall notify, in writing, the
division of building and neighborhood services and each occupant of the rental dwelling, of the name, address and
telephone number of the agent. Such written notice shall contain the signature of the agent accepting appointment
and designation as agent of the owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 169/923
3. Any individual, who is appointed and designated as agent of the owner, shall reside within Jackson County, Illinois,
or any other Illinois county which adjoins Jackson County, Illinois. An owner of a rental dwelling may act as his own
agent provided he meets the residency requirements set forth herein.
G. Occupants To Provide Access For Inspections And Compliance With Code:
1. Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner thereof, his agent, or employee or agents of the
division of building and neighborhood services access to the rental dwelling, or unit thereof under their control, to
conduct inspections authorized by this chapter.
2. Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or his employees, access to
any part of such rental dwelling at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any standard regulation set forth in this
code, as amended.
H. Fees:
1. Annual fees for registration of any rental dwelling pursuant to this chapter shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00) per
"dwelling unit" as defined in section 4-4-6, "Definitions", of this chapter. Should violations of the standards and
regulations of this code be found and not be corrected by the time of the first reinspection, the owner shall be
subject to a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second reinspection and each subsequent reinspection until such
violation is corrected.
2. Any reinspection fees remaining unpaid after two (2) weeks shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as such,
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
3. In the event a dwelling unit is not inspected within a three (3) year period, registration fees for that dwelling unit
shall be waived by the city of Carbondale for the succeeding registration year.
I. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, unless specified otherwise within this
chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation continues. All violations of this
section are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may be abated or enjoined by the city. Nothing in this section
shall exempt the city or any person from seeking civil remedies against any person who is in violation of this section.
J. Preservation Of Other Rights And Penalties: This section shall not be construed as to restrict the right of the city of
Carbondale to inspect any property nor to seek penalties for violations of other provisions of this code. (Ord. 2007-42)
4-4-17: UNLAWFUL INTERRUPTION OF TENANT OCCUPANCY:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any landlord or any person acting at their direction to knowingly oust or dispossess or
attempt to oust or dispossess any tenant from a dwelling unit without authority of law, by plugging, changing, adding
or removing any lock or latching device; or by blocking any entrance into said unit; or by removing any door or
window from said unit; or by interfering with the services to said unit, including, but not limited to, electricity, gas, hot
or cold water, plumbing, heat or telephone services; or by removing a tenant's personal property from said unit; or by
the use of force or threat of violence, injury or force to a tenant's person or property; or by any other act rendering a
dwelling unit or any part thereof or any personal property located therein inaccessible or uninhabitable.
B. Exclusion: The provisions of this section shall not apply where:
1. A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining to forcible entry and detainer and engages the
sheriff of Jackson County to forcibly evict a tenant or his personal property; or
2. A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining to distress for rent; or
3. A landlord acts pursuant to court order; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 170/923
4. A landlord interferes temporarily with possession only as necessary to make needed repairs or inspection and only
as provided by law; or
5. The tenants with a right to possession of the dwelling unit have been absent therefrom for thirty (30) consecutive
days without advising the landlord of such absence or their intent to return, current rent is thirty (30) or more days
overdue, and after diligent inquiry the landlord has reason to believe that tenants have abandoned the premises
and do not intend to return.
6. If it appears on the face of the lease document that the lease term has expired, a rebuttable presumption will be
created excluding the landlord from the provisions of this section. (1998 Code)
4-4-18: REQUIRED PROVISIONS TO RESIDENTIAL LEASE AGREEMENTS:
A. Charges: All lease agreements for residential property within the city of Carbondale with an effective date of May 1,
2006, or later, shall include an addendum, incorporated by reference in the lease agreement and signed by both the
tenant and lessor, that clearly states any and all fees and/or charges, excluding normal monthly rent, actual
damages, and cleaning charges, that may be assessed to the tenant, either during the rental period, or upon
termination of the lease agreement.
If lessor, or its agent, fails to provide a copy of the executed lease agreement, with the required addendum to a
tenant, by the date the lease agreement was signed by the tenant and deposit made, that tenant shall not be
responsible for any charges or fees associated with the provision.
B. Relevant Zoning Restrictions: All lease agreements for residential property within the city of Carbondale with an
effective date of May 1, 2006, or later, for residences zoned R-1 by the city of Carbondale, shall include an
addendum, incorporated by reference in the lease agreement and signed by both the tenant and lessor, that clearly
states the maximum occupancy restrictions on the property being leased, pursuant to the city of Carbondale's zoning
code.
Both addenda shall be printed in 14-point bold type font, and all tenants shall receive a copy of the lease agreement,
and copies of both addenda, by the date the lease agreement was signed by the tenant and deposit made. (Ord.
2005-26)
4-4-19: NONLIABILITY OF CITY OFFICIALS; PENALTY:
A. Lack Of Personal Liability: No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage to
persons or property resulting from any act required or permitted in the discharge of the duties of such officer, agent,
or employee under the provisions of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-19 of this chapter. Any lawsuit of any nature brought
against such officer, agent, or employee as a result of any act, requirement or permitted function in the discharge of
the duties of such officer, agent, or employee aforesaid shall be defended at the sole expense of the city until a
complete and final determination of such lawsuit.
B. Penalties: Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of any provisions of sections 4-4-1 through 4-4-18 of
this chapter, shall, upon a finding of guilt, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2005-26)
Chapter 5
RESIDENTIAL CODE
4-5-1: ADOPTION:
A. Code Adopted: The international residential code, 2003 edition, is hereby adopted by reference, except for such
portions as are specifically hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 171/923
B. Purpose: The purpose of this international residential code is to provide minimum requirements to safeguard life or
limb, health, and public welfare and the protection of property as it relates to these safeguards by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, prefabrication, equipment or appliance installation, quality of materials, and repair
of detached one- and two-family dwellings not more than three (3) stories in height.
C. Code On File: A copy of the international residential code, 2003 edition, including all amendments made by this
section shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated by this
chapter as fully as if set out in length herein and the provisions hereof including all deletions or modifications shall be
controlling in the construction of all one- and two-family dwelling units within the jurisdiction of the city.
D. Deletions And Modifications: The international residential code, 2003 edition, is adopted as set forth hereinabove with
the following deletions and modifications:
1. Any reference to "Family" is hereby deleted and shall be governed by the Carbondale Revised Code.
2. Any reference to "Plumbing" is hereby deleted and shall be governed by the Carbondale Revised Code.
3. Any reference to "Energy Conservation" is hereby deleted and shall be governed by the Carbondale Revised
Code.
4. Any reference under the ICC Residential Code to "Board of Appeals" is hereby deleted and shall be governed by
the Carbondale City Code.
5. Any reference under the ICC Residential Code to "Electrical" is hereby deleted and shall be governed by the
Carbondale Revised Code.
6. Any reference to the Climate and Geographic Design Criteria under the ICC Residential Code shall be as follows,
as table R301.2(1):
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind
Speed
(mph)
Seismic
Design
Category
Weathering
Frost
Line
Depth
Termite Decay
Winter
Design
Temp
Ice Shield
Under
Layment
Required
Flood
Hazards
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp
20 90 D2 Severe 18" Moderate
Heavy
10 Yes 750
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 mile per hour = 1.609 km/h.
a. Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural
requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., "negligible",
"moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The
grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C34, C55, C62, C73, C90, C129, C145, C216 or C652.
b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in
the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
c. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "very heavy", "moderate to heavy", "slight to moderate", or
"none to slight" in accordance with Figure R301.2(6) depending on whether there has been a history of local
damage.
d. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "moderate to severe," "slight to moderate," or "not to slight"
in accordance with Figure R301.2(7) depending on whether there has been a history of local damage.
e. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure
R301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 172/923
R301.2.1.4.
f. The outdoor design dry bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2 percent values for winter
from Appendix D of the Illinois State Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be
permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.
g. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the Seismic Design Category determined from Section
R301.2.2.1.
h. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood
Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b)
the date(s) of the currently effective FIRM and FBFM, or other flood hazard map adopted by the community, as
may be amended.
i. In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1., R905.4.3., R905.5.3., R905.6.3., R905.7.3. and R905.8.3., for areas
where the average daily temperature in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less, or where there has been a history of local
damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise,
the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO".
j. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from
Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing
Index-USA Method (Base 32° Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
k. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic
Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
(Ord. 2003-72)
4-5-2: PERMITS AND FEES:
The provision for permits and fees for work subject to the international residential code shall be the same as that found in
section 4-1-2 of this title. (Ord. 91-68; Ord. 2003-72)
4-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person which is found to have violated any provision of the international residential code, 2003 edition, or as it may
be amended in the future, or any part of this chapter, shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and
not greater than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that any violation of any provision of the international
residential code or any provision of this chapter shall occur, continue, or be permitted shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 91-68; Ord. 97-166; Ord. 2003-72)
Chapter 6
NOISE REGULATIONS
4-6-1: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, POLLUTION
CONTROL BOARD NOISE REGULATIONS:
There is hereby adopted by reference by the city, that certain set of regulations known as "subtitle H: noise" of the Illinois
pollution control board (1987), one copy of which is on file with the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein as though set out in full, and from the date which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the city and on any city property, subject to the terms of section 14-4-7 of this code. (Ord.
2015-18)
Chapter 7
HOUSING REHABILITATION ASSISTANCE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 173/923
4-7-1: AVAILABILITY OF GRANTS AND LOANS:
The city council hereby authorizes the making of grants and loans to homeowners for the purpose of housing
rehabilitation. (Ord. 2001-39)
4-7-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations for the operation of housing rehabilitation grant and loan programs shall be all those created
by this chapter; those mandated by applicable state and federal laws, rules, regulations and funding agreements; and
such other rules and regulations deemed appropriate and necessary by the city manager for the proper implementation
and administration of the housing rehabilitation program. (Ord. 2001-39)
4-7-3: APPLICATIONS FOR GRANTS AND LOANS:
A. Form: Applications by homeowners for grants and loans shall be made in the form provided by the city manager or his
designee.
B. Information: The applicant shall provide the requested information in order to establish eligibility. Failure to provide the
information or providing false information shall disqualify persons from eligibility for housing rehabilitation grants and
loans. (Ord. 2001-39)
4-7-4: ELIGIBILITY FOR GRANTS AND LOANS:
A. Income: To be eligible for a housing rehabilitation grant or loan, the applicant's household income shall not exceed
limits established by the state and/or federal government for the particular housing rehabilitation grant or loan
program.
B. Target Area: To be eligible for a housing rehabilitation grant or loan, the home shall be located in an area approved for
rehabilitation in accordance with grant approval(s) from the state and/or federal government.
C. Other Requirements: To be eligible for a housing rehabilitation grant or loan the applicant shall meet such other
eligibility and ranking requirements as are set forth in the city's application(s) for housing rehabilitation funds
submitted to the state and/or federal government and any eligibility requirements established by those governments.
(Ord. 2001-39)
4-7-5: PRIORITY FOR HOUSING REHABILITATION MEASURES:
The majority of funds to be expended on a dwelling will to be to correct violations of city codes, to make energy
conservation improvements and/or to address health and safety matters. No work will be performed on a dwelling unless
sufficient funds are available to address all city housing code items and those items required by the applicable state and
federal rules and regulations. (Ord. 2001-39)
4-7-6: AUTHORIZATION TO APPROVE GRANTS AND LOANS:
A. Administrative Review: Applications for housing rehabilitation grants and loans shall be processed and reviewed by
city employees authorized by the city manager.
B. Board Review: Applications for housing rehabilitation grants and loans shall be reviewed by the community
development loan and grant review board which shall recommend action to the city manager for approval or
disapproval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 174/923
C. Decision By City Manager: Applications for housing rehabilitation grants and loans shall receive final approval or
disapproval by the city manager. (Ord. 2001-39)
Chapter 8
ENERGY EFFICIENCY CODE
4-8-1: ADOPTION OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The City hereby adopts that certain Energy Code known as the ASHRAE 90-75, which Code is
approved by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., except for such
portions thereof as are specifically hereinafter, deleted, modified, or amended.
B. Code On File: Three (3) copies of said ASHRAE 90-75, including all amendments made by this Section shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated by this Chapter as fully as if
set out in length herein, and the provisions hereof including all amendments shall be controlling within the jurisdiction
of the City from and after January 1, 1981.
C. Modifications And Additions: That said ASHRAE 90-75, be and is hereby modified by the following addition:
1. That Section 2.1.1 of said ASHRAE 90-75, be and is hereby modified by the following addition:
This Standard does not apply to new buildings or new additions to existing buildings classified as Type A-1, said
classification being residential dwelling units not exceeding 35 feet in height and which classification of Type A-1
does not include mobile homes.
2. That Section 4.5.3.1 of said ASHRAE 90-75, be and is hereby modified and shall read as follows:
Section 4.5.3.1 Windows (ANSI A134.1; NWMA IS-2 MEMA 1-71). Windows shall be designed to limit air leakage;
the air infiltration rate shall not exceed .30 ft. 3/min. per foot (.462 cm 3/s per meter) of sash crack. (See 4.5.1).
3. That Section 4.5.3.3 of said ASHRAE 90-75, be and is hereby modified to read as follows:
Section 4.5.3.3 Entrance Swinging Doors for Residential Use (Residential use only as a means of egress or
ingress to living units) (MHMA 3-7415). Entrance swinging doors used for egress or ingress from residential living
units shall be designed to limit air leakage; the air infiltration rate shall not exceed .1 ft3/s per square meter) or door
area.(See 4.3.1.).
(Ord. 80-82)
4-8-2: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day any violation of this Chapter shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 80-82; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 9
GRANT AND LOAN FUND AVAILABILITY FOR ENERGY AUDITS
AND RETROFITS
4-9-1: AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION:
The City Council hereby authorizes establishment of loan and grant funds to be distributed to eligible citizens of the City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 175/923
in accordance with the policies and goals of the City to improve the energy efficiency of the community, to minimize the
flow of energy related dollars from the community and to promote an energy self-reliant community. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ELDERLY FAMILY: A family whose head or whose spouse or whose sole member is at least fifty five (55) years of age.
HANDICAPPED CITIZENS: A person having a physical or mental impairment which: 1) is expected to be of long
continued and indefinite duration, and 2) substantially impedes his ability to live independently.
LOW OR MODERATE INCOMES: Those incomes that do not exceed the amounts for low and moderate incomes as
defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development now and as hereafter amended.
OWNER-OCCUPANT: A person who owns or who is purchasing the residence to be improved by the loan or grant funds,
and who is also occupying that residence, and who has occupied that residence as owner of purchase for the required
period prior to the date of the application. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-3: APPLICATION:
A. Form: Applications shall be in the form provided for by rules and regulations and approved by the City Council by
motion or resolution.
B. Authorization To Verify Information: The applicant shall be required to authorize credit investigations and verification of
income information to supplement the information given on the application to determine eligibility for any grant or
loan. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-4: STANDARD OF REVIEW FOR APPROVAL OF LOANS AND GRANTS:
Applications for loans and grants shall be reviewed by the Loan and Grant Review Board. Applications shall receive final
approval by the Director of the Community Development Department. Review and approval shall be in accordance with
the criteria for review and approval established in the rules and regulations; such criteria shall include at least the
following factors: applicant meets all eligibility requirements and, in the case of a loan, is credit worthy; the proposed
improvements meet the project prioritization set by rules and regulations and are cost-beneficial; and funds are available.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to establish criteria in accordance with this Section by rules and regulations, such
rules and regulations to be approved by the City Council by motion or resolution. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-5: ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR LOANS AND GRANTS:
A. Grant Qualifications: Grants authorized by this Chapter will be available only to elderly and handicapped residents of
the City, who have a low or moderate income and who are owner/occupants of the residence for at least three (3)
years.
B. Loan Qualifications: Loans authorized by this Chapter will be available to residents of Carbondale who have a low or
moderate income and who are owner/occupants of the residence for at least one year.
C. Prior Denial Of Loan Required: Applicants for a loan who meet the eligibility requirements set forth in subsection B of
this Section must, in addition, have applied for a loan from a commercial lending institution for substantially the same
project for which assistance is applied and have been denied the loan by such institution within sixty (60) days of the
loan application. (Ord. 83-32 § 1)
4-9-6: TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR LOANS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 176/923
A. Maximum Amount: The maximum amount of loan and grant funds, in any combination to be distributed to any person
or for any one residence under this Chapter shall not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
B. Minimum Amount: The minimum amount of a loan to be distributed to any person at any one time is five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
C. Interest Rate: The interest rate to be calculated on the loans granted under this Chapter shall be determined by the
following method:
Low To Moderate Income
As Established By HUD
Interest Rate Per Annum On Principle
Remaining Due At Time Of Payment
50 percent or less
of median income
5 percent
51 - 60 percent 6 percent
61 - 70 percent 7 percent
71 - 80 percent 8 percent
D. Payment Penalty: There shall be no payment penalty. The loan shall constitute a lien upon the property.
E. Repayment Schedule: The repayment schedule for such loans shall begin thirty (30) days after the date the loan
funds are disbursed with the maximum pay-back period being five (5) years (60 months). The City Manager is
authorized to develop criteria for establishing a pay-back schedule, such criteria to be approved by the City Council
by motion or resolution. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-7: TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR GRANTS:
A. Maximum Amount: The maximum grant to be distributed to any one person or for any one residence shall not exceed
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
B. Minimum Amount: There shall be no minimum amount requirement for the distribution of a grant under this Chapter.
C. Violations Of Conditions: Grant awards are funds given free and clear of any interest or requirements for repayment,
unless the person who receives the grant funds violates any of the conditions of the grant. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-8: PURPOSES FOR WHICH LOAN OR GRANT FUNDS MAY BE EXPENDED:
Funds distributed to eligible persons in the form of loans or grants under this Chapter must be used by the recipient to
make the improvements to the residence which are specified in their approved loan or grant. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-9: PENALTY FOR MISUSE OF FUNDS:
A. Failure To Perform: Should any person receiving loan or grant funds misuse such funds by not making the
improvements to the residence which are specified in their approved loan or grant orviolating any other condition of
the approved loan or grant, the entire amount of the loan or grant shall become due immediately along with interest
accrue from the date the loan or grant was disbursed until the time the entire amount is paid at the prevailing home
improvement loan interest rate in the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 177/923
B. Excess Funds: Should the recipient of a loan or grant require less money than was disbursed to the recipient to
complete the improvements authorized by their approved loan or grant, the recipient shall repay the City upon written
demand by the City the excess amount plus any amount of interest on that amount which would be due and owing by
the recipient as of the date of repayment calculated in accordance with Section 4-9-6 of this Chapter.
C. Change Of Status Of Recipient: Upon the termination of the recipients owner/occupant status, a loan shall become
immediately due. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
4-9-10: ENERGY AUDITS:
A. Commercial And Residential Qualifications: The City shall perform energy audits for commercial and residential
buildings and dwelling units within the City upon request of the owner or tenant of the building or dwelling unit.
However, the City shall not perform an energy audit of any building or dwelling unit that is eligible for performance of
any energy audit through a public utility.
B. Fee Schedule: The fee schedule for energy audits conducted by the City shall be adopted from time to time by the
City Council by motion or resolution.
C. Application Form For Audits: Prior to the City performing an energy audit for any person or any building or dwelling
unit, the person shall complete an application form and shall pay the energy audit fee to the City. The application
shall be in the form provided for by rules and regulations and approved by the City Council by motion or resolution.
D. Priority Audits: Energy audits of buildings or structures occupied by elderly and handicapped persons shall be given
first priority. (Ord. 62-32 § 1)
4-9-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In addition to those rules and regulations specifically authorized by this Chapter, the City Manager is hereby authorized
to adopt such other rules and regulations which he deems appropriate and necessary to administer this Chapter,
including the establishment of criteria to determine credit worthiness, the establishment of procedures to monitor the use
and distribution of funds and the completion of residential projects, the establishment of procedures to perform and
administer energyaudits and the establishment of other appropriate guidelines and forms which the City Manager deems
reasonable and necessary to implement this Chapter. (Ord. 82-32 § 1)
Chapter 10
RENTAL REHABILITATION LOAN PROGRAM
4-10-1: AVAILABILITY OF LOANS:
The City Council hereby authorizes the establishment of a rental rehabilitation loan program to provide loans to eligible
property owners for the rehabilitation of certain rental property located in designated target areas of the City. (Ord. 85-23)
4-10-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations for the operation of the rental rehabilitation loan program shall be all those created by this
Chapter, those mandated by applicable State and Federal laws, rules, regulations and funding agreements, and such
other rules and regulations deemed appropriate and necessary by the City Manager for the proper implementation and
administration of this rental rehabilitation loan program. (Ord. 85-23)
4-10-3: APPLICATION FOR LOAN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 178/923
A. Form: Application for a rental rehabilitation loan shall be made in the form provided by the City Manager in
accordance with the rules and regulations authorized by Section 4-10-2 of this Chapter.
B. Information: The applicant shall provide requested information to establish eligibility, credit worthiness, and need for
the rehabilitation loan. (Ord. 85-23)
4-10-4: STANDARD OF REVIEW FOR APPROVAL OF LOAN:
A. Criteria Examined: Applications for rental rehabilitation loans shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved in
accordance with the rules and regulations authorized by Section 4-10-2 of this Chapter, and consideration shall be
given at least to the availability of rental rehabilitation loan funds and eligibility of the applicant, rental property, and
proposed rehabilitationimprovements as required by the rules and regulations.
B. Board Review: Applications for rental rehabilitation loans shall be reviewed by the Loan and Grant Review Board
which shall recommend action for approval or disapproval.
C. Decision By City Manager: Applications for rental rehabilitation loans shall receive final approval or disapproval by the
City Manager or his designee. (Ord. 85-23)
4-10-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICIPATION IN LOAN PROGRAM:
A. Target Areas: All property to be rehabilitated under this rental rehabilitation loan program must be located in target
areas which meet the criteria set down in the rules and regulations authorized by Section 4-10-2 of this Chapter,
which areas are designated by the City from time to time.
B. Residential Rental Uses: Rental rehabilitation loans shall be used only to rehabilitate properties to be used for
primarily residential rental uses where at least fifty one percent (51%) or more of the floor spaces of the property is
residential rental (50 percent for duplexes).
C. Factors Examined: The following factors will be examined to determine whether an applicant will be assisted with a
rental rehabilitation loan:
1. The extent to which the rental property proposed for rehabilitation is currently occupied by lower income families.
2. The extent to which rental dwelling units with two (2) bedrooms or more will be rehabilitated.
3. The extent to which the proposed rehabilitation is financially feasible given the maximum subsidy amount per unit,
prevailing interest rates, proposed rents, and market for the rehabilitated units.
4. The extent to which displacement will be minimized.
5. The extent to which the rehabilitated units will be affordable to low and very low income families.
6. The extent to which the proposed rehabilitation will have a positive impact on the physical environment of the
surrounding neighborhoods.
7. The extent to which the owner of the property has indicated a commitment to continue ownership and to maintain
the property as demonstrated by a track record of sound management, e.g. prior record of compliance or
noncompliance with the City Housing Code.
D. Dollar For Dollar Match: The property owner must provide a minimum of one dollar ($1.00) match from a private
lender, theowner's resources or other public or private monies for every dollar provided by the rental rehabilitation
loan for eligible rehabilitation costs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 179/923
E. Compliance Required: The property owner must agree to comply with all requirements of the rules, regulations, and
procedures authorized by Section 4-10-2 of this Chapter.
F. Zoning Code Compliance: No property shall qualify for a rental rehabilitation loan unless it complies with the Zoning
Code at the time of rental rehabilitation loan approval.
G. Compliance Upon Completion Of Project: No property shall qualify for a rental rehabilitation loan unless it will comply
with all applicable City codes, including but not limited to the Housing Code, at the completion of the rehabilitation
work.
H. Eligible Costs: Eligible rehabilitation costs include only:
1. The actual rehabilitation costs necessary to correct substandard conditions, make essential improvements
including energy-related repairs and improvements to permit the use of rehabilitated projects by handicapped
persons, and repair major housing systems in danger of failure. Substandard conditions are those housing
conditions that do not meet the Carbondale Housing Code requirements.
2. Other costs that are associated with the rehabilitation or rehabilitation financing as permitted by the rules and
regulations authorized by Section 4-10-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. 85-23)
4-10-6: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF LOAN:
A. Loan Amount: The rental rehabilitation loan amount shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total eligible costs and
shall not be less than an average of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per unit per project, nor more than an average of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per unit per project.
B. Interest: The property owner shall pay no interest on the unpaid balance of the rental rehabilitation loan. No interest
shall accrue during the term of repayment of the private loan secured to provide the private share of the eligible
rehabilitation costs for up to five (5) years.
C. Repayment: The repayment of the rental rehabilitation loan shall begin thirty (30) days after the date of the final
payment of the private loan for the required private share of the eligible rehabilitation costs or upon the sale or
transfer of interest in the property, whichever occurs first. If there is no private loan for the private share of the eligible
rehabilitation costs, repayment of the rental rehabilitation loan shall begin thirty (30) days after the date the rental
rehabilitation loan funds are disbursed in full or upon the sale or transfer ofinterest in the property, whichever occurs
first. In any case, full repayment of the rental rehabilitation loan shall become due and payable upon the sale or
transfer of interest in the property.
D. Prepayment Penalty: There shall be no prepayment penalty. The rental rehabilitation loan shall constitute a lien upon
the property.
E. Maximum Pay-Back Period: The maximum pay-back period for the rental rehabilitation loan shall not exceed five (5)
years. (Ord. 85-23)
4-10-7: RESPONSIBILITIES AND ROLE OF CITY STAFF IN ADMINISTERING LOAN PROGRAM:
The City staff, in administering the rental rehabilitation loan program shall perform those functions necessary to
implement the program in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and agreements including, but not limited to the
following:
A. Solicit Applications: Solicit applications for rental rehabilitation loans.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 180/923
B. Review And Process Applications: Review and process applications for rental rehabilitation loans, inspect rental units
to find code violations and assist owners with work descriptions.
C. Let Bids: Prepare specifications, solicit and award bids to contractors for the rehabilitation work.
D. Inspections: Monitor and inspect rehabilitation work and authorize payments for work completed.
E. Monitor Benefit: Monitor benefit to low and moderate income tenants and coordinate with the Jackson County
Housing Authority in the use of the Section 8 certificates made available with the rental rehabilitation program.
F. Compliance Required: Monitor the property for continued compliance with the Zoning Ordinance until the rental
rehabilitation loan is repaid. (Ord. 85-23)
4-10-8: PENALTY FOR MISUSE OF FUNDS:
A. Adherence To Agreement: Should any person receiving loan funds misuse such funds by not making improvements
which are specified in the approved loan or by violating any other condition of the approved loan, the entire amount of
the loan shall become due immediately along with interest accrued from the date the loan was disbursed until the
time the entire amount is paid.
B. Excess Funds: Should the recipient of a loan require lessmoney than was disbursed to the recipient to complete the
improvements authorized by the approved loan, The recipient shall repay to the City upon written demand by the City
the excess amount plus any amount of interest on that amount which would be due and owing by the recipient as of
the date of repayment. (Ord. 85-23)
Chapter 11
FAIR HOUSING POLICY
4-11-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
A. Equal Opportunity Housing: In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its constitution and other laws; in order
that the safety and general welfare, peace and health of all the inhabitants of the city may be ensured, it is hereby
declared the policy of the city, to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, age,
disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry, to live in decent, sanitary,
healthful, standard living quarters.
B. Discrimination: It is the policy of the city that no owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent, or other person,
having the right to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation and/or real property within the
city, or any agent of these, shall refuse to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group
of persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability,
marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry of such person or persons or discriminate
against any person or persons because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status,
sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities and/or services in connection therewith.
C. Grievances: It is the policy of the city that grievances arising from relocation due to the acquisition of property by the
city are to be resolved in a fair, responsible manner.
D. Desegregation: Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum choice within the community's
total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially
inclusive patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities. (Ord. 2003-66)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 181/923
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this
section and as used in this chapter:
DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING: Housing which is in sound, clean, and weathertight condition in
conformance with applicable local, state, and national codes.
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: Any difference expressed in any way toward a person or persons in the terms of
the sale, exchange, lease, rental or financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such sale,
exchange, rental, lease or finance because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status,
sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry of such person.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person, institution or business entity of any kind which loans money to persons and
receives as security for said loans a secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or occupied,
maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human
beings, or any real estate so used, designed or intended for such use.
OWNER: Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in any real property or
who hold legal or equitable title to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative which owns
any real property and/or housing accommodation(s).
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation and/or agent thereof, who for a fee or other
valuable consideration offers, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates, for the sale, purchase, exchange or
rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or collects rental for the use of a housing
accommodation and/or real property of another.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing accommodations within the city limits of
the city of Carbondale, Illinois. (Ord. 2003-66)
4-11-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Discrimination Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker or
salesman, financial institution or employee of the financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the
foregoing, to discriminate against any person or persons because of their race, color, religion, sex, age, disability,
marital status, familialstatus, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry with regard to the sale, exchange or rental,
or any dealing concerning any housing accommodation and/or real property.
B. Realtors, Lending Institutions, Hold To Standards: In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial institution dealing with housing or real property
in the city:
1. To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any kind
relating to the sale, rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in the city or in
furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith.
2. To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice, statement or advertisement, or to
announce a policy, or to use any form of application, for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property, or
to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of such real estate,
which expresses directly or indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital
status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry.
3. To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining
or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any
housing accommodation and/or real property.
4. To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of any housing accommodation and/or real property on the
ground of loss of value because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 182/923
persons of any particular race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation,
national origin or ancestry.
5. To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any owner of any
housing accommodation and/or real property to sell or lease his property because of any present or prospective
change in the race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national
origin or ancestry.
6. To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or the anticipated listing for sale of any housing
accommodation and/or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale
of any housing accommodation and/or real property by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of
persons of any particular race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation,
national origin or ancestry in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in the block,
neighborhood, or area in which the property is located.
7. For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent or otherwise deal with such owner's housing
accommodations and/or real property with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, sex, age,
disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry.
8. For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any housing accommodation and/or real property
because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin
or ancestry of the proposed buyer or tenant. (Ord. 2003-66)
4-11-4: RELOCATION PURSUANT TO FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS:
Where required by federal law or regulation, relocation caused by the city in carrying out federally assisted programs
shall be consistent with policies and requirements under the uniform relocation assistance and real property acquisition
act of 1970 (PL 91-646, 1371.1) or current additions or revisions and applicable federal regulations. (Ord. 95-92)
4-11-5: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF ALLEGED VIOLATIONS:
A. City Manager Act As Hearing Officer: The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed as the administrative
hearing officer for alleged violations of sections 4-11-1 through 4-11-3 of this chapter.
B. Third Party Hearing Officer: The city manager shall appoint an independent third party as the hearing officer for
alleged violations of section 4-11-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-92)
4-11-6: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
A. Duties Enumerated: It shall be the duty of the administrative hearing officer to:
1. Receive or initiate, record, and investigate complaints charging violations of sections 4-11-1 through 4-11-3 and
sections 4-11-6 through 4-11-8 of this chapter.
2. Seek conciliation of parties involved in such complaints and grievances by conciliation, conference, formal and
informal hearings where necessary, making findings of fact, issuing recommendations to the city manager and city
council, and publishing its findings of fact and recommendations in accordance with the provisions of section 4-11-
7 of this chapter.
3. Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out its purposes and provisions of sections 4-11-1
through 4-11-3 and 4-11-5 through 4-11-8 of this chapter subject to the concurrence of the city council.
4. Report annually to the Carbondale city council concerning the implementation of sections 4-11-1 through 4-11-3
and 4-11-5 through 4-11-8 of this chapter including recommendations relating thereto.
B. Third Party Hearing Officer: It shall be the duty of the independent third party hearing officer to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 183/923
1. Receive, record, and investigate relocation grievances charging violation of sections 4-11-4, and 4-11-6 through 4-
11-8 (as they pertain to relocation grievances) of this chapter. Among the items which the administrative hearing
officer may consider as a grievance are displacement timing, amount of remuneration, availability and suitability of
relocation housing, and conditions of housing being temporarily occupied while persons are awaiting permanent
relocation. The independent third party hearing officer shall not be concerned with general relocation planning or
general relocation grievance to be within his jurisdiction if the aggrieved party has not first attempted in good faith
to resolve the grievance through normal city administrative procedures.
2. Seek conciliation of parties involved in such complaints and grievances by conciliation, conference, formal and
informal hearings where necessary, making findings of fact, issuing recommendations to the city manager and city
council, and publishing its findings of fact and recommendations in accordance with the provisions of section 4-11-
7 of this chapter.
3. Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out his purposes and the provisions of sections 4-
11-4 of this chapter subject to the concurrence of the city council. (Ord. 95-92)
4-11-7: PROCEDURE FOR FILING AND HANDLING COMPLAINTS:
A. Complaint; Form And Procedure: Any person aggrieved in any manner by any violation of any provisions of this
chapter may file a written signed complaint setting forth his grievance on a form obtainable in the city clerk's office,
city hall.
1. Such complaint must be filed with the clerk of the city within thirty (30) days from the date of commission of the
alleged violation (or within 180 days in the case of a relocation grievance) and shall include the name and address
of the complainant or aggrieved party and the name and address of the person and/or agency against whom the
complaint is filed and a brief statement of the facts surrounding the alleged violation.
2. Upon receipt of a written signed complaint, the city clerk shall notify the city manager of receipt of the complaint
and provide the city manager with a copy of the complaint. The city manager shall, within three (3) business days
of receipt of the complaint from the city clerk, appoint an appropriate hearing officer, depending on the nature of the
complaint, and providethe hearing officer with a copy of the complaint.
B. Decision Of Hearing Officer; Conciliation Hearing: Upon appointment by the city manager, the hearing officer will
decide if the complaint is within his jurisdiction and give written notice of his decision to all affected parties within five
(5) days of receipt of the complaint from the city manager. For those cases which the hearing officer finds to be within
his jurisdiction, the hearing officer will call for a conciliation hearing (after conducting whatever investigation it deems
necessary) within no more than fourteen (14) business days from its initial receipt of the complaint.
C. Conduct Informal Interviews: At the conciliation hearing, the hearing officer shall informally interview the complainant
and person, persons, or agency against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the
complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and persuasion.
D. Formal Hearing: If such attempts at conciliation are not successful, the hearing officer shall, within twenty one (21)
days of its receipt of a written complaint, proceed promptly to set a date for a formal hearing to be held within thirty
(30) days of its receipt of the written complaint.
E. Form And Content Of Hearing: Such formal hearing shall be conducted by the hearing officer upon due and
reasonable notice of all parties concerned. The hearing officer shall have full power to subpoena witnesses and
pertinent documents which powers may be enforced by the hearing officer by proper petition to any court of
competent jurisdiction. The hearing officer shall have the power to request and receive relevant records of the city
relative to specific complaints. The hearing officer shall have power to administer oaths and to take sworn testimony.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written report and recommendations which shall be
served in person or by mail upon the complainant, the party complained against, the city manager, and the city
council, together with his recommendation, if any, that the city attorney be instructed to seek injunctive relief in any
court of competent jurisdiction to prohibit such violation and/or to prosecute any person or persons who may be in
violation of any provisions of this chapter. If the purpose of the hearing was to consider a relocation grievance, the
independent third party hearing officer shall recommend to the city manager and city council resolution, if possible, of
the grievance within the confines of the relocation policy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 184/923
F. File Complaint: The hearing officer shall be empowered at the conclusion of such proceedings as a part of its report, to
file with the city council, for the purpose of having the city council file with the department of registration and
education of the state, a complaint against any real estate broker (or owner) violating any provisions of this chapter,
seeking suspension of the license issued to such broker by the state.
G. Record Of Proceedings: The hearing officer shall keep records of his proceedings, especially of his decisions and the
reasons for making them. A copy of the proceedings shall be transmitted to the city clerk, city manager, and the city
council. (Ord. 95-92)
4-11-8: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. This section shall, in no way abrogate or impair the right of the city to specifically enforce, by any legal
means, any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 95-92; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 12
MECHANICAL REGULATIONS
4-12-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE:
A. Code Adopted: The International Mechanical Code in its most current edition, as published from time to time
(hereinafter referred to as the "Mechanical Code" for the design and installation of mechanical systems through
requirements emphasizing performance that safeguard the public health and safety), is hereby adopted by reference.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum regulations for mechanical systems for the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, location, or maintenance of mechanical systems using
prescriptive and performance-related provisions.
C. Code On File: A copy of the Mechanical Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and same is hereby
adopted and incorporated by this Chapter as fully as if set out in length herein. The provisions hereof, including all
deletions or modifications, shall be controlling in the construction and installation of all mechanical systems within the
jurisdiction of the City.
D. Exceptions And Modifications: The International Mechanical Code is adopted as set forth hereinabove with the
following exceptions and modifications:
Any and all provisions contained in the International Mechanical Code referring to the following terms or phrases are
hereby deleted and shall be governed by the Carbondale City Code:
Penalties
Board of Appeals
Permit fee
(Ord. 96-60)
4-12-2: PENALTY:
Any person who is found to have violated any provision of the International Mechanical Code, in its most current edition,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 185/923
or as it may be amended in the future, or any part of this Chapter, shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and not greater than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Eachday that a violation of any provision of the
International Mechanical Code or any provision of this Chapter shall occur, continue, or be permitted shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 96-60; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 13
ROOFING SERVICES
4-13-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city of Carbondale that, in order to safeguard the life, health, property and
public welfare of its citizens, the business of roofing construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance and repair is a
matter affecting the public interest, and any person desiring to engage in the business of "roofing", as hereinafter
defined, shall be required to register with the city of Carbondale as herein provided. (Ord. 2002-70)
4-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, phrases and terms shall have the following definitions and meanings:
CITY: The city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois.
CORPORATE LIMITS: The area of land located within the boundaries of the city.
ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL REGULATION: The state agency responsible for regulating professional
services in the state of Illinois, including, but not limited to, services in the roofing trade.
ILLINOIS ROOFING INDUSTRY LICENSING ACT: The law regulating the roofing industry in the state of Illinois.
PERSON: A person, firm or corporation.
ROOFING: Any act or work to apply to any roof deck waterproofing materials including all roofing, damp and
waterproofing materials and/or systems such as shingles, tile, slate, built up roofing, single ply and spray on roofing.
ROOFING LICENSE: A valid and current certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois roofing industry
licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 335/1 et seq., by the Illinois department of professional regulation. (Ord.
2002-70)
4-13-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business or act in the capacity of or hold himself or herself out in any
manner as a roofing business or contractor in the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale unless such person has
registered with the city of Carbondale and holds a valid roofing license issued by Illinois department of professional
regulation pursuant to the Illinois roofing industry licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 335/1 et seq. (Ord. 2002-
70)
4-13-4: REGISTRATION:
Any person who seeks to engage in the business or act in the capacity of or hold himself or herself out in any manner as
a roofing contractor shall first register with the city of Carbondale prior to engaging in said roofing business, service or
act, and shall meet the following requirements:
A. Application: Any person desiring to engage in the business, occupation or service of a roofer in the city of Carbondale
shall first make written application to the building and neighborhood services division for registration. Said registration
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 186/923
shall include information relating to the business of roofing, in the type, manner and form as prescribed by the city of
Carbondale. Information shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Name, address and telephone number of applicant, including business name and address.
2. Number of years that applicant has been performing roofing work or business, and whether business involves
residential, commercial, and/or other roofing work.
3. Proof of a valid and current roofing license issued by the Illinois department of professional regulation in
accordance with the Illinois roofing industry licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 335/9.1 et seq., including
state license number and expiration date.
4. Name, address and telephone number of current insurance agent/company, including type and amount of liability
insurance in effect for roofing business, company or individual applicant.
B. Verification: The city shall make suitable inquiries to ascertain the accuracy of the information contained in the
applicant's application, including confirming the issuance and validity of the roofing license. (Ord. 2002-70)
4-13-5: MAINTAIN VALID LICENSE:
If a person who has registered with the city of Carbondale fails to maintain his/her valid roofing license issued by the
Illinois department of professional regulation, i.e., such license issuspended or revoked, said person shall immediately
cease to perform roofing services or advertise such in the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale, unless and until said
roofing license is reinstated or reissued and proof of such is provided to the city. (Ord. 2002-70)
4-13-6: PENALTY:
No person shall do any work or perform any roofing services as described in this chapter unless said person has
registered with the city of Carbondale and holds a valid and current roofing license in accordance with the Illinois roofing
industry licensing act. Any person who fails or refuses to register with the city prior to performing roofing services for hire
or advertising such in the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale, or fails or refuses to provide proof of a valid roofing
license to the city, or who fails or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine in the
amount of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of imposing a penalty.
(Ord. 2002-70)
Chapter 14
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
4-14-1: MEMBERSHIP OF BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Members: The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a building board of appeals ("board"). The
board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed for the following terms: two (2) for three (3) years, two
(2) for two (2) years, and one for one year. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for three (3) years or until a
successor has been appointed. A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall complete the term of said position.
B. City Staff Support: City staff designated by the city manager shall serve as secretary to the board. Upon request, the
board shall receive additional reasonable and necessary support from the office of the city manager or his designee.
All requests for such support shall be submitted to the city manager's office.
C. Qualifications: Members of the board shall be eighteen (18) years of age or older, shall reside within the city limits of
Carbondale, Illinois, and shall have knowledge or expertise in the housing or building profession.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 187/923
D. Organization: The board shall be organized as follows:
1. Officers: The mayor shall appoint the chairperson of the board each year on or before July 1. Thereafter, the board
shall hold a meeting to select officers of the board. By a majority vote of the board members present during the
meeting, one member shall be selected to serve as vice chairperson for a term of one year. If the chairperson
cannot attend a meeting, the vice chair shall preside over the meeting. In the absence of both the chair and vice
chair, a majority of the members present shall elect a member to act as the presiding chairperson during the
meeting.
2. Board Rules: The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the city clerk a set of rules to govern
its own meetings. Such board rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this code. The rules shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information shall be received.
The rules may be amended from time to time but only upon prior notice to all members that the proposed
amendments shall be considered at a specified meeting.
3. Disqualification Of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any direct or indirect
personal, professional, or financial interest which would impair his unbiased judgment.
4. Compensation Of Members: Appointment to the board is on a voluntary basis and no compensation shall be given
for any membership upon the board. (Ord. 2003-38)
4-14-2: DUTIES:
A. Appeals: The board shall hear appeals from any person aggrieved by an administrative decision made by a city
official or employee, which was based upon a housing or building code, ordinance, rule, regulation, or statute
adopted pursuant to this title.
B. Policy Recommendations: The board shall continually review the provisions of the building and housing codes and
shall from time to time, in an advisory capacity, make recommendations to the city council on issues or matters
relating to this code provisions which pertain to building and housing code matters, their administration and
enforcement.
C. Request Advice: The board may seek the advice and counsel of a representative from the individuals with knowledge
or expertise in areas of concern, including, but not limited to, Jackson County health department, or in the alternative,
a licensed physician, on matters pertaining to the public health. (Ord. 2003-38)
4-14-3: MEETING PROCEDURE:
A. Meetings: The board shall meet in regular session at least once a year to elect officers, and any other time as
provided in its rules. All additional meetings of the board shall commence by the call of its chair, or vice chair in the
absence of the chair, or by at least three (3) members of the board. Written notice of all meetings shall set forth the
time, date, place and purpose of each meeting and shall be sent to all board members by designated city staff. If
matters, other than amendments to the board's bylaws, which were not included in the notice arise for consideration
during such meeting, the matters shall only be considered by the board upon the unanimous affirmative vote of all
members present. The failure to notify any member who is absent shall in no way invalidate the proceedings at such
meeting if a quorum is present.
B. Quorum: At least three (3) members must be present at a meeting in order to take action on matters before the board.
C. Board Action: The board shall act by oral motion or by written resolution by every order of the board and every final
action on any petition or appeal shall be by written resolution.
D. Minutes: A member from city staff assigned by the city manager to support the board shall be designated as secretary
to the board. The secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings and proceedings of the board, showing the vote of
each member upon each question. The secretary shall file a written detailed record of the minutes of each meeting in
the office of the city clerk no later than fourteen (14) days after a meeting.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 188/923
E. Open Hearing: All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the open meetings act1.
F. Location: All meetings of the board shall take place within the city limits of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
G. Vote: Each member of the board, including the chair and vice chair, shall have one vote on all matters. In order to
vote, a member must be in attendance during the proceedings subject to vote. Support staff from the city manager's
office shall not be allowed to vote. An affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at a meeting shall be
required in order to take official board action or for a decision to be final. (Ord. 2003-38)
4-14-4: APPEALS:
A. Appeal Requirements: Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision made by a city official or employee, which
was based upon a housing or building code, ordinance, rule, regulation, or statute adopted pursuant to this title, may
appeal such administrative decision to the board. An application for appeal shall be based on the grounds that the
true intent of section(s) cited as violated or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted by
the city or that a violation of the section was not present in the structure.
B. Procedure For Appeal: In order for an appeal to be properly before the board, the following provisions shall apply:
1. Written Notice: An appeal shall be taken by sending a written notice of appeal to the director of development
services of the city of Carbondale within fourteen (14) days of the date an administrative decision of the city was
submitted to the aggrieved person which has an affect on the property owner's use or control over the property in
question. The notice of appeal shall specify exactly what administrative decision was made, any action taken by
the city, and the grounds for the appeal. Failure to submit a notice of appeal pursuant to the provisions of this
section to the director of development services within fourteen (14) days shall be considered a waiver of any right
to appeal such decision to the board, and the administrative decision shall be considered final.
2. Fee: Each written notice of appeal shall be accompanied by anonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
to cover the administrative costs of such appeal. If the notice does not contain the required fee, the appeal shall be
deemed waived by the aggrieved person and the administrative decision shall be considered final.
3. Hearing Date: Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, the director of development services, or his designee,
shall immediately forward the notice to the chair of the board, who shall set a date not more than thirty (30) days
after receipt of said notice for a hearing before the board. The director of development services, or his designee,
shall notify the person(s) requesting the appeal in writing by personal service or certified mail at least three (3) days
prior to said hearing. Any action taken by the board shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of board
members present during the hearing.
4. Hearing Procedure: At the appeal hearing, the appellant, the appellant's representative, and any person whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the administrative decision
of the city should be modified or reversed. The city shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in support of
the administrative decision and to show cause why the administrative decision should be affirmed. Strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, but only relevant evidence shall be considered.
5. Board's Decision: At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make a determination, based upon evidence
presented at the hearing as to whether the provisions, rules, regulations, and ordinances of this title were correctly
applied in the matter at hand. Any action taken by the board shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of
members present during the hearing. The determination shall either affirm, modify, or reverse the administrative
decision of the city. A copy of the board's decision shall be served on the appellant and the city manager within
fourteen (14) days after it is issued by the board. Service shall be made through first class mail to the appellant's or
appellant's representative's address.
6. Effect Of Decision: All decisions and findings of the board shall be final and immediately subject to review under
the provisions of the administrative review act of the state of Illinois. Any person aggrieved by the board's decision
may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by laws of the state of Illinois.
7. Continuance Of Hearing: Either the appellant or the city may request one continuance of the hearing for good
cause shown. Said request shall be in writing and delivered to the opposing party and the director of development
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 189/923
services at least forty eight (48) hours before the hearing is scheduled to begin. The director of development
services shall reset within thirty (30) days from the date of the continuance.
8. Record Of Proceedings: The proceedings of the hearing held bythe board pursuant to a notice of appeal, including
any findings and decision, shall be recorded, reduced to writing and entered as a public record in the city clerk's
office. Such record shall include a copy of the notice of appeal and the board's decision in connection with the
matter. (Ord. 2003-38)
4-14-5: PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS:
The board shall adopt procedures for hearings held pursuant to this chapter. Said procedures may be amended from
time to time as the board determines. The appellant shall receive a copy of the procedures with the notification of the
hearing date. (Ord. 2003-38)
Chapter 15
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
4-15-1: ADOPTION:
A. International Property Maintenance Code: The ICC international property maintenance code, 2003 edition, is hereby
adopted by reference, except for such portions as are specifically hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this code is to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and
welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises.
Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a
minimum level of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in
existing buildings shall comply with the international building code.
C. Code On File: A copy of the international property maintenance code, 2003 edition, shall be kept on file in the office of
the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated by this chapter as fully as if set out in length herein
and provisions hereof including all deletions or modifications shall be controlling in the maintenance of property within
the jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale. (Ord. 2003-72)
4-15-2: AMENDMENTS:
The international property maintenance code, 2003 edition, is adopted as set forth hereinabove with the following
deletions and modifications:
Any reference to "weeds, grass and/or obnoxious growth" is hereby deleted and shall be governed by the Carbondale
Revised Code.
Under Section 404.3 of the Code, the minimum ceiling height exception: #3 shall be modified to read as follows: "a clear
ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet (2134 min) over not less than 1/2 (50%) of the required minimum floor area...".
All words and phrases indicated in Appendix D of Section 602.2 of the Illinois State Plumbing Code are hereby omitted.
Under Section 602.3, the following phrase "during the period from [date] to [date]" is hereby omitted.
The exception under Section 602.3 is hereby deleted.
(Ord. 2003-72)
4-15-3: CONFLICTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 190/923
Other than the provisions of this chapter, if there is any conflict that exists between the international property
maintenance code and other ordinances within the Carbondale revised code, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to overrule or supersede the provisions under the Carbondale rental
housing maintenance ordinance under the Carbondale revised code. (Ord. 2003-72)
Title 5
BUSINESS AND OCCUPATIONS
Chapter 1
LICENSES, GENERALLY
5-1-1: LICENSES/PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on any business, occupation or pursuit for which a license or
permit is required by the provisions of this title within the jurisdiction of the city, without first obtaining a license or permit
in accordance with the provisions of this title. Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be
made in writing to the city clerk in the absence of a provision to the contrary. (Ord. 98-41)
5-1-2: INVESTIGATION:
Unless specifically provided for otherwise, where a provision of this code provides for an investigation before a license or
permit is issued, the city clerk shall forward the necessary information, within forty eight (48) hours of receipt of the
application, to the current background screening company contracting with the city to initiate an investigation. (Ord.
2013-47)
5-1-3: FEES:
A. Listed With Specific Legislation: Any fee required for any license or permit granted under this chapter shall be set forth
in the section of this title which addresses that particular license or permit.
B. Fees Prorated: Unless otherwise specifically provided, where the license or permit is to be renewed annually and
more than half of the license or permit term has expired, the license or permit may be issued for the remainder of the
term for the sum of one-half (1/2) the annual fee.
C. Fees Due With Application; Nonrefundable: In the absence of a provision to the contrary, all fees for licenses or
permits shall be paid at the time the license or permit application is filed and are nonrefundable.
D. Distribution Of Monies: Except as otherwise provided, all license and permit fees shall become part of the general
fund of the city. (Ord. 98-41)
5-1-4: LICENSE AND PERMIT TERMS:
Unless otherwise specified, all licenses and permits shall be granted for a period of one year to coincide with the city's
fiscal year, being May 1 to April 30. (Ord. 98-41)
5-1-5: TRANSFERABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 191/923
All licenses and permits granted under this title shall be nontransferable unless specified otherwise and all relevant
provisions for transfer have been fulfilled. (Ord. 98-41)
5-1-6: REVOCATION:
A. Failure To Comply: Every license and permit issued by the city shall be issued only upon the condition that the city
shall have the right to revoke such license or permit at any time for failure to comply with the provisions of this title
and this code. The city shall provide the license or permit holder with written notice of its intent to revoke the license
or permit no later than three (3) days prior to the date the revocation takes effect. However, if the city manager
determines that there is a reasonable belief that the holder poses a danger or threat to the health, safety or welfare of
the city, the city manager may take action to immediately revoke the license or permit without prior notice to the
holder.
B. Addition To Other Penalties: Any revocation of any license or permit shall be in addition to any other penalties
provided for in this title.
C. Cause For Revocation: Evidence that the licensee or permittee has violated any ordinance relating to the license or
permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or the premises occupied, shall constitute sufficient cause for
revocation.
D. Nonrefundable: In case of revocation, no part of the license or permit fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 98-41)
5-1-7: USE OF SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC WAYS OR PUBLIC PLACES BY LICENSEE:
A. Use Of Sidewalks, Streets, Etc.: Except as otherwise permitted within this title, no person, entity, business or
corporation shall solicit, engage in or carry on a business, occupation or pursuit upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, city
owned or leased parking lot or area, street, alley, public way or other public place in the city. This section does not
prohibit license or permit holders from using streets, alleys, sidewalks, public or private property pursuant to a license
or permit granted under this chapter or chapter 14 of this title, or for normal means of travel in accordance with the
provisions of title 18 of this code, or the Illinois state statutes, as hereafter amended. (Ord. 2005-69)
5-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, unless specified otherwise within this title. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation continues. All violations of this title are hereby
determined to be a nuisance which may be abated or enjoined by the city. Nothing in this title shall exempt the city or any
person from seeking civil remedies against any person who is in violation of this title. (Ord. 98-41)
Chapter 2
ADVERTISING
5-2-1: ADVERTISING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, print, paint, nail or otherwise affix any handbill, sign, poster, billboard,
advertisement, notice or document of any kind whatsoever, or cause the same to be done, on any curbstone, sidewalk,
street, curb, trash can, or other public property or upon any tree, lamp, telephone pole, or other fixture located thereon.
(Ord. 98-41)
5-2-2: ADVERTISING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 192/923
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, print, paint, nail or otherwise affix any handbill, sign, poster, billboard,
advertisement, notice or document of any kind whatsoever, or cause the same to be done, upon any private structure or
building, unless all City Code provisions regarding signage are obeyed and the person responsible for the affixed
document is the owner, agent or lessee of the private structure or building. (Ord. 98-41)
5-2-3: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF IDENTITY:
When any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement, notice or document of any kind shall be found posted, painted, printed,
nailed or otherwise affixed upon any curbstone, curb, sidewalk, street, or other public property or upon any tree, lamp,
telephone pole, or other fixture located thereon, or upon any private building or structure, the finding of such shall be
prima facie evidence that it was affixed by the person or agency advertised within the document or advertisement. (Ord.
98-41)
5-2-4: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in Sections 5-2-2 or 5-2-3 of this Chapter shall apply to any notice required by law to be posted or to the painting
of street numbers upon curbs within the City when authorized by the City Manager or his designee. (Ord. 98-41)
5-2-5: POSTING OBSCENE MATTER PROHIBITED:
No person, agency or organization shall post or cause to be posted, within this City, so the same can be seen from the
streets, alleys or other public places of the City, any advertisement containing pictures or illustrations of an obscene or
immoral character, or the promotion or suggestion of illegal activity. (Ord. 98-41)
5-2-6: DEFACING POSTED MATERIAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to wilfully and maliciously tear down, mutilate, deface, or render illegible any notice, handbill, poster
or advertisement lawfully posted upon any street, alley or other place within the City. (Ord. 98-41)
5-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation continues. All violations of this Chapter are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may be
abated or enjoined by the City. Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt the City or any person from seeking civil remedies
against any person who is in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
Chapter 3
MOBILE HOME PARKS
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them by
this section, unless specified otherwise:
LICENSEE: Any person licensed to operate and maintain mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter.
MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled, movable dwelling designed and constructed to be towed on its chassis,
comprised of frame on wheels, to be used without a permanent foundation, and distinguishable from other types of
dwellings in that the standards to which it is built include provisions for its mobility on that chassis as a vehicle. Removal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 193/923
of the tongue, wheels, or hitch, or placement of the structure upon a permanent foundation shall not be considered in
determining whether or not a structure is a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot of ground upon which three (3) or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
PARK: A mobile home park.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. (Ord. 98-41)
5-3-2: MOBILE HOME; CONFORMITY TO ZONING:
A mobile home whether temporarily or permanently placed, shall conform to the zoning requirements of title 15 of this
code and shall be the principal building located upon the lot, tract or parcel of land. (Ord. 2013-21)
5-3-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or operate a mobile home park within the zoning limits
of the city, unless such person shall first obtain a license from the manager of building and neighborhood services. No
license shall be issued to operate a mobile home park for fewer than three (3) mobile homes on any one lot, tract or
parcel of land. (Ord. 98-41)
5-3-4: INITIAL APPLICATION; FEE:
A. Information Required: In order to obtain a permit to construct or an original license to operate a mobile home park the
applicant shall file with the manager of building and neighborhood services a written application and plan documents,
and such plan documents shall be prepared by a registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the state,
with registration seal affixed, setting forth:
1. The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names and addresses of the partners if the applicant
is a partnership, or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present and
last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the application;
2. The location and legal description of the land upon which it is proposed to operate and maintain a mobile home
park;
3. The proposed and existing facilities in the mobile home park for water supply, sewage, garbage and waste
disposal, fire protection, and the proposed alterations therein and the maintenance thereof;
4. The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the mobile home park is to be located;
5. The plot plans of the mobile home park, building plans and specifications for existing buildings and facilities, and
the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities, or the proposed alterations in existing facilities, all as
may be required by this chapter and the statutes of the state relating to mobile homes and mobile home parks;
6. A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private, which are available to the mobile home park;
7. Such further information as may be requested by the manager of building and neighborhood services to enable
him to determine if the proposed park will comply with all legal requirements.
B. Affidavit Attached: An affidavit of the applicant(s) as to the truth of the matters contained in the application shall be
attached thereto. (Ord. 2006-53)
C. Fee: For applications that are submitted for the first time for a mobile home license, a onetime, initial application fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be required, unless a fee has been paid pursuant to the site plan application fee in
accordance with subsection 15.6.10.5 of this code. The application fee, once paid to the city, shall not be refunded.
(Ord. 2013-21)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 194/923
5-3-5: ISSUANCE; DENIAL; APPLICATION FOR CHANGES:
A. Investigation; Approval: Upon receipt of an application for a permit to construct a mobile home park or an application
for a license to operate and maintain the same, the manager of building and neighborhood services shall cause the
applicant(s) to be investigated and review the application and the proposed plans and specifications. If the applicant
is of good moral character, and the park is, or the proposed mobile home park will, when constructed or altered in
accordance with the plans and specifications, be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances and statutes, the manager of building and neighborhood services shall approve the application,
and upon completion of the park according to the plans shall issue a permit to construct or an original license.
B. Denial Of Application: If the application for a license is denied, the manager of building and neighborhood services
shall give the reasons therefor in writing to the applicant. If such objections can be corrected, the application of the
applicant may be amended and resubmitted for approval.
C. Inspection Upon Completion: If a permit to construct a park has been issued, the applicant upon completion thereof
shall notify the manager of building and neighborhood services. The manager of building and neighborhood services
shall have the park inspected. If completed in accordance with the accepted application, the manager of building and
neighborhood services shall issue an original license.
D. Changes; Fee: No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage or waste
disposal, and no change in the plot plan shall be made without first making a written application to the manager of
building and neighborhood services and receiving a written permit therefrom. Such application shall be made in the
way and manner hereinbefore set forth, except that a fee amounting to twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany
each application for a permit to increase the size of the park. No application fee shall be required to accompany an
application for a permit to alter a mobile home park where such alteration involves only a reduction in the number of
mobile home spaces to a number less than that for which such park is currently licensed. (Ord. 98-41)
5-3-6: DURATION:
A. Validity: Mobile home construction permits are valid for one year from the date of issue, but may be extended by the
manager of building and neighborhood services.
B. Expiration Date: Each mobile home park license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on May 1 each year, but
may be renewed on a yearly basis pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-3-7: TRANSFERABILITY:
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable, unless prior written consent of the manager of building
and neighborhood services is received; provided, however, that the city may not withhold such consent where the
provisions of this chapter have been met. For the transfer of a mobile home park license, the fee shall be twelve dollars
($12.00). (Ord. 2006-53)
5-3-8: RENEWAL:
A. Certificate Issued: Upon application in writing by a licensee for renewal of a license, and a determination by the
manager of building and neighborhood services that the applicant is accurate and truthful, and the proposed mobile
home park is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, the manager of
building and neighborhood services shall issue a certificate renewing such license for an additional one year period.
(Ord. 2006-53)
5-3-9: SPACE REQUIREMENTS AND SETBACKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 195/923
No mobile home park shall be constructed or established which does not conform to the following space requirements
and setbacks:
A. Distance From Road: No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') from any city street or public road.
However, this provision does not apply to private drives within the park.
B. Distance Between Mobile Homes: All mobile homes shall be located within the parks so that a minimum space of
fifteen feet (15') is maintained between mobile homes, together with additions and appurtenances and from other
permanent structures or buildings.
C. Distance From Property Lines: No mobile home shall be located closer than twelve feet (12') from the side and/or rear
lot line of any park, except that where parks are adjoining, this distance may be reduced to seven and one-half feet
(71/2') so long as the fifteen foot (15') spacing as required by this section from other mobile homes or buildings is
maintained. (Ord. 2006-53)
5-3-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; NOTICE:
If the licensee fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any building provisions as defined in this code, or any
provisions under this title pertaining to mobile homes, the licensee will be subject to a suspension or revocation of the
license by the manager of building and neighborhood services. Upon notification that a violation has occurred, the
manager of building and neighborhood services shall issue a notice to the licensee by first class mail stating the specific
provisions, regulations or ordinances that have been violated. From the date of the notice, the licensee shall have a
maximum of seven (7) working days from the date which the notice was mailed to abate the violation and/or comply with
the provisions of this code. Upon written request by the licensee, the manager of building and neighborhood services
may extend the time period provided for under this section only upon determining that an extension of time is necessary
and reasonable in order for the licensee to avoid a substantial hardship. If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of the notice, within the time specified or such extended period of time, the manager of building and
neighborhood services may suspend or revoke such license by sending written notice of the suspension or revocation by
first class mail no less than three (3) days prior to the effective date of the revocation or suspension. (Ord. 2006-53)
5-3-11: DISPLAY:
Each permit to construct, license to operate, and permit to make alterations therein pursuant to this chapter shall be
prominently displayed in the office of the park for which issued. (Ord. 2006-53)
5-3-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation continues. All violations of this chapter are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may be
abated or enjoined by the city. Nothing in this chapter shall exempt the city or any person from seeking civil remedies
against any person who is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-53)
Chapter 4
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator-occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to
the public with no more than five (5) guest rooms for rent. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 196/923
breakfast establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
GUEST ROOM: A sleeping room intended to serve no more than two (2) transient guests per night.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Department of Health of the County of Jackson.
LICENSEE: Any person licensed to operate and maintain a bed and breakfast establishment under the provisions of this
Chapter.
OPERATOR: The owner of the bed and breakfast establishment, or the owner's agent, who is required by this Chapter to
reside in the bed and breakfast establishment, or on contiguous property.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, corporation or combination of individuals acting for a
common purpose. (Ord. 98-41)
5-4-2: RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL USE DISTINGUISHED:
A. Housing Regulations Applicable: For purposes of the housing regulations of the City, a bed and breakfast
establishment shall be considered a residential dwelling use and shall conform to all the requirements of a residential
dwelling use as set forth in said housing regulations.
B. Handicapped-Accessibility Standards: For purposes ofhandicapped-accessibility determination, a bed and breakfast
shall be considered a change in use from private residence to public accommodation and the establishment shall
conform to all applicable handicapped-accessibility standards.
C. State Tax Requirements: For purposes of the Illinois Department of Revenue, a bed and breakfast establishment shall
be considered a hotel and shall be subject to all requirements of the Illinois Department of Revenue including
payment of all applicable hotel taxes.
D. City Room Tax: For purposes of the City's hotel/motel privilege tax, a guest room within a bed and breakfast
establishment shall be considered a "hotel or motel room" and shall be subject to said tax pursuant to Title 7 Chapter
9 of this Code. (Ord. 98-41; 1998 Code)
5-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly or privately advertise, maintain or operate a bed and breakfast
establishment within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a license from the Manager of Building and
Neighborhood Services as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-4-4: LICENSE EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFERAL:
A. Validity: A license is valid from the date issued until the following September 1. No license shall be granted for a
period exceeding one year.
B. Reinspection: Licensed bed and breakfast establishments shall be reinspected by the Manager of Building and
Neighborhood Services, Fire Department, and the Jackson County Health Department for compliance with this
Chapter prior to renewal of license.
C. Nontransferable: A license shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not constitute property. Nothing in this
Chapter shall be construed to grant a right to transfer or accept the transfer of any licenses whenever there is a
change in interest or ownership. No bed and breakfast license shall be transferred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 197/923
D. Continuation Of Business: The death of a licensee, termination of a partnership, dissolution of a corporation, or
bankruptcy of a licensee shall cause the license to cease to exist except that the administrator or executor of the
estate or trustee in bankruptcy may continue to operate the business for six (6) months upon order of the appropriate
court; provided, however, that the trustee, administrator or executor of an estate shall meet the qualifications set forth
in this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-4-5: FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Application for a bed and breakfast license shall be filed with the Manager of Building and Neighborhood Services on
forms provided by the Building and Neighborhood Services Division. The application shall contain the following:
A. The name, business address, business telephone number, residence address and residence telephone number of the
proposed licensee, operator and property owner. If the proposed licensee, operator or property owner is a
corporation, the officer's name and residence addresses shall be furnished.
B. The address and legal description of the proposed bed and breakfast establishment.
C. A drawing of the site showing:
1. The location of all existing and proposed structures in relation to the property lines, and
2. The location of all existing and proposed parking areas and driveways in relation to the property lines and
structures.
D. Existing and proposed floor plans of all structures on the property.
E. Any other information as may be required to determine compliance with this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-4-6: APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE:
A. Departmental Review: The Manager of Building and Neighborhood Services shall, within five (5) days of the receipt of
the application, refer copies of the application to other relevant City departments and the Health Department. The
City departments shall within ten (10) days review the application and, if required, inspect the premises proposed to
be operated as a bed and breakfast establishment and make written recommendations to the Manager of Building
and Neighborhood Services concerning compliance with the codes and laws that they administer. In particular, the
departmental responsibilities shall be as follows:
1. The Planning Office shall make a determination as to whether a site plan is necessary and shall determine
applicable zoning requirements.
2. The Building and Neighborhood Services Division shall determine what, if any, modifications are needed to meet
the local housing regulations and all applicable handicapped-accessibility standards.
3. The Fire Department shall determine what, if any, modifications are needed to meet all local requirements,
theState Fire Marshal's requirements for one- and two-family dwellings and all additional requirements in the State
Bed and Breakfast Act1.
4. The Police Department shall verify all the information pertaining to the proposed licensee, operator and property
owner. Providing false information will result in denial of the license.
5. The Health Department shall determine what, if any, modifications are needed to meet all local standards and all
additional requirements in the State Bed and Breakfast Act.
B. Notification To Applicant: Within five (5) days of receipt of the recommendations of the aforementioned departments,
the manager of building and neighborhood services shall notify the applicant of those determinations and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 198/923
requirements. (Ord. 98-41)
5-4-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Requirements: The manager of building and neighborhood services shall issue a bed and breakfast license when it is
determined that all of the following requirements have been met:
1. A zoning certificate or site plan for the bed and breakfast establishment has been approved.
2. All applicable health department licenses and approvals have been issued.
3. All applicable state and local fire standards have been complied with including:
a. The state fire marshal's requirements for one- and two-family dwellings.
b. Additional standards as required by the Illinois bed and breakfast act.
c. All other applicable local fire prevention standards.
4. All other applicable standards, including, but not limited to, building construction, plumbing, electrical and
handicapped accessibility standards.
5. The licensee shall maintain minimum liability insurance coverage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
for each individual and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence. The licensee shall submit a
certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of the license. Failure to maintain minimum liability insurance
shall result in automatic revocation of the bed and breakfast license.
6. The licensee shall submit a certificate of registration from the Illinois department of revenue for payment of any
applicable state hotel and retail sales taxes.
7. The licensee shall have registered with the city's finance department for payment of all applicable municipal fees or
taxes, including the hotel/motel and food/alcoholic beverage privilege tax.
B. License Displayed: Once the license is issued, the licensee shall display the license at all times in a location easily
viewed by guests and prospective guests of the bed and breakfast establishment. (Ord. 98-41)
5-4-8: APPEAL FROM DETERMINATION AND/OR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Request For Hearing: If an applicant believes any determination and/or requirement made by any department of the
city with regard to the issuance of a bed and breakfast license is erroneous, the applicant may request a hearing
before the city manager to determine the propriety of any such determination and/or requirement.
B. Notification Required: To request a hearing, the applicant must notify the city manager within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of the determinations and requirements from the manager of building and neighborhood services as provided
in subsection 5-4-7A of this chapter. The city manager will, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the request for the
hearing, schedule said hearing. (Ord. 98-41)
C. Decision By City Manager: Both the applicant and the city department involved may present testimony and evidence.
The city manager can limit but not prohibit evidence and testimony. The city manager shall make his decision
regarding the propriety of the determination or recommendation based on the applicable industry standards
(international, ANSI, etc.) and with due regard for the health and safety of the public. (Ord. 98-41; Ord. 2003-72)
5-4-9: VIOLATION; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Temporary Suspension: Bed and breakfast licenses may be suspended temporarily by the manager of building and
neighborhood services for failure by the licensee or any employee of the licensee to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, or in any case where the licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized employee of the city or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 199/923
county to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Upon notification by the city's finance director, the manager
of building and neighborhood services may temporarily suspend a bed and breakfast license if the licensee fails to
pay any applicable municipal tax or fee, including, but not limited to, the hotel/motel and food/alcoholic beverage
privilege tax.
B. Notice Of Violation; Timely Response: Whenever a licensee or any employee of the licensee has failed to comply with
the requirements of this Chapter, the licensee shall be provided written notice of the violation. Such notice shall cite
the violation, specify the corrective action to be taken, state that such violation shall be corrected within ten (10) days
or the bed and breakfast license shall be suspended, and shall inform the licensee of the right to request a hearing
before the City Manager, as hereinabove provided. Such notice may be personally served on the licensee or shall be
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such service by mail shall be deemed to have been served at the time
of posting thereof. Any notice given under the provisions of this Section shall operate as and shall become a final
order without further action being necessary upon the expiration of ten (10) days from and after the effective date of
service of such notice, unless, within such ten (10) day period, the licensee files a written request for a hearing before
the City Manager. A properly filed written request shall suspend the effective date of the suspension until the date of
the City Manager's decision. The City Manager shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request.
The City Manager shall render written decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord.
98-41)
5-4-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Repeated Offenses: Bed and breakfast licenses may be revoked by the Manager of Building and Neighborhood
Services for continuing violations or repeated failures by the licensee or any employee of the licensee to comply with
the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Notice Of Revocation Date; Request For Hearing: Whenever a licensee or any employee of the licensee continuously
fails to comply with, or repeatedly violates the requirements of this Chapter, the licensee shall be provided written
notice of the effective date of the revocation. Such notice shall cite the existing violation(s) (if any), specify the
corrective action(s) to be taken, state the date that such violation(s) shall be corrected, and shall inform the licensee
of the right to request a hearing before the City Manager, as hereinabove provided. Such notice may be personally
served on the licensee or shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such service by mail shall be
deemed to have been served at the time of posting thereof. The Manager of Building and Neighborhood Services
shall notify the licensee at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of the revocation. If requested, the City
Manager shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request. The City Manager shall render a
written decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing.
C. Liability Insurance Required: Bed and breakfast licenses shall be automatically revoked if a licensee fails to maintain
the minimum amount of liability insurance. If a license is automatically revoked due to failure of the licensee to
maintain the minimum liability insurance, no prior notice of said revocation shall be required; however, if such failure
becomes known to the Manager of Building and Neighborhood Services, he shall provide written confirmation of the
revocation within ten (10) days after his knowledge of the failure to maintain insurance.
D. Surrender License: In any case where a bed and breakfast license is revoked, the licensee shall immediately
surrender such license to the Manager of Building and Neighborhood Services. (Ord. 98-41)
5-4-11: POWER TO ACT IN EMERGENCIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, whenever unsanitary, unsafe, or other conditions are found in the
operation of the bed and breakfast establishment which constitute a substantial and immediate hazard to the public
health and safety, the Manager of Building and Neighborhood Services or the Fire Chief may, without warning, notice or
hearing, issue a written notice to the licensee citing the condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, specifying
the time period within which such action shall be taken, and if necessary, stating that any or all bed and breakfast
operations are to be discontinued immediately. The licensee to whom such an order is issued shall immediately comply
therewith, but may request in writing, within ten (10) days, a hearing before the City Manager to abate such order. If
requested, the City Manager shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request. The City Manager
shall render a written decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. 98-41)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 200/923
5-4-12: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules and regulations authorized by this Chapter shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of any
tax due. Each day of any violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 98-41)
Footnote 1: 50 ILCS 820/1 et seq.
Chapter 5
TEMPORARY OR MOBILE SALES, VENDING, OR SOLICITATION
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
BONA FIDE NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any corporation organized under the General Not for Profit
Corporation Act of 1986, 805 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/101.01 or any association having attained section 501(c)(3),
(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (19), or other charitable status under the Internal Revenue Code. Not for profit corporations include
those organized for the following purposes:
A. Charitable;
B. Benevolent;
C. Educational;
D. Civic;
E. Patriotic or veterans' organization;
F. Political;
G. Religious;
H. Social;
I. Literary;
J. Athletic;
K. Professional, commercial, industrial or trade association;
L. Agricultural or horticultural association.
BUILDING AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DIVISION (BNS): That division of the City government, formerly known
as the Code Enforcement Division, created by title 1, chapter 7 of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 201/923
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined
together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of
the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
CITY: The City of Carbondale, in the County of Jackson, in the State of Illinois.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Carbondale.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Carbondale.
CITY MANAGER: The City Manager of the City of Carbondale.
COMMUNITY ORIENTED EVENT: A special event organized by a bona fide not for profit organization and designed for
and open to all members of the community. The focus of the event is to celebrate a holiday, historical event, or to
promote the community at large. Community oriented events may include, but are not limited to: Lights Fantastic,
Noontime Concerts, Arts-in-Celebration, Founders' Day, Pancake Days, Farmers' Market, and other festivals or
celebrations.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction
in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in
their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: That department of the City government created by title 1, chapter 10 of this Code.
FOOD SERVICE ORDINANCE: That ordinance first adopted on June 12, 1965, by the County Board of Jackson County,
Illinois, with all revisions and amendments made subsequent thereto.
FOOD SERVICE SANITATION CODE: The regulations promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health and
found at part 750 of title 77 of the Illinois Administrative Code, with all revisions and amendments made thereto.
FOOD TRUCK VENDOR: A person engaged in the business of selling food or nonalcoholic beverages from a selfcontained
motorized vehicle or a self-contained enclosed trailer with valid license plates and registration. A food truck
vendor does not include an ice cream truck operator.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to
both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government.
GOODS, WARES OR MERCHANDISE: Any tangible personal property which is normally used for personal, family or
household purposes.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Jackson County Health Department.
ICE CREAM TRUCK: Every motor vehicle in which ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or frozen desserts of any kind are
carried for purposes of retail sale from the motor vehicle on the City streets.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the
conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
LOTTERY: Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance among persons who have
paid or promised consideration for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery,
raffle, gift, sale or some other name.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local
license fees, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no
personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, joint stock association, or firm, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 202/923
POLICE DEPARTMENT: That department of City government created by title 1, chapter 9 of this Code.
PRIVATE PROPERTY OPERATOR: Any vendor, transient merchant, solicitor, or pushcart operation, who operates from
an approved and properly zoned privately owned property with written permission from the owner.
PUSHCART: A nonself-propelled vehicle selling and/or serving food products for use or consumption of the purchaser
and not for resale.
PUSHCART OPERATION: The business of selling and/or serving food products from a pushcart.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter, in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or
by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the
winning chance; and
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of
chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the
winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of religious
worship.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes from one residential unit or business to another for the purpose of: a) seeking to
obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, or services of any kind for any kind
of consideration; b) seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, or other type of
publication; or c) seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or
benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; or d) selling goods, products or
merchandise.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise in
this City and who, for the purpose of conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any
kind, vacant lot, or parcel of property. However, this chapter does not apply to any person selling goods, wares or
merchandise which are raised, produced or manufactured by him, to any person selling vegetables, fruit or perishable
farm products at an established City market, to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property owned
by him or upon which he resides, or to any person operating a stand or booth at a trade show, exposition, convention or
similar event.
VEND: The act of selling goods, wares, merchandise or food items, including items that are to be delivered at a future
date.
VENDING STAND: Any table, platform, deck, pushcart, or other structure used for the display and/or sale of food,
beverages, goods, or merchandise of any kind.
VENDOR: Any person, group or organization who operates a vending stand during a community oriented event.
VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are
individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote
the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit.
(Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on any business, occupation or pursuit for which a license or
permit is required by the provisions of this chapter within the jurisdiction of the City, without first obtaining a license or
permit. (Ord. 2017-55)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 203/923
5-5-3: INVESTIGATION:
The applicant shall pay all fees associated with conducting a background investigation, the fees for which are
nonrefundable. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-4: FEES AND PRORATION:
In the absence of a provision to the contrary, all fees for licenses or permits shall be paid at the time the license or permit
application is filed and are nonrefundable. Licenses issued after July 1 will be prorated at fifty percent (50%) of the
standard license fee.
Commercial/for-profit
sales:
Private property
operator
$100.00 Operate only from properly zoned private property with written
permission of the owner
Ice cream truck $100.00 for the first
truck
$50.00 for each additional truck
Commercial solicitor
No annual permit Daily fee $10.00 per day, per solicitor (maximum of 30 days)
Food truck/trailer $100.00 Operate only from specially designated public property sites (maps
available)
Non-profit
sales/events:
Raffles $200.00 annually $20.00 per single raffle event
Community oriented
event
$10.00 Complete vendor listing must be provided to City Clerk's Office 2
days in advance
(Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-5: TERM AND APPLICATION DUE DATE:
All annual licenses and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be granted for a period of one calendar year, being
January 1 to December 31; permits/licenses issued for raffles, solicitation, and community oriented events shall be
issued for the specific dates identified in the application. Renewal applications shall be due no less than fifteen (15)
business days prior to the start of the license year. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-6: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Applications for all new licenses and permits governed by this chapter shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office on the
designated form with all required documentation and fees no less than ten (10) business days in advance of the
proposed activity. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-7: TRANSFERABILITY:
All licenses and permits granted under this chapter shall be nontransferable. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-8: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 204/923
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, unless specified otherwise within this title. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation continues. All violations of this title are hereby
determined to be a nuisance which may be abated or enjoined by the City. Nothing in this title shall exempt the City or
any person from seeking civil remedies against any person who is in violation of this title. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-9: USE OF SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC WAYS OR PUBLIC PLACES BY LICENSEE:
No person shall sell or attempt to sell any commodity by means of vending such commodity upon any sidewalk, street,
roadway, alley or private parking lot/area which is open to the public except under the following circumstances and upon
obtaining a permit from the City of Carbondale:
A. When the person, group or organization has obtained a permit in accordance with chapter 10 of this title;
B. When the person, group or organization has obtained a permit to use sidewalks or other public property in accordance
with section 17-1-5 of this Code;
C. When the person, group or organization sells commodities in connection with and/or during a "community oriented
event" as defined in this chapter;
D. When the person or business is duly licensed and is operating in accordance with the rules and regulations
established for food trucks/trailer or ice cream trucks. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-10: GRANTING OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A license or permit to conduct business under this chapter may be granted to a corporation, partnership, or firm. Such a
corporation, partnership, or firm may use more than one agent or employee in conducting business within the City under
the same license. If a corporation, partnership, or firm wishes to have more than one agent or employee conducting
business simultaneously, multiple licenses may be required. Revocation of a license or permit issued to an agent or
employee of a corporation, partnership, or firm, may result in the revocation of said business' ability to hold future
licenses in the City for a minimum of five (5) years. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-11: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
If any of the following factors have been committed, the application for the license shall be denied or a currently issued
license or permit shall be revoked by the City Clerk, or the City Clerk's authorized representative:
A. Any of the material statements made in the application are false;
B. The applicant/licensee/permittee has been charged with or received a disposition of guilt either through supervision,
probation, or conviction for any offense involving theft, burglary, fraud, bribery, assault, or moral turpitude under the
laws of the State of Illinois, of any other state, or of the United States within five (5) years of the date of application;
C. The applicant/licensee/permittee or their employer has had a previously issued license under this or a similar chapter
revoked by the City or by any other municipality or has been convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter
within five (5) years of the date of the application;
D. The applicant has not submitted all required documents at the time of application;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 205/923
E. The applicant has outstanding debt with the City;
F. Applicant/licensee/permittee has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in the course of carrying out
his business;
G. Applicant/licensee/permittee has conducted business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public; or
H. The City has received no less than three (3) verifiable complaints from citizens regarding misleading or deceptive
tactics during a licensing period.
Notice: Immediately upon such denial or revocation, written notice shall be given by the City Clerk or the City Clerk's
authorized representative to the applicant, licensee, or permittee, in person, or by first class mail addressed to the
applicant's address set forth in the license application. Such notice shall state the action taken and the reasons
supporting such action. Immediately upon the delivery or mailing of such notice, any currently issued permit or
license shall become null and void. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-12: APPEAL OF LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
A. Notice Of Appeal: Any person whose application has been denied or license revoked under this chapter may appeal
to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk's Office no later than seven (7) business
days after the final action of denying or revoking the license has been initiated. Such appeal shall contain a written
statement setting forth the grounds of the appeal. The appealing party shall submit whatever documentation it
believes is relevant along with the written notice of appeal for the City Manager's consideration.
B. Decision Of City Manager Final: The City Manager shall grant or deny the appeal, with or without an evidentiary
hearing, no later than ten (10) business days from the date the City Clerk receives notice of the appeal. The decision
of the City Manager is final and the person aggrieved shall comply with the provisions of the Illinois Administrative
Review Act.
C. Reapplication Waiting Period: If a license or permit is denied either by the City Clerk, or the City Manager if an appeal
is filed, no application for a merchant or vendor license shall be considered by the City for at least six (6) months from
the date the denial is effective. In the event that a license or permit is revoked, application from an individual,
partnership, business, or corporation will be considered by the City for five (5) years from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-13: LICENSE TO BE CARRIED ON PERSON AND EXHIBITED UPON REQUEST:
Licenses or permits issued to a vendor conducting any type of mobile sale or soliciting orders for future sales shall be on
the vendor's person at all times while conducting business in this City. It shall also be the duty of every vendor to exhibit
such permit and allow any information contained thereon to be documented when requested to do so by any law
enforcement officer, any City official, or at the request of any citizen of this City. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-14: ENFORCEMENT DUTIES:
The Carbondale Police Department and Building and Neighborhood Services Division are authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to serve summonses and other processes for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-15: FOOD SALES AND SANITATION:
A. The Jackson County Health Department should be contacted about acquiring a health permit prior to conducting sales
of food or beverages. A copy of the permit issued to the vendor should be attached to the application before being
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 206/923
submitted to the City Clerk's Office. If the Jackson County Health Department suspends or revokes the food service
establishment permit, then a license hereunder shall be suspended until the Jackson County Health Department
reinstates the food service establishment permit.
B. Vendors must provide for the sanitary collection of all refuse, litter, and garbage generated by their patrons who
purchase items or use the service and remove all such waste materials from the location before departing. (Ord.
2017-55)
5-5-16: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The City Manager is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter as
are deemed necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-17: REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO SOLICITORS (COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL):
A. Soliciting: No person shall solicit on any premises if the premises is posted against solicitation by means of a notice
prominently displayed, on which is printed the following legend, or words of similar meaning: NO SOLICITORS, NO
PEDDLERS, or NO TRESPASSING. It shall be the duty of each solicitor to first examine any premises for the abovereferenced
notice and, if present, to immediately and peaceably depart. Any peddler/solicitor who has gained
entrance to or who is on any premises, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
B. Hours: Soliciting shall not occur except between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
Monday through Saturday and between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Sundays, and
State or national holidays.
C. False, Deceptive Or Misleading Statements: A solicitor shall not misrepresent or make false, deceptive, or misleading
statements concerning the quality, quantity, or character of any merchandise offered for sale, his/her identity, or the
identity of the organization which he or she represents.
D. Complaints: If a verbal or written complaint is filed alleging that a solicitor has violated any provision of this chapter,
the City Clerk shall promptly send a copy of the written complaint to the solicitor, together with a notice that an
investigation will be made as to the truth of the complaint. The solicitor shall be invited to present exculpatory
evidence to the City Clerk's Office. If the City Clerk, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint to be
supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint shall be certified.
E. Non-Commercial Solicitation Are Exempt From Licensing Requirements: Licensing requirements for door-to-door
solicitation shall not apply to government employees when on official business, persons soliciting on behalf of a bona
fide not-for-profit organization, persons soliciting on behalf of a candidate for political office or on behalf of a political
party, and a person of the age sixteen (16) and under, who is participating in fundraising programs for, or sponsored
by, a public or private elementary or high school or bona fide children's organization including, without limitation, Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, or youth sports. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-18: REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO THE OPERATION OF ICE CREAM TRUCKS:
A. A person shall vend only when the ice cream truck is lawfully stopped.
B. A person shall vend only from the side of the truck away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or
side of street.
C. A person shall not vend to a person standing in the roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 207/923
D. An ice cream truck shall not stop on the left side of a one-way street to vend.
E. The driver of the ice cream truck shall not place vehicle in reverse in order to make or attempt a sale.
F. Music, chimes, or amplified sounds while vending are permitted between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. only.
G. The operator of an ice cream truck may drive through the streets of the City for the purposes of vending only between
the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Thereafter, vending may occur only from a
single parked location through ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
H. Except for those streets identified below, licensed ice cream truck vendors may vend from public streets, in
accordance with all other pertinent regulations. No sales shall be made from the roadway along the following streets:
1. Walnut Street between Oakland Avenue and Giant City Road;
2. Main Street;
3. Mill Street;
4. Grand Avenue;
5. Illinois Avenue north of Saluki Boulevard;
6. University Avenue; and
7. Giant City Road. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-19: REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO PRIVATE PROPERTY OPERATOR:
A. Surety Bond Required: The applicant shall file with the City Clerk's Office the application, along with a surety bond
issued by an insurance company having authority to do business in Illinois or a cash deposit. The amount of the bond
or deposit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) of the wholesale value of the merchandise that the applicant shall offer
for sale; however, the amount of the bond or deposit shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor
more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
B. Fee And License Exemptions: The following persons or groups shall not be required to obtain a license or are exempt
from the license fee under this chapter:
1. Exempt from fees:
a. Any person selling goods, wares, or merchandise which are raised, produced, or manufactured by him, including
farmers, artisans, or other persons wishing to peddle or to hawk farm products, orchard products, or articles of
their own make or labor, including milk, butter, chickens, or other articles of their own make or ingenuity;
b. Any person selling vegetables, fruit, or perishable farm products which were grown, raised, or produced by him
at an established City market;
c. Any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property owned by him upon which he resides;
d. Any person conducting sales of natural trees, wreaths, or greenery during a holiday season;
e. All such persons or classes of persons exempted by State Statute.
2. Exempt from license requirements:
a. Youth Organizations: Members of the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts, and other such youth organizations which are
sponsored by the elementary and secondary schools in this City who sell merchandise on behalf of such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 208/923
organizations.
b. Nonprofit Organizations: Sales, consumer shows, or exhibitions of collectibles conducted or sponsored by
governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal, educational, religious, or benevolent organizations which have been in
active and continuous existence for at least one year prior to the holding of the sale, or which are incorporated as
a not-for-profit corporation by the State, unless done for the financial gain of the individual, corporation, or other
business entity so engaged in such activity.
c. Garage And Yard Sales: Garage and yard sales.
d. Concessions: Sales incidental to sporting events, concerts, or performances of plays, circuses, or similar
presentations where said sales are conducted by the person producing the event.
e. Trade Shows: Individuals or business enterprises participating in a consumer show or exhibition of collectibles
for which a sponsor's license has been issued, where they are listed on the sponsor's license application.
f. Political Solicitations: Persons soliciting on behalf of a candidate for public office or on behalf of a political party.
g. Delivery Carriers: Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products, or bakery products to regular
customers on established routes. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-20: REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO COMMUNITY ORIENTED EVENT VENDORS:
A community oriented event is a special event organized by a bona fide not-for-profit organization and designed for and
open to all members of the community where vending will occur. The focus of the event is to celebrate a holiday,
historical event, or to promote the community at large. Community oriented events may include, but are not limited to:
Lights Fantastic, Noontime Concerts, Founders' Day, Pancake Days, Farmers' Market, and other festivals or
celebrations.
A. Standards For Participation Of Individual Vendors During A Community Oriented Event: The City Manager may
prohibit any individual, group, or organization, who is listed as a participating vendor on the community oriented event
vending application from participating as a vendor during the event if such individual, group, or organization is
determined to be unfit by the City Manager.
B. Supplemental Documentation To Be Submitted With Application:
1. A signed letter or notification from the organization's local chair or president which denotes the organization's
approval of said event.
2. The name of the community oriented event, along with a statement describing the event, including the extent and
manner in which City property will be used for such event.
3. A plan, diagram and/or design and description of the location and setup of the community oriented event, in
addition to the location of vending stands and waste disposal containers.
4. Evidence of liability insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the State of Illinois. The certificate shall insure the applicant and/or the organization sponsoring the
community oriented event in the amount of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit coverage.
The certificate shall also name the City as an additional insured.
5. A list of the type of commodities, goods, wares, or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the vendors during
the event.
6. The names and addresses of any individuals or business enterprises expected to participate in supplying or selling
the commodities under this application, which shall be provided to the City Clerk no less than two (2) days prior to
the event. If an individual, vendor, or business enterprise is not listed on the above application in the time period
herein, then they shall not be allowed to vend or sell commodities, goods, wares, or merchandise during the event.
7. The permit fee shall be paid at the time the application is submitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 209/923
C. Denial: An application shall be denied by the City Manager if the applicant fails to provide information required under
this section in the submitted application; if any of the material statements made in the application are false; or if the
use for which the application is being sought does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to,
Building, Health, Fire, or Electrical Codes, or any local, State, or Federal law.
D. Standards For Issuing Community Oriented Event Vending Permit: Within five (5) business days of receipt of a
complete and accurate application and permit fee, the City Manager shall determine whether the application is in
accordance with applicable provisions of this Code, and whether the applicant and/or sponsoring organization (and
its officer(s)) is fit to hold a vending permit in the City.
The City Manager shall consider the following factors to determine the fitness of the applicant and/or sponsoring
organization (and its officer(s)):
1. Whether any of the material statements made in the application are false or incomplete;
2. Whether the applicant or sponsoring organization's officer(s) have previously held a community oriented event
permit which event resulted in significant citizen complaints, litter, or required excessive City resources.
3. Whether the applicant or sponsoring organization's officer(s) has been convicted of violating any provisions of this
title within the last five (5) years from the date of application;
4. Whether the applicant has failed to submit all of the requirements of the application process under this chapter;
5. Whether the applicant or sponsoring organization's officer(s) has an outstanding debt with the City.
E. Regulation Of Operations:
1. Permit Dates And Times: Upon approval by the City Manager, a vending permit issued in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter shall remain and be in effect for a period of time not to exceed forty eight (48) hours
and shall automatically expire thereafter. The City Manager may grant a one-time extension of time for no more
than twenty four (24) hours upon request.
2. Vending Tables: No vending table shall be placed on any street, sidewalk, or right-of-way, other than at the
locations authorized under the permit. Vending tables shall be placed to allow for handicapped access to sidewalks
and walkways.
3. Loudspeaker Or Sound Amplifying Device: No holder of a vending permit, its representatives, or any person acting
under the holder's permit, shall shout, make an outcry, blow any horn, ring any bell, or use any other sound device
including, but not limited to, any loudspeaker or sound amplifying device during the authorized event, unless
otherwise authorized by the City Manager.
4. Food Safety: Any holder of a vendor permit or any person acting under the holder's permit who displays, offers for
sale, or sells a food product shall comply with all provisions of the Jackson County Health Department, food service
ordinance, and the Food Service Sanitation Code.
5. Advertising: During an event, each authorized vendor listed under the application shall advertise the items being
vended in a manner that does not cause any interference or unnecessary distraction to motorists.
6. Refuse Container: Any holder of a vending permit, and any person acting under the holder's permit, who sells food
products shall have reasonable access to a garbage or refuse container (minimum size of 20 gallons) which shall
be durable, easily cleanable, and possess a tightfitting lid. The garbage or refuse container must be made available
for use by the customers of the vendors.
7. Compliance With Regulations: All holders of a vending permit and any person acting under the holder's permit
shall comply with all applicable regulations set forth by the Carbondale Police Department, Building and
Neighborhood Services Division and the Carbondale Fire Department.
8. Discrimination: No holder of a vending permit, nor person, group, or organization acting under the holder's permit,
shall discriminate against any person or group during the community oriented event.
9. Code Compliance: All community oriented event vending permit holders, and any persons acting under their
permit, shall obey, abide by, and comply with all local, State, and Federal laws, in addition to all provisions of this
Code. (Ord. 2017-55)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 210/923
5-5-21: REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO THE OPERATION OF RAFFLES:
A. Raffle: A form of lottery conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter, in which:
1. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or
by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the
winning chance; and
2. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of
chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the
winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
B. Criteria For Holding Raffles And Issuing A Permit:
1. Raffles licenses may only be issued to a bona fide nonprofit religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal,
educational, or veterans' organization which has been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years
immediately before making application for a license and which has had during that entire five (5) year period a
bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objective. No person except a bona fide member of the
sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. No person may receive any
remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. No person under the age of
eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances.
2. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct that game.
3. The applicant must specify the areas within the City in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period
during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the location or
locations at which winning chances will be determined.
4. The license application must contain a sworn statement of the presiding officer that the organization is qualified to
hold a license under the provisions of this chapter.
5. A license shall be valid only for the specified number of raffles identified in the application or, in the event of an
annual license, any number of raffles during a period not to exceed one year. The maximum period for which
chances may be issued or sold for an individual raffle is three (3) months.
6. The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle
shall not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). The maximum price which may be charged for
each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
C. Fidelity Bond For Raffles Manager: All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in a sum equal to the
aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise to be awarded in the raffle with a solvent surety bond company
licensed to do business in the State of Illinois, in favor of the sponsoring licensee, conditioned upon his honesty and
performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing
authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. The City Manager may waive this bond requirement by
including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization provided that a unanimous vote of the members
of the license organization has approved a waiver of the raffles manager's bond.
D. Records Of Raffles:
1. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep the records of its gross receipts, expenses,
and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records
indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
2. Gross receipts from the operation of a raffle program shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization,
including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to
license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 211/923
Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses, and net proceeds from the operations of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
3. Records shall be preserved for three (3) years and the organization shall make available the records relating to the
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 2017-55)
5-5-22: REGULATIONS SPECIFIC TO THE OPERATION OF FOOD TRUCKS:
A food truck vendor is a person engaged in the business of selling food or nonalcoholic beverages from a self-contained
motorized vehicle or a self-contained enclosed trailer with valid license plates and registration. A food truck vendor does
not include an ice cream truck operator.
A. Display: No person shall operate as a food truck vendor without having first secured a valid annual license for each
vehicle to be operated within the City, and to be displayed in or on each vehicle to be used in the operation of any
such business.
B. Amplified Sound And Utilities: Food truck vendors shall not be permitted to utilize amplified sound. Food truck vendors
are not permitted to utilize City water, electric, or other utility to conduct business. When operating as a private
property operator, electricity may be utilized with the permission of the property owner.
C. Vending Stations: Sales occurring on public property by food truck vendors are permitted only from designated food
truck vendor areas. Maps of these designated places of sales are available in the City Clerk's Office and on the City's
website. The issuance of an annual food truck vendor license does not in any way reserve or designate space in the
food truck vendor areas. Availability will be on a first come, first serve basis. Food truck vendors may operate from
private property in the same manner as provided for private property operators. If food truck vendors desire to sell on
property owned by Southern Illinois University, they must first obtain written permission from the university. Sales may
also be conducted from a Carbondale Park District park, but only when written authorization from the Carbondale
Park District is submitted to the City Clerk's Office.
D. Vehicle Appearance And Maintenance: Vehicles utilized for food truck vending shall be kept in good mechanical and
structural condition. Vehicles shall have a clean exterior and interior and shall be equipped with signs to alert traffic to
proceed with caution past the truck while it is serving customers. Each vehicle shall have the company name affixed
to it in a professional, workmanlike manner and in letters that are a minimum of six inches (6") high. The company
name shall be affixed to each side and rear of the vehicle. Building and Neighborhood Services and the Carbondale
Fire Department will conduct annual inspections of food truck vendor vehicles to ensure compliance with health and
safety issues.
E. Disposal Of Fats, Oil, And Grease: Food truck operators must provide the addresses of the businesses or facilities at
which any fat, oil or grease generated during the operation of the food truck or food trailer is disposed of, including
the contact information for the individual or business responsible for the operation of each such business or facility.
Any change in the businesses or facilities used for the disposal of such fat, oil and grease shall be reported to the
City Clerk in writing by the food truck vendor within three (3) business days of the first use of the new business or
facility. No oil may be disposed of on public property or in the sewer system.
F. Liability Insurance Requirements: Any application for a food truck vendor license requiring a vehicle shall be
accompanied by proof of liability insurance in a minimum sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and issued by
companies licensed to do business in the State of Illinois. Such insurance certificate shall contain an agreement
signed by the insurance company that, prior to modification, cancellation or termination of the subject policy, written
notice shall be sent to the City by said insurance company.
G. Health And Safety Standards:
1. No tents, tables, chairs, or other displays shall be placed at the designated vending area. Signage shall be limited
to signs permanently or magnetically affixed to the vehicle. One A-frame sign shall also be permitted. This sign
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 212/923
must be within ten feet (10') of the vehicle and shall be limited to six (6) square feet per side (2 sides permitted).
Food truck vendors are not permitted to utilize City water, electric, or other utility to conduct business.
2. A motorized food truck shall not sit idle while serving food unless its operation is essential to producing the product
sold.
3. Food truck vendors shall only permit sales from the curb side of the vehicle when parked on a City street.
4. No service area for the operation of a food truck or trailer shall block, obstruct, or interfere with vehicular, bicycle,
or pedestrian traffic flow. Food truck vendors must maintain a minimum four foot (4') wide clear walkway on all
public sidewalks.
5. Food truck vendors may operate at one location for a minimum of thirty (30) minutes and a maximum of four (4)
consecutive hours and may not return to that same location for a minimum of two (2) hours after leaving.
H. Safe Driver Requirement: The City of Carbondale may revoke any food truck vendor's license if the driver of said
vehicle is convicted of a moving traffic law violation occurring while operating a food truck or trailer under a license
issued hereunder in the City of Carbondale. (Ord. 2017-55)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them by
this section, unless specified otherwise:
AMUSEMENT ARCADE: Any building or separate room within a building which is devoted to and wherein are operated
two (2) or more automatic amusement devices for profit.
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any mechanical amusement device or machine, the operation of which is
governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token, except mechanical music devices. The term shall include, but is
not limited to, pinball machines, coin or token operated electronic games, coin or token operated pool tables, coin or
token operated moving picture devices and coin or token operated rides.
BOWLING ALLEYS: Any establishment wherein there is operated one or more lanes for participating in the sport of
bowling.
CARNIVAL: Any aggregation of attractions for profit, whether shows, acts, games, vending devices or amusement
devices, whether conducted under one or more managements or independently, which are temporarily set up or
conducted in a public place or upon any private premises accessible to the public, with or without admission fee to the
aggregation as a whole.
MECHANICAL MUSIC DEVICE: Any mechanical device which produces or reproduces music, the operation of which is
governed and controlled by the deposit of a coin or token therein, including, but not limited to, jukeboxes and coin
operated or token operated pianos or musical instruments.
MISCELLANEOUS AMUSEMENT: Any performance, exhibition or entertainment of, or by, any circus; menagerie;
hippodrome; pony, dog, monkey, bird or other animal show; artificial curiosities; paintings or statuary; feats of jugglery;
sleight of hand, magic and the like; or to set up, keep or maintain any swing or merry-go-round, exhibition of rope or wire
walking or dancing, puppets, wax figures, or any other similar public exhibition, entertainment, show or amusement
whatsoever, given for gain, within this City.
MOTION PICTURE THEATER: Any establishment which exhibits motion pictures, moving pictures or cinema for profit,
except by means of an automatic amusement device.
POOL HALL: Any establishment operated, wherein there is kept a billiard or pool table or tables, whether or not a fee is
charged for the use of the table or tables; provided, however, that for the purposes of this definition, the keeping of a coin
operated or token operated pool table shall not render the establishment a pool hall.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 213/923
TRUCK STOP: "Licensed truck stop establishment" means a facility: a) that is at least a 3-acre facility with a
convenience store, b) with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor vehicles, c) that sells at retail more than
ten thousand (10,000) gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month, and d) with parking spaces for commercial motor
vehicles. "Commercial motor vehicles" has the same meaning as defined in section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
The requirement of item c of this definition may be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at
least ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Video gaming terminals as defined by Illinois law, and licensed by the Gaming Board,
pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq. (Ord. 2018-21)
5-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. License Required: No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in any other capacity, shall
operate or permit to be operated an amusement arcade, bowling alley, carnival, motion picture theater or pool hall
without having first obtained a license to do so.
B. License Displayed: No person shall install, keep, maintain, use, or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or
use of a mechanical musical device or an automatic amusement device not contained in an amusement arcade,
unless there is displayed in the establishment a license for the current calendar year posted pursuant to this chapter.
C. License To Be Current: No person shall deliver or install or cause to be delivered or installed an automatic
amusement device or a mechanical music device within this City for use by any person from the operation thereof
unless there is a license therefor for the current calendar year.
D. Gambling Devices Prohibited: Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any
gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in
any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State, with the exception of gaming
terminals allowed under subsection E of this section.
E. Gaming Terminals: Gaming as allowed under the Illinois Video Gaming Act, may be allowed to those holders of a valid
liquor license under title 2 of this Code or truck stops as defined by section 5-6-1 of this chapter, which also hold a
State gaming license under the Illinois Video Gaming Act and have purchased a license from the City of Carbondale
and are in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The number of video gaming licenses shall be limited
to one hundred (100) video gaming terminals for establishments licensed under title 2 of this Code and fifteen (15)
video gaming terminals for truck stops as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-21)
5-6-3: FEES:
The applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay to the Manager of Building and Neighborhood Services, prior to
filing an application, the following nonrefundable license fee:
Amusement arcade $100.00
Automatic amusement device, per machine 25.00
Bowling alley, per lane or, 15.00
if more than 10 lanes 150.00
Carnival, per week or fraction thereof 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 214/923
Gaming terminals, per machine 25.00
Mechanical music device, per machine 25.00
Miscellaneous amusement, per day 25.00
Motion picture theater:
Fewer than 450 seats 200.00
450 to 850 seats 300.00
850 to 1,250 seats 500.00
More than 1,250 seats 800.00
Pool halls, per table or, 15.00
if more than 10 tables, whichever is less 150.00
(Ord. 98-41; Ord. 2012-34)
5-6-4: APPLICATION:
An application for any license required by this chapter shall be made in writing to the Manager of Building and
Neighborhood Services which shall set forth the following:
A. The name of the individual, partnership, corporation or association applying for the license.
B. The residence, phone number and driver's license number of the applicant or partner; or, if a corporation or
association, the residence, phone number and driver's license number or the principal officers.
C. The location for which the license is requested.
D. The type of license requested.
E. The seating capacity and price of admission to be charged.
F. Whether the applicant, his partners or the principal officers of the corporation or association have been convicted of a
criminal offense or ordinance violation (other than traffic or parking offenses) in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of
such convictions with date and prosecuting jurisdiction. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-5: INVESTIGATION:
A. Investigation Of Records: Within five (5) business days of receipt of a completed license application, the manager of
building and neighborhood services shall cause copies thereof to be sent to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 215/923
1. Criminal Background: The chief of police or the chief of police's designee who shall cause an investigation to be
made as to the applicant's criminal record, if any, and compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances of the
state and the city.
2. Financial Liability: The finance director or the finance director's designee who shall examine the city's records to
determine if the applicant owes any outstanding fee, fine or other amount to the city. No license shall be issued to
any applicant who has unpaid fines, fees, or other financial obligations outstanding with the city. Any applicant
having unpaid fines or other fees owed the city for any purpose shall bring those accounts current prior to the
issuance of a license.
B. Additional Information: Applicants shall cooperate with such investigation and furnish such additional information as
may be reasonably requested in furtherance of said investigation. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Within five (5) business days of receiving the reports from the departments referred to in section 5-6-5 of this chapter, the
manager of building and neighborhood services shall issue the license required under this chapter, unless it is
determined that:
A. Fraudulent Statements: Any of the material statements made in the application are false;
B. Disposition Of Guilt: The applicant has been charged with or received a disposition of guilt either through supervision,
probation or conviction for any offense involving theft, burglary, fraud, bribery or moral turpitude under the laws of this
state, of any other state, or of the United States within five (5) years of the date of application;
C. Revocation Of Previous License: The applicant or his employer has had a previously issued license under this or a
similar chapter revoked by the city or by any other municipality within five (5) years of the date of the application;
D. Previous Violation: The applicant or his employer has been convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter within
five (5) years of the date of application;
E. Outstanding Fee Or Fine: The applicant or his employer owes any outstanding fee, fine or other amount to the city; or
F. Noncompliance With Applicable Laws: The operation of the amusement as proposed would not comply with all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, building, health, zoning and fire codes of this city. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-7: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
If the manager of building and neighborhood services determines that any of the conditions in section 5-6-6 of this
chapter occurred, the city clerk shall deny the issuance of the license and shall give written notification of such denial to
the applicant in person or by first class mail. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Reasons For Revocation: A license issued hereunder shall be revoked by the manager of building and neighborhood
services if the holder of the license:
1. Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state, or the ordinances of this city.
2. Has knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant information on any application for
license or in investigation into any such license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 216/923
B. Notice Of Revocation: The manager of building and neighborhood services shall provide the license holder with a
written notice of the revocation in person, or by first class mail addressed to the applicant's address set forth in the
license application, stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. Immediately upon the delivery or
mailing of such notice, the license shall become null and void. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-9: APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Appeal: Any person denied a license under this chapter or whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked
may appeal to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the manager of building and neighborhood
services.
B. Grounds Of Appeal: An appeal must be filed with the manager of building and neighborhood services within ten (10)
business days after revocation or denial of the license, and shall contain a written statement setting forth the grounds
of the appeal. The appealing party shall submit whatever documentation it desires to have the city manager consider
with the written appeal.
C. Decision Of Manager Final: The written decision of the city manager shall be made available to the appealing party
not later than ten (10) business days after the manager of building and neighborhood services receives the appeal.
Any decision of the city manager is final. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-10: LICENSE POSTING:
A. License Displayed: Every person licensed under this chapter shall cause, at all times during the period for which it is
effective, such license to be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the principal entrance to the premises for which
the license is issued.
B. Affixed To Device Or Glass: Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter for a mechanical music device
or an automatic amusement device shall be either affixed to the device for which it has been issued in a prominent
location on the front of the machine or affixed to a pane of glass which is prominently displayed in a conspicuous
place upon the premises for which the license is issued. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-11: LICENSE TERM:
No license shall be granted for longer than a one year period, and an annual license shall expire on the last day of the
fiscal year of the city, being April 30. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any fee for any license issued
under this chapter for any reason whatever. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-12: ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be assigned and transferred to another person upon the payment of a fee
of one dollar ($1.00) to the manager of building and neighborhood services for making such assignment and transfer.
(Ord. 98-41)
5-6-13: CONDITION OF PREMISES:
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep the premises of the public amusement clean and in a proper hygienic, sanitary
condition. City officials shall have the right to periodically inspect and examine such premises during a reasonable hour
in order to ascertain whether the licensee is complying with the provisions of this chapter and all other city ordinances.
(Ord. 98-41)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 217/923
5-6-14: PRESERVATION OF ORDER:
It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain order at the amusement for which the license was granted. If necessary,
the city manager may authorize, upon application of the licensee, the deployment of a sufficient number of police to
preserve order at the amusement. The licensee shall bear all costs and compensation for such law enforcement
services. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-15: RIOTOUS OR DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No person shall conduct himself at any exhibition or entertainment provided for in this chapter in a riotous and disorderly
manner. If the person giving any such entertainment shall fail to preserve order, or if any agent, servant or employee
thereof shall conduct himself in a riotous or disorderly manner, the City Manager may, in his discretion, immediately
revoke the license granted to such person. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-16: INDECENT OR LEWD PLAYS:
No licensee shall allow or permit the act or performance of any "improper exhibition" as defined in section 5-11-2 of this
title, any indecent or lewd plays, exhibitions, entertainments, or any other amusement. (Ord. 98-41)
5-6-17: GAMBLING DEVICES NOT PERMITTED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any
mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be
contrary to any future laws of the State, with the exception of video gaming terminals allowed under section 5-6-2 of
this chapter.
B. The City specifically allows, within the corporate limits of the City of Carbondale, video gaming terminals licensed by
the State of Illinois pursuant to the Video Gaming Act1 for those who purchase licenses through the City of
Carbondale pursuant to section 5-6-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-21)
5-6-18: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation continues. All violations of this chapter are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may be
abated or enjoined by the City. Nothing in this chapter shall exempt the City or any person from seeking civil remedies
against any person who is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
Chapter 7
PAWNBROKERS
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
this Section, unless specified otherwise:
APPLICANT: The person or persons required to sign the application for the license required by this Chapter.
CHANGE OF FORM OF OWNERSHIP: Change from individual ownership to partnership or corporate ownership,
partnership to individual or corporate ownership, or corporate ownership to individual ownership or partnership.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 218/923
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP (CORPORATE): The transfer of five percent (5%) or more of the stock of the corporation,
except where the stock is publicly traded.
LICENSEE: That person named in the license required by this Chapter includes all officers, partners, agents or
employees.
PAWNBROKER: Any person engaged in the business of receiving personal property in pledge or as security for money
or other things advanced to the owner or pledger.
THEFT-PRONE PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any of the following types of personal property:
A. Bicycles;
B. Cameras, video and photographic equipment;
C. Citizen band radios, cellular telephones;
D. Computers and related equipment, including but not limited to disc drives, modems, monitors, printers, and
computer game equipment;
E. Firearms;
F. Gold, silver, platinum, coins, and jewelry;
G. Microwave ovens;
H. Audio components, including but not limited to record, tape or compact disc players, receivers, and speakers;
I. Televisions, video cassette recorders (VCR);
J. Tools. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or corporation shall conduct or operate the business of a pawnbroker without having first obtained a license
as herein provided. However, any person who is an auctioneer, junk dealer, licensed itinerant merchant and/or person
buying and selling personal property on behalf of a civic, service, charitable or other not for profit corporation or
organization is exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-3: APPLICATION; FEE; INVESTIGATION:
A. Contents: Application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made with the city clerk. The application shall include the
applicant's name; permanent business address (which shall include a street address); residential address of the
principal, and if the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the names and residential addresses of its officers or
partners; the location at which the applicant intends to do business; whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime, other than traffic offenses; and any other information required by the city council. Failure to complete the
application shall result in denial of the license.
B. Fee: A nonrefundable license application fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) shall accompany the application in the
form of cash, certified check, or money order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 219/923
C. Investigation: The background screening company currently contracting with the city shall cause an investigation to be
made as to the applicant's criminal record. All costs associated with such investigation shall be paid in full by the
applicant at the time the application is submitted to the city clerk. Any costs associated with the background
investigation are nonrefundable.
D. Violations: No license shall be issued or renewed to any person or corporation that has violated this chapter or a
similar ordinance or state statute. No license shall be issued or renewed to any applicant if any partner or owner of
twenty percent (20%) or more shares of the applicant has violated this chapter or a similar ordinance or state statute.
No license shall be granted if the investigation reveals that false information has been provided on the application. No
license shall be issued to any person, corporation, partnership, or association other than the actual proprietor of the
business. (Ord. 2014-29)
5-7-4: NONUSE; TRANSFER:
A. Null And Void: In the event a licensee ceases to conduct business for a consecutive period of ninety (90) days, the
license shall automatically become null and void upon the expiration of the ninety (90) day period.
B. Nontransferable: Licenses shall not be transferable to any other person, corporation, partnership or association. (Ord.
98-41)
5-7-5: ACTS OF EMPLOYEES:
The licensee shall be responsible for any and all acts of his employees which violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
98-41)
5-7-6: RATE OF PERCENTAGE ALLOWED:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to charge or collect a greater benefit or percentage upon money advanced, and
for the use and forbearance thereof, than the rate of three percent (3%) per month. Nothing in this section shall be
construed so as to conflict with the law pertaining to usury and the person receiving money so advanced may hold such
monies to pay any fees in addition to interest as herein provided. Each pawnbroker, when making a loan under this
section, must disclose in printed form on the pawn contract the following information to the persons receiving the loan:
A. The amount of money advanced, which must be designated as the amount financed;
B. The maturity date of the pawn, which must be at least thirty (30) days after the date of the pawn;
C. The total pawn interest and service charge payable on the maturity date, which must be designated as the finance
charge;
D. The total of payments that must be paid to redeem the pledged goods on the maturity date, which must be designated
as the total of payments; and
E. The annual percentage rate, computed according to the regulations adopted by the board of governors of the federal
reserve system under the federal truth in lending act.
Each pawnbroker may contract for and receive a monthly finance charge including interest and fees not to exceed
one-fifth (1/5) of the loan amount, as set forth herein, for appraising, investigating title, storing and insuring the
collateral, closing the loan, making daily reports to local law enforcement officers including enhanced computerized
reporting, complying with regulatory requirements, and for other expenses and losses of every nature whatsoever
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 220/923
and for all other services. Such fees, when made and collected, shall not be deemed interest for any purpose of law.
(Ord. 2000-08)
5-7-7: NOTICE:
Every licensee shall, at the time of making any advancement or loan, deliver to the person pledging any property a
memorandum or note signed by him containing an accurate account and description, in plain English, of all the goods,
articles or other things pawned or pledged; the amount of money, value or thing loaned thereon; the time of pledging the
same; the rate of interest to be paid on each loan; and the name and residence of the person making such pawn or
pledge. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-8: RECORD; IDENTIFICATION:
A. Record Book: Every licensee shall keep a standard record book that has been approved by the Police Department in
which the following shall be recorded in ink: the date and time of each and every loan or taking of a pledge; an
accurate account and description, in plain English, of all the goods, articles, and other things pawned or pledged; the
amount of money, value or thing loaned thereon; the time of pledging the same; the rate of interest to be paid on the
loan; and the name and residence of the person making such pawn or pledge. Each entry shall include the serial
number or identification number of items received which are required to bear such number.
B. Identification Of Articles: Every licensee shall also record in his book an accurate account and description, in plain
English, of all goods, articles and other things purchased or received for the purpose of resale or loan collateral by
the licensee from any source, not in the course of a pledge or loan; the time of such purchase or receipt; and the
name and address of the person or business which sold or delivered such goods, articles or other things to the
licensee.
C. Entry Changes: No entry in the record book shall be erased, mutilated or changed.
D. Identification Required: Every licensee shall require two (2) forms of identification to be shown him by each person
pledging or pawning any goods, articles or other things to the pawnbroker. One of the two (2) forms of identification
shall be a photograph identification and include his residential address. The acceptable forms of identification are
limited to the following: driver's license, State photo identification card, firearm owner's identification card, utility bill,
employee or student identification card, credit card, or civic, union or professional association membership card.
(Ord. 98-41)
5-7-9: INSPECTION:
The book, as well as any article or other thing of value so pawned or pledged, shall at all reasonable times be open to
inspection by members of the Police Department. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-10: DAILY REPORT:
It shall be the duty of the licensee to prepare and deliver to the Police Department on each day before the hour of twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon, a legible and exact copy from the standard record book that lists all personal property and other
valuable things received on deposit or purchased during the preceding day, together with the exact time when received
or purchased, and a description of the person or persons by whom the items were left in pledge, or from whom the same
were purchased. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-11: PROPERTY FROM MINOR:
No licensee shall take or receive any pawn or pledge for any advancement or loan, any property of any kind from any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 221/923
minor who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or the ownership of which is in, or claimed by, any such minor, or which
may be in possession or under control of any such minor. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-12: PROPERTY FROM INTOXICATED PERSON OR THIEF:
No licensee shall purchase or take any article in pawn or pledge from any person appearing to be intoxicated, nor from
any person known to have been convicted of theft, burglary, robbery or retail theft. A law enforcement officer may provide
such criminal conviction information to a licensee, upon request. When any person is found to be the owner of stolen
property which has been pawned, such property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the
money advanced by the licensee thereon or any costs or charges of any kind which the licensee may have placed upon
the same. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-13: SALE OF PROPERTY:
No personal property received on deposit or pledge, or purchased by any such licensee, shall be sold or permitted to be
redeemed, or removed from the place of business of such licensee for the space of twenty four (24) hours after the
delivery of the copy and statement required by Section 5-7-10 of this Chapter to be delivered to the Police Department.
No personal property pawned or pledged shall be sold or disposed of by any such licensee within one year from the time
when the pawner or pledger shall make default in the payment of interest on the money so advanced by the licensee,
unless by the written consent of the pawner or pledger. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-14: WEAPONS; STORE SECURITY:
A. Unlawful Weapons: No licensee shall buy, sell, exchange, trade, barter, or receive as a pledge or pawn any blackjack,
sawed-off shotgun, metal knuckles, switchblade, weapon capable of firing eight (8) or more shots with a single
function of the firing device, grenade, explosive bullet or other ammunition or weapons the possession of which is
declared to be unlawful by the State or the City.
B. Display Prohibited:
1. No licensee shall have on display in a window or have any items listed in subsection A of this Section for sale.
2. No licensee shall have any weapons lawful for sale on display in a window.
C. Alarm Required: No licensee shall have for sale any weapons lawful for sale without having the area of the licensee's
place of business where such weapons are kept protected by a silent alarm, in working condition, which is capable of
being manually triggered during business hours and automatically triggered when forcible entry into the business is
attempted when the business is closed.
D. Firearm Owner's Identification Card: No licensee shall sell, buy, barter or exchange a firearm for sale without proof
that the individual has a current, valid firearm owner's identification card issued by the State. (Ord. 98-41)
5-7-15: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; REQUEST FOR HEARING:
The City Manager may revoke any license granted hereunder for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter, upon notice
provided to the licensee within three (3) days prior to effective date of revocation. The licensee may request an
opportunity to be heard before such revocation by submitting a written request for a hearing to the City Manager within
three (3) days from the date he received notice of the revocation. Any decision made by the City Manager is final. (Ord.
98-41)
5-7-16: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 222/923
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day that a violation continues. All violations of this Chapter are hereby determined to be a nuisance
which may be abated or enjoined by the City. Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt the City or any person from seeking
civil remedies against any person who is in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
Chapter 8
PUSHCART VENDORS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-55)
Chapter 9
CONSUMER INSTALLMENT LOAN BUSINESS
5-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to limit the number of installment loan businesses operating in the city in order
to minimize the detrimental effects that certain installment loan business practices have on individuals and families.
Nothing in this chapter is meant to conflict with the payday loan reform act, 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 122/1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2013-49)
5-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or
phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
CONSUMER INSTALLMENT LOAN BUSINESS: Any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership, engaged in
the business or service of, and providing facilities for consumers to receive cash or evidence of cash in exchange for a
loan agreement to be repaid in one or more installments over a period of weeks, months or years, which agreement is
either collateralized or not, and for which any service charge is made or interest received, including, but not limited to,
loans collateralized by personal check, payroll check, wage assignment or personal property title, or collateralized with
the promise to relinquish possession to any personal property upon default, or engaged in any one or more of the
foregoing businesses; except, that this definition does not include: state or national banks, or savings banks, the United
States postal service, Postal Telegraph Company or Western Union Telegraph Company, credit unions, pawnshops, or
any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at
retail who, in the course of such business and only as an incident thereto, receives checks, drafts, money orders or other
evidences of money, or receives or issues a contractual agreement to receive money or evidence of money on an
installment basis in exchange for tangible goods sold or rented on the premises, with or without using such tangible
goods as collateral or as a repossessible item upon default. (Ord. 2013-49)
5-9-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall conduct or operate a consumer installment loan business in
violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter and without having first obtained a license as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 2013-49)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 223/923
5-9-4: STATE LICENSING REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
Any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership applying for or holding a consumer installment loan business
license, pursuant to this chapter, must also hold a license to operate from the State of Illinois, whenever such license is
required pursuant to the Consumer Installment Loan Act, 205 Illinois Compiled Statutes 670/1 et seq., or the Payday
Loan Reform Act, 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 122/1-1 et seq., or pursuant to any other licensing provision of the State
of Illinois and must show that such State license is current and active. In addition, any person, firm, association,
corporation or partnership operating a consumer installment loan business within the City must at all times be in full
compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the State of Illinois pertaining to the operation of a consumer
installment loan business. Failure to achieve and maintain full compliance with all laws, rules and regulations shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-49)
5-9-5: LICENSE APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE; FEE:
A. Application for a consumer installment loan business license shall be made to the City Clerk and shall state therein
the name of the applicant, the place of business and the number of employees intended to be engaged. The
application shall identify the State of Illinois license number and shall be accompanied by good and sufficient proof of
compliance with all State of Illinois licensing laws pertaining to a consumer installment loan business. The City Clerk
or designee may request additional information from the applicant.
B. The annual fee for the license required by this chapter shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2018-28)
5-9-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on April 30 of the year following issuance or renewal. (Ord. 2013-49)
5-9-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES; RESTRICTIONS:
A. The number of licenses for a consumer installment loan business shall not exceed one per each five thousand (5,000)
inhabitants residing in the City as established by the most recent U.S. census, which number is five (5) as of the 2010
census, and, except for those authorized in subsection B of this section, shall be the maximum number until the 2020
census.
B. Those consumer installment loan businesses operating as of August 2018, may continue to renew their annual
license, but if any such business closes for more than thirty (30) days, its license shall terminate and any new,
nonrenewal business applications after August 14, 2018, shall comply with subsections A and B of this section. (Ord.
2018-28)
5-9-8: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No consumer installment loan business may be open between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. (Ord. 2013-49)
5-9-9: TRANSFER:
A. Any license required and described in this chapter shall be a purely personal privilege, not to exceed its designated
term. It shall not constitute property and shall not be transferable, except as provided in this chapter; and
B. No person shall be authorized to do business or act under such license but the person to whom it is granted, or at any
other place than specified therein, nor shall any license authorize any person to act under it at more than one place of
business, or at any other time than is therein specified; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 224/923
C. In the case of the sale of a licensed consumer installment loan business by the current licensee, said current licensee
may request that the purchasing person or entity succeed as licensee. Upon application of the purchaser, a
consumer installment loan business license may be issued by the City if the applicant meets all the criteria applicable
to a new licensee and subject to the conditions imposed on the licensee to whom it was originally issued. The
purchaser shall pay the required fees for the duration of the license term prior to being issued any license. Nothing
contained in this section shall serve to increase the number of licenses as restricted in this chapter; or
D. In the case of the death of any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter, before the term of the license
shall have expired, the surviving partner, in the case of a partnership, or the legal representative may continue to act
under the license for the unexpired term thereof subject to the conditions imposed on the licensee to whom it was
originally issued. Nothing contained in this section shall serve to increase the number of licenses as restricted in this
chapter. (Ord. 2013-49)
5-9-10: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A. No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation licensed to conduct a consumer installment loan business
shall accept items in pawn or for bailment in exchange for cash or other evidence of cash nor shall a consumer
installment loan business accept evidence of title or ownership in real property in exchange for cash or evidence of
title or ownership in real property in exchange for cash or evidence of cash.
B. No person shall alter, deface, forge, counterfeit, or duplicate any consumer installment loan business license issued
by the City. (Ord. 2013-49)
5-9-11: PENALTY:
A. Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every
day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
B. Proceedings to enforce violations of this chapter may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to
the provisions of this Code providing for administrative adjudication of Code violations or by any other means
provided by law. (Ord. 2013-49)
Chapter 10
PERMITS FOR THE USE OF CITY-OWNED EVENT VENUES
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, unless otherwise provided herein:
BONA FIDE NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any corporation organized under the General Not-For-Profit
Corporation Act of 1986, 805 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/101.01 or any association having attained section 501(c)(3),
(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (19), or other charitable status under the Internal Revenue Code. Not-for-profit corporations include
those organized for the following purposes:
A. Charitable;
B. Benevolent;
C. Educational;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 225/923
D. Civic;
E. Patriotic or veterans organization;
F. Political;
G. Religious;
H. Social;
I. Literary;
J. Athletic;
K. Professional, commercial, industrial or trade association;
L. Agricultural or horticultural association.
BUILDING AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DIVISION (BNS): That division of the City government created by title 1,
chapter 7 of this Code.
CITY: The City of Carbondale, in the Counties of Jackson and Williamson, in the State of Illinois.
CITY-OWNED EVENT VENUES: Includes the Town Square and Washington Street venues as described in this section.
COMMUNITY-ORIENTED EVENT: A special event organized by a bona fide not-for-profit organization and designed for
and open to all members of the community. The primary focus of the event is to celebrate a holiday, historical event, or to
promote the community at large. Community-oriented events may include but are not limited to: Lights Fantastic,
concerts, arts and cultural events, Founders' Day, Pancake Days, Farmers' Market, and other festivals.
FACILITIES AND PROPERTY MANAGER: The person or employment position entitled and authorized by the City
Manager to manage the use, maintenance and operations of the City of Carbondale's facilities and properties.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: That division of the City government created by title 1, chapter 10 of this Code.
FOOD SERVICE ORDINANCE: The ordinance first adopted on June 12, 1961, by the County Board of Jackson County,
Illinois, and all subsequent revisions and amendments.
FOOD SERVICE SANITATION CODE: The regulations issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health and found at
part 750 of title 77 of the Illinois Administrative Code, and all subsequent revisions and amendments.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Jackson County Health Department.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, joint stock association, or firm, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The department of City government created by title 1, chapter 9 of this Code.
TOWN SQUARE: The area surrounded by Illinois Avenue on the west, Jackson Street on the north, Washington Street
on the east and Monroe Street on the south, but does not include any sidewalk or right-of-way abutting said streets.
VENDING STAND: Any table, platform, deck, pushcart, or other structure used for the display and/or sale of food,
beverages, goods, or merchandise of any kind.
WASHINGTON STREET VENUE: The area bordered by Canadian National Railway on the west, Main Street on the
north, Washington Street to the east and Walnut Street to the south. (Ord. 2018-27)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 226/923
5-10-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Not-For-Profit Organization: No person shall display, offer for sale, sell or deliver in exchange for consideration of any
type any food, beverages, goods or merchandise in or on a City-owned event venue unless such person is a "bona
fide not-for-profit organization", as defined in this chapter, and has obtained a City-owned event venue permit from
the City Manager.
B. Display, Offer For Sale: A bona fide not-for-profit organization or government entity may display, offer for sale, sell or
deliver in exchange for consideration of any type, food, beverages, goods or merchandise in or on the City-owned
event venue upon obtaining a City-owned event venue permit from the City Manager, issued pursuant to the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
C. Transferable: If a bona fide not-for-profit organization receives a permit pursuant to this chapter, it may transfer the
rights granted under such permit to a person who does not qualify as a not-for-profit organization, provided such
person complies with the requirements of this section, subsections 5-10-3C1 through C11 and section 5-10-5 of this
chapter.
D. Community-Oriented Events: No City-owned event venue permit shall be issued by the City Manager unless the event
to be held upon a City-owned event venue is to promote or participate in community-oriented events.
E. Date And Time: Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall state the date and time in which it will be in effect and
shall remain in effect for up to forty eight (48) hours and shall expire automatically thereafter. (Ord. 2018-27)
5-10-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. First-Come, First-Serve Basis: In order for a bona fide not-for-profit organization to request the use of City-owned
event venues, an application shall be submitted to the Civic Center Manager in accordance with the requirements of
this section no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date for which the use of the City-owned event venue is
sought. City-owned event venue permits shall not be issued until an application has been approved by the City
Manager. Applications shall be considered on a first-come, first-serve basis for the purpose of reserving any Cityowned
event venue.
B. Signature Required: Each application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, all partners
shall sign the application. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by at least two (2) officers of
the corporation and shall be verified by the secretary of the corporation. If the applicant is a trust, the trustee shall
sign the application and name all beneficiaries of the trust. The information recited in the application shall be under
oath or affirmation as to each individual signing the application.
C. Contents: Each application shall include the following information and statements:
1. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant in the case of an individual.
2. Name, address, and telephone number of any person, other than the applicant, who is authorized by the applicant
to operate the vending stand.
3. In the case of a partnership, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of a majority of the partners.
4. In the case of a corporation, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of two (2) of the directors.
5. In the case of a trust, the name, address, and telephone number of the trustee, and the declaration of trust if the
trustee is an individual. If the trustee is a partnership, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of each
partner and the declaration of trust. If the trustee is a corporation, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers
of all officers, directors, and managers.
6. The name or title of the community-oriented event, along with a statement describing the community-oriented
event, including the extent and manner in which the City-owned event venue will be used for such event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 227/923
7. A statement describing in detail items to be displayed or offered for sale by the applicant during the communityoriented
event.
8. If food products are to be sold by the applicant, a copy of a valid and current permit issued by the Jackson County
Health Department.
9. A copy of the State Retailer's Occupation Tax certificate.
10. A plan, diagram, photo, or description of the vending stand detailing its size, construction, location, and type of
waste disposal containers.
11. A letter approving the vending stand from Building and Neighborhood Services.
12. Evidence of liability insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the State. The certificate shall insure the applicant, owner, lessee, and licensee if any, at a minimum
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit coverage. This certificate shall name the City as an
additional insured.
13. Permit fee as required by this chapter.
14. Date(s) for which the permit will be in effect (i.e., date and time of the event).
15. If the applicant is seeking permission for the use of amplified sound.
16. If the applicant is seeking permission for the sale of alcohol upon the City-owned event venue.
17. If the applicant is requesting a fair days designation which would allow the public to bring their own alcohol to the
event in non-glass containers.
D. Cause For Denial Of Application: An application shall be denied by the City Manager if the applicant fails to provide
information required within this section in the submitted application; if any of the material statements made in the
application are false; if the use for which the application is being sought does not comply with all applicable laws,
including, but not limited to Building, Health or Fire Codes, or any local, State or Federal law, or the City Manager
determines that the use the application is being sought is not in the best interest of the City. (Ord. 2018-27)
5-10-4: PERMIT FEE:
A nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day shall be charged to each applicant for each event to be held in
addition to any other rental charges or deposits. Such fee shall be submitted to the Civic Center Manager at the same
time as the application, and in the form of cash, certified check or money order. (Ord. 2018-27)
5-10-5: REGULATION OF OPERATIONS:
A. Dates And Times: The City Manager shall approve all dates and times of each community-oriented event operation,
subject to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Vending Tables: No vending table shall be placed on any street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless approval has been
granted pursuant to section 17-1-5 of this Code. Vending tables shall be placed to allow for handicapped access to
walkways.
C. Loudspeaker Or Sound Amplifying Device: No holder of a City-owned event venue permit, its representatives or any
person acting under the holder's permit, shall shout, make an outcry, blow any horn, ring any bell, or use any other
sound device including, but not limited to, any loudspeaker or sound amplifying device within the City-owned event
venue area during the hours of operation permitted by this chapter, except if the use of loudspeaker or amplified
sound was specifically approved during the application review process.
D. Food Safety: Any holder of a City-owned event venue permit or any person acting under the holder's permit who
displays, offers for sale, or sells a food product shall comply with all provisions of the food service ordinance and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 228/923
Food Service Sanitation Code.
E. Advertising: Advertising shall be prohibited, except for signs, displays or banners which advertise the bona fide notfor-
profit organization sponsoring the event, as shown on the permit application, and official commercial sponsors of
the event as provided. In no event shall any person allow or permit any type of advertising that would cause an
interference or unnecessary distraction to motorists.
F. Refuse Container: Any holder of a City-owned event venue permit or any person acting under the holder's permit who
sells food products shall have sufficient garbage or refuse containers, having a minimum size of twenty (20) gallons,
which shall be durable, easily cleanable, and possessing a tight-fitting lid. Containers must be made available for use
by the customers of the permit holder.
G. Compliance With Regulations: All holders of a City-owned event venue permit and any person acting under the
holder's permit shall comply with all applicable regulations set forth by the Carbondale Police Department, Building
and Neighborhood Services Division, and the Carbondale Fire Department.
H. Discrimination: No bona fide not-for-profit organization shall discriminate in granting licenses.
I. Insurance: All City-owned event venue permit holders shall possess liability insurance in the amount specified in
subsection 5-10-3C of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a vending stand without the insurance
coverage specified in this chapter.
J. Code Compliance: All City-owned event venue permit holders and any persons acting under their permit shall obey,
abide by, and comply with all Federal and State Statutes and with all other provisions of this Code and the County of
Jackson. (Ord. 2018-27)
5-10-6: ENFORCEMENT DUTIES:
A. Issue Rules And Regulations: It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his designee to issue such rules and
regulations regarding vending stands which will be located within the City-owned event venue and their operations,
and other policies and procedures as deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter.
B. Serve Summonses: It shall be the duty of the Carbondale Police Department, Carbondale Fire Department and
Building and Neighborhood Services Division to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to serve summonses and
other processes for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-27)
5-10-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation continues. All violations of this chapter are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may be
abated or enjoined by the City. Nothing in this chapter shall exempt the City or any person from seeking civil remedies
against any person who is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-27)
Chapter 11
ENTERTAINMENT CLUBS
5-11-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City hereby exercises its police powers for the protection of the public welfare, health and safety of persons who
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 229/923
attend and patronize entertainment clubs. It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this Chapter to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the community, to promote the stability of property values, and impose restrictions upon
those activities which pander to gross sexuality in a manner that would detract from the neighborhood, adversely affect
the property values, increase crime and violence. In recognition of the protection afforded to the citizens under the First
and Fourteenth Amendments, it is not the intent of this Chapter to inhibit freedom of speech, but to deter establishments
from promoting rowdiness, criminality, and indecent behavior. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
CITY: The City of Carbondale, Illinois.
CLUB PREMISES: Any place where an entertainment club is operated or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms,
parking areas and other adjacent portions of the premises which are accessible to the public during operating hours.
DANCE: Includes any dance held on a regular basis in the same business establishment to which the general public is
admitted and a charge or donation is imposed as a condition of attendance.
EIGHTEEN AND OVER CLUB: Any entertainment club which restricts its admissions to persons age eighteen (18) years
and over.
ENTERTAINMENT CLUB: Commercial premises which are open to the public, the primary function of which is to offer
patrons an opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or
the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers. As an incidental function, an entertainment
club may sell and serve food and beverages to its patrons.
The term "entertainment club" does not include the following: premises which are licensed by the City to serve "alcoholic
beverages" as defined by State law; theaters where the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants
where the only entertainment consists of background music which is incidental to the primary function of serving food;
outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited guests which is not open to the public;
dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or nonprofit religious,
charitable, benevolent, fraternal or social organization.
IMPROPER EXHIBITION: Exposure of any of the following areas:
A. Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair, unless completely covered with nontransparent material or cloth;
B. Buttock or anus, unless covered at minimum by a g-string bikini bottom; or
C. Female breast, unless the areola is completely covered with nontransparent material no less than three inches (3")
in diameter (normally referred to as a "pastie").
D. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
PERSON: One or more natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, or other entities capable of having an
action at law brought against such entity.
TEEN CLUB: Any entertainment club which restricts its admissions to persons between the ages of thirteen (13) and
eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to open up, conduct, own, lease, manage, operate or maintain an entertainment club within the City without
a validand subsisting entertainment club license. For multi-use facilities which include an entertainment club, a separate
and additional license must be issued for the entertainment club operation. (Ord. 98-41)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 230/923
5-11-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ENTRY; HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. Teen Clubs: Persons of the following ages shall not be permitted to enter or remain on the premises of a teen club:
1. Under the age of thirteen (13) years;
2. Nineteen (19) years of age or older except for bona fide employees or entertainers hired by the licensee to work in
the club;
3. Persons in violation of the curfew provision of Section 14-4-1 of this Code.
B. Eighteen And Over Club: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to enter or remain on the
premises of an eighteen (18) and over club unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, except for entertainers
hired by the licensee to work in the club.
C. Hours Of Operation, Teen Clubs: Teen clubs operated on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday nights
shall close at not later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Teen clubs operated on Friday and Saturday nights shall close at
not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
D. Hours Of Operation, Eighteen And Over Club: An eighteen (18) and over club may operate any night of the week and
shall close no later than one fifty nine o'clock (1:59) A.M.
E. Combination Teen And Eighteen And Over Club: An entertainment club which is licensed for a combination of teen
club and/or eighteen (18) and over club shall comply with the age and hours of operation for each type of club as
specified in this Section and for which type of club that was approved in the license. The club must meet the
requirements regarding "restrictions on entry" as defined in subsections A and B of this Section. Only one type of club
may be in operation at any one time. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-5: OPERATING RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following operating rules and regulations shall apply to all entertainment clubs in the City:
A. Standards Of Conduct: The standards of conduct applicable to all businesses in the City shall apply to entertainment
clubs.
B. Security Personnel: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ an adequate number of qualified security
personnel whowill be present on the entertainment club premises during all operating hours to maintain peace and
order and to ensure compliance with all applicable laws of the State and the City.
C. Alcohol And Drugs: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to insure that no alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances are offered for sale, consumed, or possessed by patrons, employees or persons on the entertainment
club premises.
D. Closing Times Enforced: It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, to admit the public or permit the public to
remain within the licensed premises fifteen (15) minutes after the required closing time.
E. Licensee And Employees Only: No person except the licensee and his employees shall enter the licensed premises
between the closing hour as set forth hereinabove and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
F. Cooperation Required Of Patrons: Any individual, other than the licensee or employee who is actually on duty for
cleaning and maintenance purposes only, who remains in a licensed premises after the closing time specified
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 231/923
hereinabove, after having been advised or requested to leave by the licensee, shall be subject to arrest and fine.
(Ord. 98-41)
5-11-6: IMPROPER EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, or for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to permit any
employee, entertainer or patron to engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the licensed premises
which constitutes an "improper exhibition" as defined in Section 5-11-2 of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-7: RESTRICTIONS ON MULTI-USE FACILITIES:
No entertainment club shall be located on premises used at any time during the week or weekend as a facility to serve
alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-8: CHECKING AGE OF PATRONS:
A. Proof Of Age Responsibility: It is the responsibility of the licensee to obtain either a picture identification or reasonably
equivalent evidence showing the age of each person admitted to an entertainment club. It is unlawful for any person
to knowingly or recklessly allow a person to enter or remain on the premises of an entertainment club in violation of
the age restrictions of this Chapter.
B. Fraudulent Identification: It is unlawful for any person to misrepresent his age for the purpose of obtaining admission
to, or remaining at, an entertainment club in violation of theprovisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-9: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
All applications for licenses under this Chapter shall be in writing, under oath, addressed to the City Manager and filed in
the office of the City Clerk and shall provide the following:
A. Owner Information: The name and address of all owners of the proposed licensed establishment.
B. Signatures: Each application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall sign
the application. If the applicant is a corporation or club, the application shall be signed and verified by the president
and secretary. The information recited in the application shall be under oath or affirmation as to each person signing
the application.
C. Address; Proof Of Ownership; Lease: The address of the proposed licensed establishment and proof of property
ownership or a valid lease.
D. Intended Security Measures: A written detailed description of all measures proposed to insure that adequate traffic
control, crowd protection and security both inside and outside the premises will be maintained and that the ages of
patrons admitted to the entertainment club will be monitored.
E. Precise Use And Hours Defined: A statement electing whether the club will be operated as a teen club, eighteen (18)
and over club or a twenty one (21) and over club, or a combination thereof with a statement of the proposed schedule
of operating hours and days. If a club is proposed to be open for a different age group at different hours and/or days,
the hours and/or days for each age group shall be specified.
F. Criminal Background And Credit Checks: A completed criminal background and credit check authorization for each
person required to report conviction information.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 232/923
G. Amenities Offered: A statement of the nature of the business and type of entertainment to be provided. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-10: PAYMENT OF FEES:
A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be submitted to the City Clerk in the form of cash, certified check or money
order and paid in full at the time the application is made. There shall be no refund of any fee paid hereunder. (Ord. 98-
41)
5-11-11: PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
After receiving an application and fee for an entertainment club license, as specified in Section 5-11-9 above, the City
shall follow the following procedure:
A. Compliance With Regulations; Validity: The City Clerk shall forward copies of the application to appropriate City staff
for their comments regarding compliance with regulations under their jurisdiction. The City Manager shall consider all
materials and comments submitted and shall issue or deny the license within thirty (30) working days after the date
on which a completed application was filed unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the time period. A license
shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months unless suspended or revoked sooner, pursuant to Section 5-11-12 of
this Chapter. No license may be transferred. Persons desiring to purchase an existing licensed entertainment club
shall submit a new license application.
B. Grounds For Denial: An entertainment club license shall be denied by the City Manager for any one or more of the
following grounds:
1. If the business premises does not comply with all applicable City ordinances and State laws,
2. If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material misrepresentation,
3. If the application does not show adequate measures for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in
terms of traffic control, crowd protection, and security, both inside and outside the premises, and the monitoring of
the ages of patrons admitted to the entertainment club.
4. Whether the issuance (or renewal) of said license would be in the "best interest" of the City (for example, would
there be an adverse impact on public health, safety, welfare, or demand for City services; would the issuance of the
license adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood; would the license adversely impact the
City's orderly growth and development, etc.).
5. If the applicant has been convicted of a felony or has been convicted of pandering or any other crime of morality, or
a person who has been convicted of being a keeper of a house of ill fame under the laws of the State, or any other
Federal or State law, unless the City Manager determines within his sole discretion, that such person now warrants
the public trust.
C. Notice Of Denial; Appeal: If the City Manager denies a license, written notice of the denial stating the reasons why
shall be sent to the applicant within five (5) business days after the denial. The applicant shall have a period of five
(5) business days after the date of the license denial to file a written notice of appeal to the City Council by filing the
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. If the City Council denies the appeal, the applicant shall have a period of
ten (10)business days after the date of the appeal denial to appeal in the manner provided by the Administrative
Review Act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-12: SUSPENSION, AMENDMENT OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
A. Notice Of Charges: Except as provided in subsection B hereof, no licensee shall receive a written reprimand or be
fined and no license shall be amended, suspended or revoked prior to an evidentiary hearing pursuant to subsection
C hereof. The licensee shall be given written notice of the charge or charges against it not less than three (3) days
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 233/923
prior to the hearing. The licensee may, if it so chooses, be represented at its own expense by legal counsel at the
evidentiary hearing.
B. Closure Of Premises: A licensed premises may be closed for not more than seven (7) days without notice or hearing,
upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason(s) for closing if the City Manager has reason to believe that
the continued operation of the specific licensed premises will immediately threaten the public health, safety and
welfare of the community. An evidentiary hearing shall be held within a seven (7) day period, such period beginning
on the date of the closing, giving the licensee the opportunity to be heard on the matter.
C. Evidentiary Hearings; Issue Subpoenas: The City Manager shall, as the "hearing officer", preside over all evidentiary
hearings. The hearing officer shall have the right to issue subpoenas for witnesses, to place witnesses under oath, to
rule on objections, and to conduct the evidentiary hearing in an efficient manner. The hearing officer shall be
responsible for securing the services of a certified court reporter at the evidentiary hearing. The initial costs and fees
of the court reporter shall be paid by the City. The licensee shall bear all costs and expenses for production of
transcripts from an evidentiary hearing; provided, however, that if the City wants a transcript for its own purposes, not
related to an appeal, the City shall pay for the cost and expenses of the transcript.
D. Burden Of Proof: The City shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the charges alleged
against the licensee. After the City has presented its evidence, the licensee may present evidence in its defense.
After the licensee has presented its evidence, if any, the City shall have the right to present rebuttal evidence, if it so
chooses. The evidentiary hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
E. Written Reprimand: If the hearing officer determines that the charges against the licensee have been proven by a
preponderance of the evidence, the hearing officer may issue a written reprimand; may suspend the license; may
suspend the license of the licensee for a period of not more than thirty (30) days; revoke the license; and/or impose a
fine of not less than fiftydollars ($50.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
F. Nature Of Violation: In making the determination to reprimand, amend, suspend, revoke or impose a fine, or in
determining the length of a suspension imposed, the hearing officer may consider the nature of the violation, past
violations of the licensee and the facts and circumstances surrounding the violation as presented at the evidentiary
hearing.
G. Service Of Order; Appeal: A copy of the hearing officer's order shall be served upon the licensee within seven (7)
days of its issuance. Service may be made by placing the order in the United States mail, postage prepaid. If a fine is
imposed, the order shall specify the date by when the fine shall be paid. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of each
order issued by the hearing officer. The licensee shall have a period of five (5) business days after the date of the
order to file a written appeal to the City Council by filing the written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. If the City
Council denies the appeal, the applicant shall have a period of ten (10) business days to appeal in the manner
provided by the Administrative Review Act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 98-41)
5-11-13: INSPECTION:
All City officials, officers, and employees, while in the execution of their duties to promote and enforce the public health,
safety and welfare of the City, shall have free access to all entertainment clubs for the purpose of inspection and
enforcement of compliance with this Chapter and this City Code. (Ord. 98-41)
5-11-14: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation continues. All violations of this Chapter are hereby determined to be a nuisance which may be
abated or enjoined by the City. Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt the City or any person from seeking civil remedies
against any person who is in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 234/923
Chapter 12
ADULT USES
5-12-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of the city council to regulate uses which, because of their nature, are recognized as having
serious objectionable, operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated in a particular area,
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Regulation of such uses is necessary to ensure that these
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. The primary control
or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, unless otherwise provided for:
ADULT USES: The following words, terms and phrases shall be considered an "adult use":
Adult Bookstore: A public or private establishment which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade
books, magazines, films for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or any other coin
operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified anatomical areas", or an establishment
that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays,
actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths, the exclusion of minors from the establishment's
premises, or any other factors showing that the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
Adult Entertainment Cabaret: A public or private establishment or facility which features: a) topless dancers,
strippers, erotic male/female dancers; b) entertainers, employees or patrons which display "specified anatomical
areas"; c) employees who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed
primarily to appeal to the sexual interest of the patron; or d) employees who knowingly and intentionally touch a
patron or the patron's clothing in the "specified anatomical areas" or while involved in any "specified sexual activity"
within the adult use premises.
Adult Entertainment Facility: A public or private striptease club facility or establishment, or pornographic movie
theater which offers to its patrons the dissemination, or distribution of sexually explicit material, live shows, or other
form of exhibitions, or an adult bookstore or adult video store whose primary business is the commercial sale,
dissemination, or distribution of sexually explicit material, shows, videos, or other live or taped exhibitions.
Adult Theater: An enclosed building routinely used for presenting material by motion picture or video, and having
as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or
relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons, employees or
members therein.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult use establishment on a full time, part
time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent,
lessee, or otherwise.
PATRON: A person who enters into a business or establishment, either by paying some form of monetary compensation
or a membership fee, as a customer or private member, for the purpose of receiving services provided by a business or
establishment located upon such premises.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following areas:
A. Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair, unless completely covered with nontransparent material or cloth;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 235/923
B. Buttock or anus, unless covered at minimum by a g-string bikini bottom; or
C. Female breast, unless the areola is completely covered with nontransparent material no less than three inches (3")
in diameter (normally referred to as a "pastie").
D. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Prostitution or promotion of prostitution, dissemination of obscenity, sale, distribution
or display of harmful material to a minor, sexual performance by a minor, possession or distribution of child pornography,
public lewdness, indecent exposure, indecency with a child, engaged in organized criminal activity, sexual assault,
molestation of a child, gambling, or distribution of a controlled substance, or any offense under the criminal offense
section of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation;
C. Fondling or other sexual or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttock or female breast; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in subsequent subsections A through C
of this definition. (Ord. 98-41; Ord. 2014-49)
5-12-3: REGULATED USES:
Adult uses subject to the provisions of this chapter include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
A. Adult bookstore;
B. Adult entertainment cabaret;
C. Adult theater;
D. Adult entertainment facility. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-4: LIMITATIONS ON ADULT USES:
A. General Restrictions: Adult uses shall be permitted within the City limits subject to the following restrictions:
1. An adult use shall not be permitted or allowed within one thousand feet (1,000') of any premises upon which an
establishment or business is licensed to sell, dispense or deliver alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 98-41)
2. An adult use shall not be permitted or allowed within five hundred feet (500') from the nearest property line of the
following zoning districts, as described in title 15, chapter 2 of this code: AG, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, PUD, and RMH,
and all variations of such districts, as hereinafter amended in title 15 of this code. (Ord. 2013-21)
3. An adult use shall not be permitted or allowed within one thousand feet (1,000') of a school, public park,
playground, day care center or facility, public housing property, church or other religious facility or institution,
government building, institution of higher education or cemetery.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 236/923
B. Zoning Restriction: Any facility, building or structure used for an adult use shall be subject to the zoning restrictions as
set forth in title 15 of this code, and as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-5: SIGNS AND OTHER VISIBLE MESSAGES:
Any premises, establishment, building or property upon which an adult use is located shall display exterior signs,
billboards or messages in the following manner:
A. Name And Description: Signs, billboards or messages shall only display the name and description of material or
services of the adult use at that location; and
B. Prohibited Content: Signs, billboards or messages displayed shall not include any graphic, pictorial depiction,
photograph, silhouette, or drawing of material or services of the adult use at that location; and
C. Location: Sign, billboards or messages relating to the adult use shall be displayed on flush wall against the building,
structure or location where the adult use business is located. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-6: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES:
For the purpose of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the property line of the premises upon which the adult use is located to the nearest property line of the
areas stated in subsection 5-12-4A of this chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-7: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No owner or person in control of an adult use shall permit or allow the observation of any message or material depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" by display, decoration, sign, show
window or other opening visible from the outside of the premises upon which the adult use is located or from any public
way. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-8: REGISTRATION:
A. Information Required: The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purpose of managing, controlling or
collecting rents, or any other person managing or controlling the facility or premises in which an adult use is located
upon shall register with the city clerk the following information:
1. The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, social security number, Illinois driver's license number of the
manager, owner or representative who will be in charge of the day to day operations of the adult use;
2. The address of the premises on which the adult use will be located;
3. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the premises upon which the adult use is located, including
name(s) of all beneficial owner(s) and trustees if the property is in a land trust;
4. The name of the adult use establishment;
5. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s), beneficial owner(s) or the major stockholder(s) of the adult use;
6. The date that the adult use shall be open to the public;
7. The nature of the adult use in detail;
8. The names and addresses of all employees, entertainers, or persons who will work in the adult use establishment
or facility. The person in control or manager of the adult use operations shall be required to maintain a current and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 237/923
updated list of such information with the city clerk;
9. Any of the following, including the date of the charge and disposition of the case: any prior felony convictions,
charges for sexual-related offenses, specified criminal activities or crimes against another person committed by the
owner, manager, person in control of and/or representative of the adult use establishment.
B. Compliance: No person in control of, owner or agent of an adult use shall allow or permit the adult use establishment
to be opened for business, operated, or to admit patrons, private members or the public upon the adult use
establishment, without first having complied with the provisions of this Section.
C. Violation: If a violation of this Section occurs, the City may take action, in addition to the penalties of this Chapter, to
file any civil proceeding it deems necessary to secure an injunction in order to prevent or prohibit the adult use. (Ord.
98-41)
5-12-9: ENTERTAINMENT:
No person in control, owner, manager or employee of an adult use shall permit or allow any male or female entertainer,
employee, patron, member or agent to engage in the exposure of specified anatomical areas or any specified sexual
activity upon the adult use premises. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-10: ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES:
No owner, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any adult use shall engage in any specified criminal
activity, criminal activity or conduct, or permit any other person to engage in any specified criminal activity or criminal
activity or conduct, in or about the adult use establishment which is prohibited by any ordinance of the City, law of the
State, or the United States. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-11: AGE RESTRICTION:
A. Under Twenty One: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age to be permitted
or allowed to enter, remain within or upon the premises in which an adult use is located.
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful for the owner, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any adult use
to employ in any capacity within the adult use establishment any person who is under the age of twenty one (21)
years.
C. Acceptable Identification: Only the following types of identification shall be accepted for purposes of determining
whether a person is old enough to enter an adult use establishment: vehicle operator's license, State photo
identification card for nondrivers, visa or passport, and/or military identification card. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-12: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell, or offer for sale, possess or display for sale within the corporate limits of the City, any alcoholic
liquor upon the premises, including the parking lot area. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-13: RESPONSIBILITY OF MANAGER, OWNER AND/OR REGISTERED PARTY:
Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this Chapter, or this City Code, by any patron, member
employee, entertainer, or representative of the adult use facility or business shall be deemed to be the act(s) or
omission(s) of the owner, employer, manager and/or agent of the adult use establishment and shall be punishable under
the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 238/923
5-12-14: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. Open For Business: An adult use establishment shall be permitted to remain open for business or allow or permit
patrons or members to remain upon the premises between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to one fifty nine
o'clock (1:59) A.M. the following day on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, and on
Sunday, from one o'clock (1:00) P.M. until one fifty nine o'clock (1:59) A.M. the next day.
B. Restrictions: It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, to admit the public or permit patrons to remain within or
upon the premises of an adult use establishment other than the hours as set out in subsection A of this Section. If
any person, other than the persons excepted under subsection C of this Section, is found to be within or upon the
adult use establishment more than fifteen (15) minutes after the required closing time, the person, along with the
owner, manager or person in control of the adult use establishment, will be subject to a violation of this Section.
C. Exception: This subsection does not apply to the owner, manager, or person in control of the adult use establishment,
or an employee who is performing cleaning or maintenance activities necessary for the operation of the
establishment. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-15: HEALTH AND SAFETY LAWS:
All premises, structures and/or facilities in which an adult use is located shall be in compliance at all times with the City
Building, Fire, and Zoning Ordinances, and all State and Federal laws pertaining to health, sanitation and public safety.
(Ord. 98-41)
5-12-16: INSPECTION:
A. Right Of Entry: The Building and Neighborhood Services Division, Carbondale Fire Department and the Carbondale
Police Department shall have the authority to enter upon any premises upon which an adult use is located in order to
enforce the ordinances of the City, laws of the State and any State or Federal laws pertaining to the health, safety or
welfare of the public to determine whether any such laws are being violated, and to examine the operations and
facilities used upon the premises.
B. Violation: A person who operates or controls an adult use or his agent or employee violates this Chapter if he refuses
to permit such lawful inspection of the premises. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-17: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter or the application of any provision to any item in this Chapter, is held invalid, the invalidity
of that provision or application shall not affect any of the other provisions or the application of those provisions to other
sections in this Chapter or within this Code. (Ord. 98-41)
5-12-18: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day that a violation continues. All violations of this Chapter are hereby determined to be a
nuisance which may be abated or enjoined by the City. Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt the City or any person from
seeking civil remedies against any person who is in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 98-41)
Chapter 13
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING SERVICES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 239/923
5-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any words, terms and phrases which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
NONCONSENSUAL TOWS: Any towing service performed without the prior consent or authorization of the owner or
operator of a motor vehicle.
PERSON: Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association, organization, trust, or other entity.
TOW TRUCK: Any truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to push, tow or draw vehicles by means of a
crane, hoist, towbar, towline or auxiliary axle, and to render towing services to vehicles.
TOW TRUCK OPERATOR: Any person engaged in the business of, or offering the services of, vehicle towing whereby
motor vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one place to another by use of a tow truck.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public or
private roadway, except devices moved by human power. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-2: FEES:
The following schedule of maximum fees, effective upon adoption hereof, shall be in effect for all nonconsensual tows:
Service Description Price
Towing from tow truck (any vehicle size) $75.00
Use of dolly 30.00
Use of winch 30.00
Outside storage (after 24 hours) 20.00
Inside storage (after 24 hours) 30.00
After hours release of vehicle 20.00
Interrupted tow 25.00
Excessive work or waiting 0.00
Service fee 0.00
Mileage (in or outside city limits) 0.00
Any other service provided during the nonconsensual tow shall be at no additional cost to the owner or operator of said
vehicle, unless said owner or operator agrees upon the additional fee in advance. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-3: AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
The towing or removal of any vehicle from private property without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle is
subject to compliance with the following conditions and restrictions, in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/4-201 et seq.:
A. Tow Truck And Towed Vehicle Rear Lights: Any tow truck operating within the city of Carbondale shall have rear lights
that comply with all requirements of the state of Illinois. In addition, where a towed unit, behind a towed vehicle or any
load thereon partially or totally obscures the rear lamps displaying red lights to the rear of the tow truck, the rearmost
towed unit shall be equipped with two (2) portable lamps, temporarily attached to the towed vehicle, displaying red
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 240/923
lights visible from a distance of not less than one thousand feet (1,000') to the rear of the such towed unit which are
positioned in such a manner as to not obstruct the visibility of the red light as to any vehicle operator approaching
from the rear of such vehicle or combination of vehicles, and with appropriate cable, and with cushions to protect the
towed vehicle's finish. In addition, all tow trucks operating within the city of Carbondale, shall utilize straps and tie
downs as specified by the tow truck manufacturer.
B. Owner's Consent: No motor vehicle may be towed by a tow truck operator if it is parked in the space in which it is
authorized to park without the vehicle owner's consent.
C. Written Request: Before a tow truck operator may remove an unauthorized vehicle from private property, the tow truck
operator must first obtain a written request from the property owner, the property owner's authorized agent or the
lessee of the private property to remove the specific vehicle in question, unless the tow truck operator has been given
written authorization to remove all unauthorized vehicles from said private property. Any payment of any kind by a
tow truck operator to a property owner, lessee or property manager for permission to tow any vehicle is prohibited.
D. Posted Signs: When any owner, authorized agent or lessee of private property gives written authorization to a tow
truck operator to remove all unauthorized vehicles from a private parking area, signs shall be posted pursuant to
section 5-13-4 of this chapter and the written authorization shall, upon city request, be filed with the city clerk and
Carbondale police department. Any payment of any kind by a tow truck operator to a property owner, lessee or
property manager for permission to tow any vehicle is prohibited.
E. Sticker System: When a property owner utilizes a sticker system to indicate who is allowed to park in an area, those
stickers must be of a quality such that they readily adhere to window glass, and do not readily fall off. A hang tag
system is permitted in lieu of a sticker system.
F. Termination: Except upon the termination of tenancy, no property owner may terminate parking permission without first
informing the permit holder in person or in writing of the termination. The burden of proof of showing termination
given to the permit holder shall be on the tow truck operator and property owner. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-4: SIGNS:
A. Signs Required: Before a tow truck operator removes any trespassing or unauthorized vehicles from a private parking
area containing more than three (3) spaces, signs must have been posted no less than twenty four (24) hours prior to
the time when any tow is made.
B. Visibility Of Signs: Required sign(s) shall be prominently visible from all entrances to the parking area and in clear
view free from interference from any natural or manmade objects and shall be visible at night by the use of reflective
lettering or a lighted sign. The portions of these signs informing that unauthorized vehicles will be towed shall be in
letters not less than two inches (2") in height, and in a color vividly contrasting to the background color of the sign.
Sign(s) shall be posted at each driveway access or curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property within five feet
(5') from the public right of way line. If there are no curbs or access barriers, signs must be posted at every one
hundred foot (100') interval of lot frontage. In cases where said sign(s) are absent or are not clearly visible, for
whatever reason, at the time the vehicle is parked without authorization, towing shall not be permitted. The signs
shall contain the following information:
1. A specific statement indicating who is allowed to park in the area. Said statements may use classes of persons as
well as individuals, but the statement must provide persons with adequate information to reasonably apprise
persons as to who is allowed to park in the area. The statement "Authorized Parking Only - Unauthorized Vehicles
Towed" is not sufficient to apprise persons as to who is allowed to park on private property.
2. "Customer Parking Only - All Others Towed" and "Permit Lot - Vehicles Displaying Valid Permits Only - All Others
Towed" are examples of signs which apprise persons as to who may park in a given area.
3. A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be towed.
4. The maximum amount of towing charges, if any, charged by the tow truck operator to recover the vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 241/923
5. Name and phone number of tow truck operator. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-5: TOWING WHEN NO SIGNS ARE REQUIRED:
A. Marked Parking Location: When a vehicle is parked in an otherwise authorized parking spot on private property and
no signs are posted, the tow truck operator may not remove the vehicle until after either: 1) the vehicle owner has
been notified in writing or in person that the vehicle may be towed, or 2) twenty four (24) hours have elapsed since a
sticker has been placed on the driver's side window or windshield indicating that the vehicle may be towed.
B. Parking In Unauthorized Areas: When a vehicle is parked on private property in a clearly marked no parking area, on
a nonhard surface, across a sidewalk, blocking a driveway or dumpster, or other location where parking is not
ordinarily permitted, a tow truck operator may remove the vehicle at the direction of the property owner.
C. Private Property: On private property containing three (3) or fewer parking spaces, a tow truck operator may remove
an unauthorized vehicle without signs being posted, notification to the vehicle owner, or stickers being placed on the
vehicle. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-6: INTERRUPTED TOW:
No vehicle may be towed by any person from private property if the owner or other person entitled to possession of the
vehicle is present, or arrives at the scene prior to the vehicle's removal from such private property, exhibits the ignition
key of said vehicle, and offers to remove such vehicle voluntarily prior to the time such person attempting to tow actually
removes such vehicle from the private property in question, provided that such other person so removes such vehicle
immediately. However, the owner must pay an interrupted tow fee per section 5-13-2 of this chapter. If the owner refuses
to pay the interrupted tow fee, the tow truck operator may proceed to tow the vehicle. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-7: NOTIFICATION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES:
Whenever an unauthorized vehicle is towed from private property, the tow truck operator shall notify the Carbondale
police department not later than one hour after the vehicle is removed. Such notification may be by e-mail, telephone or
fax and shall include the name of the tow truck operator; a complete and accurate description of the vehicle, including
license plate number; the location from which and to which the vehicle was towed; the time the vehicle was towed; and
the reason the vehicle was towed. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-8: STORAGE:
If an attendant is not on duty at the tow truck operator's principal place of business twenty four (24) hours a day, seven
(7) days a week, to return vehicles upon the payment of towing service charges, there shall be a sign prominently
displayed containing a telephone number where the owner, manager or attendant of the tow truck service storage area
may be reached at any time so that a towed vehicle may be reclaimed by its owner in a minimum amount of time, not to
exceed two (2) hours. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-9: RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FROM CUSTODY OF TOW TRUCK OPERATORS:
A. Inspection: Prior to release of towed motor vehicles, the tow truck operator shall permit the owner of the vehicle
towed, or his authorized agent, to inspect the interior and exterior of said vehicle and its contents.
B. Identification: The owner or authorized agent of the owner of the towed vehicle shall be identified by a valid driver's
license and an ignition key which operates the vehicle towed; or in the instance of rented vehicles, identification may
be accomplished by presentation of a rental contract and the driver's license of the renting party named in the rental
contract.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 242/923
C. Fees And Charges: Should the tow truck operator claim fees and charges for towing, it shall base fees and charges
on rates as stated in section 5-13-2 of this chapter.
D. Payment Methods: The tow truck operator shall accept any of the following methods of payment for such fees and
charges:
1. United States currency,
2. Regular recognized traveler's checks,
3. Money order,
4. Cashiers' or certified check,
5. Major credit and debit cards. To the extent that the city of Carbondale is authorized to enact regulations on the use
of credit and debit cards, a tow truck operator holding a properly signed credit or debit card receipt shall become a
holder in due course, and neither the holder of the credit or debit card nor the company which issued the credit or
debit card may thereafter refuse to remit payment in the amount shown on the credit or debit card receipt minus the
ordinary charge assessed by the credit or debit card company for processing the charge. No tow truck operator
may charge any extra fee for payment by credit or debit card.
E. Vehicle Release: The tow truck operator shall immediately release a towed motor vehicle to the owner upon tender of
the lawfully authorized fee. Failure of the tow truck operator to release a vehicle within thirty (30) minutes of the fee
being tendered shall result in a loss of the fee.
F. Reason For Tow: The tow truck operator shall provide a reason for the vehicle being towed.
G. Hours For Release Of Vehicles: A tow truck operator must be open for release of vehicles Monday through Friday,
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except for the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas. A tow truck operator must release vehicles upon
demand at all other times upon payment of an after hours fee per section 5-13-2 of this chapter, except no after hours
fee may be charged for the release of vehicles within two (2) hours of a vehicle being towed. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-10: COLLECTION OF COSTS:
Collection of towing charges from the owner or operator of a towed vehicle, pursuant to this chapter, shall be the sole
responsibility of the tow truck operator or his representative. The city and the police department will not be responsible
for nor assist in the collection of such fees, costs or charges. (Ord. 2015-17)
5-13-11: VIOLATION:
Any person, corporation or entity, who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any such violation shall constitute a separate
offense on each consecutive day that it continues. (Ord. 2015-17)
Chapter 14
COMMUNITY ORIENTED EVENT VENDORS1
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-55)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 243/923
Chapter 15
RAFFLES1
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-55)
Chapter 16
HOTEL AND MOTEL ESTABLISHMENTS
5-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter,
unless specified otherwise:
EXTENDED STAY UNIT: A hotel or motel unit with accommodations which meets the following requirements:
A. A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a minimum of not less than two hundred twenty
(220) square feet. A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a minimum of not less than three hundred
twenty (320) square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections B and C of
this definition;
B. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each have a clear
working space of not less than thirty inches (30") in front. Light and ventilation conforming to the requirements of
this code; and
C. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging is offered with or without meals to the public for compensation, with ingress and
egress to the rooms through an inside lobby supervised at all hours.
LICENSEE: Any person licensed to operate and maintain a hotel or motel under the provisions of this chapter.
MOTEL: A business consisting of a number of living or sleeping accommodations, designed primarily for lodging of
transient travelers, the physical way out of which is through outside doorway entrances other than through a common
entrance, lobby and hallways.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, or combination of
individuals acting for a common purpose. (Ord. 2007-15; Ord. 2015-7)
5-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a hotel or motel within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining
a license from the manager of building and neighborhood services as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-3: LICENSE EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFERAL:
A. Validity: A license is valid from the date issued until the following May 1. No license shall be granted for a period
exceeding one year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 244/923
B. Reinspection: Licensed hotel and motel establishments shall be reinspected by the manager of building and
neighborhood services, fire department, and the Jackson County health department for compliance with this chapter
prior to renewal of license.
C. Nontransferable: A license shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not constitute property. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to grant a right to transfer or accept the transfer of any licenses whenever there is a
change in interest or ownership.
D. Continuation Of Business: The death of a licensee, termination of a partnership, dissolution of a corporation, or
bankruptcy of a licensee shall cause the license to cease to exist except that the administrator or executor of the
estate or trustee in bankruptcy may continue to operate the business for six (6) months upon order of the appropriate
court; provided, however, that the trustee, administrator or executor of an estate shall meet the qualifications set forth
in this chapter. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-4: FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Application for a hotel or motel license shall be filed with the manager of building and neighborhood services on forms
provided by the building and neighborhood services division. The application shall contain the following:
A. The name, business address, business telephone number, residence address and residence telephone number of the
proposed licensee, operator and property owner. If the proposed licensee, operator or property owner is a
corporation, the officers' names and residence addresses shall be furnished. If the proposed licensee is a limited
liability company, the names and residence addresses of all members/managers shall be furnished.
B. The address and legal description of the hotel or motel establishment.
C. Any other information as may be required to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-5: APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE:
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the manager of building and neighborhood services or his
designee shall review and investigate the information contained therein. Such review may include an investigation of the
applicant. All licenses required by this chapter shall be acted upon within thirty (30) days of the manager of building and
neighborhood services or designee's receipt of application. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Requirements: The manager of building and neighborhood services shall issue a hotel or motel license when it is
determined that all of the following requirements have been met:
1. A zoning certificate or site plan for the hotel or motel establishment has been approved.
2. All applicable health department licenses and approvals have been issued.
3. All applicable state and local fire standards have been complied with including applicable local fire prevention
standards.
4. All other applicable standards have been complied with, including, but not limited to, building construction,
plumbing, electrical and handicapped accessibility standards.
5. The licensee shall maintain minimum liability insurance coverage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
for each individual and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence. The licensee shall submit a
certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of the license. Failure to maintain minimum liability insurance
shall result in automatic revocation of the hotel or motel license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 245/923
6. The licensee shall submit a certificate of registration from the Illinois department of revenue for payment of any
applicable state hotel and retail sales taxes.
7. The licensee shall have registered with the city's finance department for payment of all applicable municipal fees or
taxes, including the hotel/motel and food/alcoholic beverage privilege tax.
B. License Displayed: Once the license is issued, the licensee shall display the license at all times in a location easily
viewed by guests and prospective guests of the hotel or motel establishment. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-7: APPEAL FROM DETERMINATION AND/OR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Request For Hearing: If an applicant believes any determination and/or requirement made by any department of the
city with regard to the issuance of a hotel or motel license is erroneous, the applicant may request a hearing before
the city manager to determine the propriety of any such determination and/or requirement.
B. Notification Required: To request a hearing, the applicant must notify the city manager within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of the determinations and requirements from the manager of building and neighborhood services. The city
manager will, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the request for the hearing, schedule said hearing.
C. Decision By City Manager: Both the applicant and the city department involved may present testimony and evidence.
The city manager shall make his decision regarding the propriety of the determination or recommendation based
upon the applicable industry standards (international, ANSI, etc.) and with the regard for the health and safety of the
public. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-8: VIOLATION; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Temporary Suspension: Hotel or motel licenses may be suspended temporarily by the manager of building and
neighborhood services for failure by the licensee or any employee of the licensee to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, or in any case where the licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized employee of the city or the
county to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Upon notification by the city's finance director, the manager
of building and neighborhood services may temporarily suspend a hotel or motel license if the licensee fails to pay
any applicable municipal tax or fee, including, but not limited to, the hotel/motel and food/alcoholic beverage privilege
tax.
B. Notice Of Violation; Timely Response: Whenever a licensee or any employee of the licensee has failed to comply with
any of the requirements of this chapter, the licensee shall be provided written notice of the violation. Such notice shall
cite the violation, specify the corrective action to be taken, state that such violation shall be corrected within ten (10)
days or the hotel or motel license shall be suspended, and shall inform the licensee of the right to request a hearing
before the city manager, as hereinabove provided. Such notice may be personally served upon the licensee or may
be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such service by mail shall be deemed to have been served at the
time of posting thereof. Any notice given under the provisions of this section shall operate as and shall become a final
order without further action being necessary upon the expiration of ten (10) days from and after the effective date of
service of such notice, unless, within such ten (10) day period, the licensee files a written request for a hearing before
the city manager. A properly filed written request shall suspend the effective date of the suspension until the date of
the city manager's decision. The city manager shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request.
The city manager shall render a written decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord.
2007-15)
5-16-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Repeated Offenses: Hotel or motel licenses may be revoked by the manager of building and neighborhood services
for continuing violations or repeated failures by the licensee or any employee of the licensee to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 246/923
B. Notice Of Revocation Date; Request For Hearing: Whenever a licensee or any employee of the licensee continuously
fails to comply with, or repeatedly violates the requirements of this chapter, the licensee shall be provided written
notice of the effective date of the revocation. Such notice shall cite the existing violation(s) (if any), specify the
corrective action(s) to be taken, state the date that such violation(s) shall be corrected, and shall inform the licensee
of the right to request a hearing before the city manager, as hereinabove provided. Such notice may be personally
served on the licensee or may be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such service by mail shall be
deemed to have been served at the time of posting thereof. The manager of building and neighborhood services shall
notify the licensee at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of the revocation. If requested, the city manager
shall provide such hearing within five (5) days of the written request. The city manager shall render a written decision
within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing.
C. Surrender License: In any case where a hotel or motel license is revoked, the licensee shall immediately surrender
such license to the manager of building and neighborhood services. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-10: POWER TO ACT IN EMERGENCIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever unsanitary, unsafe, or other conditions are found in the
operation of the hotel or motel establishment which constitute a substantial and immediate hazard to the public health
and safety, the manager of building and neighborhood services or the fire chief may, without warning or notice, issue a
written notice to the licensee citing the condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, specifying the time period
within which such action shall be taken, and, if necessary, stating that any or all hotel or motel operations are to be
discontinued immediately. The licensee to whom such an order is issued shall immediately comply therewith, but may
request in writing, within ten (10) days, a hearing before the city manager to abate such order. If requested, the city
manager shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request. The city manager shall render a written
decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-11: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations authorized by this chapter shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of any
tax due. Each day of any violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2007-15)
5-16-12: FEES:
Fees for licenses under this chapter shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per bed or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00),
whichever is less. (Ord. 2007-15)
Chapter 17
VACATION RENTAL UNITS
5-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
HOSTING PLATFORM: A person or entity that participates in short-term rental business by providing a means through
which an owner may offer a residential unit for tourist or transient use. This business service is usually, though not
necessarily, provided through an online platform and that allows an owner to advertise the residential unit through a
website provided by the hosting platform and provides a means for potential tourist or transient users to arrange tourist
or transient use and payment, whether the tourist or transient pays rent directly to the owner or to the hosting platform.
LICENSEE: Any person licensed to operate and maintain a vacation rental unit under the provisions of this chapter.
OPERATOR: The owner or lessee of the vacation rental unit residing on the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 247/923
PRIMARY RESIDENCY: An apartment, single family home, duplex, or condominium in which the owner or tenant
resides in at least six (6) months out of the year; it shall be prima facie evidence that the owner or tenant resides at the
location if two (2) or more of the following are presented: their voter registration, driver's license, State issued
identification, lease, or tax records and shows that the address is their residence.
TRANSIENT GUEST: A person or family who resides at a place other than his or her usual place of residence for no
more than twenty nine (29) consecutive days in exchange for compensation.
VACATION RENTAL UNIT: An accommodation for transient guests where a residential dwelling is rented for lodging for a
period of time no less than twenty four (24) hours and not to exceed twenty nine (29) consecutive days. Such use may or
may not include an on-site manager. For the purposes of this definition, a residential dwelling shall include all housing
types. Permissible vacation rental units shall include all housing types located in permitted zoning districts where
operator resides on the property. (Ord. 2018-29)
5-17-2: RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL USE DISTINGUISHED:
A. Housing Regulations Applicable: For purposes of the housing regulations of the City, a vacation rental unit shall be
considered a residential dwelling use and shall conform to all the requirements of a residential dwelling use as set
forth in said housing regulations.
B. State Tax Requirements: For purposes of the Illinois Department of Revenue, a vacation rental unit shall be
considered a hotel and shall be subject to all requirements of the Illinois Department of Revenue including payment
of all applicable Hotel Taxes.
C. City Room Tax: For purposes of the City's Hotel/Motel Privilege Tax, a guestroom within a vacation rental unit shall be
considered a "hotel or motel room" and shall be subject to said tax pursuant to title 7, chapter 9 of this Code. (Ord.
2017-03)
5-17-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly or privately advertise, maintain or operate a vacation rental unit within the
corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a license from the Building and Neighborhood Services Division as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-4: LICENSE EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFERAL:
A. Validity: A license is valid from the date issued until the following September 1. No license shall be granted for a
period exceeding one year.
B. Reinspection: Licensed vacation rental units shall be reinspected by the Building and Neighborhood Services Division,
and the Fire Department for compliance with this chapter prior to renewal of license.
C. Nontransferable: A license shall be a purely personal privilege and shall not constitute property. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to grant a right to transfer or accept the transfer of any licenses whenever there is a
change in interest or ownership. No vacation rental unit license shall be transferred.
D. Continuation Of Business: The death of a licensee, termination of a partnership, dissolution of a corporation, or
bankruptcy of a licensee shall cause the license to cease to exist except that the administrator or executor of the
estate or trustee in bankruptcy may continue to operate the business for six (6) months upon order of the appropriate
court; provided, however, that the trustee, administrator or executor of an estate shall meet the qualifications set forth
in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-5: FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 248/923
Application for a vacation rental unit license shall be filed with the building and neighborhood services division on forms
provided by the building and neighborhood services division. The application shall contain the following:
A. The name, business address, business telephone number, residence address and residence telephone number of the
proposed licensee, operator and property owner. If the proposed licensee, operator or property owner is a
corporation, the officer's name and residence addresses shall be furnished.
B. The address and legal description of the proposed vacation rental unit.
C. A drawing of the site showing:
1. The location of all existing structures in relation to the property lines, and
2. The location of all existing and proposed parking areas and driveways in relation to the property lines and
structures.
D. Existing floor plans of all structures on the property.
E. Any other information as may be required to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-6: APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE:
A. Departmental Review: A designee of the building and neighborhood services division shall, within five (5) days of the
receipt of the application, refer copies of the application to other relevant city departments. The city departments shall
within ten (10) days review the application and, if required, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a
vacation rental unit and make written recommendations to the building and neighborhood services division
concerning compliance with the codes and laws that they administer. In particular, the departmental responsibilities
shall be as follows:
1. The planning office shall make a determination as to whether a special use permit is necessary and shall
determine applicable zoning requirements.
2. The building and neighborhood services division shall determine what, if any, modifications are needed to meet the
local housing regulations and all applicable handicapped accessibility standards.
3. The fire department shall determine what, if any, modifications are needed to meet all local requirements and the
state fire marshal's requirements for one- and two-family dwellings.
4. The police department shall verify all the information pertaining to the proposed licensee, operator and property
owner. Providing false information will result in denial of the license.
B. Notification To Applicant: Within five (5) days of receipt of the recommendations of the aforementioned departments,
the building and neighborhood services division shall notify the applicant of those determinations and requirements.
(Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Requirements: The building and neighborhood services division shall issue a vacation rental unit license when it is
determined that all of the following requirements have been met:
1. A zoning certificate or special use permit for the vacation rental unit has been approved.
2. All applicable state and local fire standards have been complied with including:
a. The state fire marshal's requirements for one- and two-family dwellings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 249/923
b. All other applicable local fire prevention standards.
3. All other applicable standards, including, but not limited to, building construction, plumbing, electrical and
handicapped accessibility standards.
4. The licensee shall maintain minimum liability insurance coverage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
for each individual and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence. The licensee shall submit a
certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of the license. Failure to maintain minimum liability insurance
shall result in automatic revocation of the vacation rental unit license.
5. The licensee shall submit a certificate of registration from the Illinois department of revenue for payment of any
applicable state hotel and retail sales taxes.
6. The licensee shall have registered with the city's finance department for payment of all applicable municipal fees or
taxes, including the hotel/motel and food/alcoholic beverage privilege tax.
B. License Displayed: Once the license is issued, the licensee shall display the license at all times in a location easily
viewed by guests and prospective guests of the vacation rental unit. (Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-8: APPEAL FROM DETERMINATION AND/OR REQUIREMENTS:
A. Request For Hearing: If an applicant believes any determination and/or requirement made by any department of the
city with regard to the issuance of a vacation rental unit license is erroneous, the applicant may request a hearing
before the city manager to determine the propriety of any such determination and/or requirement.
B. Notification Required: To request a hearing, the applicant must notify the city manager within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of the determinations and requirements from the building and neighborhood services division as provided in
subsection 5-17-7A of this chapter. The city manager will, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the request for the
hearing, schedule said hearing.
C. Decision By City Manager: Both the applicant and the city department involved may present testimony and evidence.
The city manager can limit but not prohibit evidence and testimony. The city manager shall make his decision
regarding the propriety of the determination or recommendation based on the applicable industry standards
(international, ANSI, etc.) and with due regard for the health and safety of the public. (Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-9: VIOLATION; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Temporary Suspension: Vacation rental unit licenses may be suspended temporarily by the building and neighborhood
services division for failure by the licensee or any employee of the licensee to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or in any case where the licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized employee of the city or the county to
inspect the premises or the operations therein. Upon notification by the city's finance director, the building and
neighborhood services division may temporarily suspend a vacation rental unit license if the licensee fails to pay any
applicable municipal tax or fee, including, but not limited to, the hotel/motel and food/alcoholic beverage privilege tax.
B. Notice Of Violation; Timely Response: Whenever a licensee or any employee of the licensee has failed to comply with
the requirements of this chapter, the licensee shall be provided written notice of the violation. Such notice shall cite
the violation, specify the corrective action to be taken, state that such violation shall be corrected within ten (10) days
or the vacation rental unit license shall be suspended, and shall inform the licensee of the right to request a hearing
before the city manager, as hereinabove provided. Such notice may be personally served on the licensee or shall be
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such service by mail shall be deemed to have been served at the time
of posting thereof. Any notice given under the provisions of this section shall operate as and shall become a final
order without further action being necessary upon the expiration of ten (10) days from and after the effective date of
service of such notice, unless, within such ten (10) day period, the licensee files a written request for a hearing before
the city manager. A properly filed written request shall suspend the effective date of the suspension until the date of
the city manager's decision. The city manager shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request.
The city manager shall render written decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord.
2017-03)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 250/923
5-17-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Repeated Offenses: Vacation rental unit licenses may be revoked by the Building and Neighborhood Services Division
for continuing violations or repeated failures by the licensee or any employee of the licensee to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Notice Of Revocation Date; Request For Hearing: Whenever a licensee or any employee of the licensee continuously
fails to comply with, or repeatedly violates the requirements of this chapter, the licensee shall be provided written
notice of the effective date of the revocation. Such notice shall cite the existing violation(s) (if any), specify the
corrective action(s) to be taken, state the date that such violation(s) shall be corrected, and shall inform the licensee
of the right to request a hearing before the City Manager, as hereinabove provided. Such notice may be personally
served on the licensee or shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such service by mail shall be
deemed to have been served at the time of posting thereof. The Building and Neighborhood Services Division shall
notify the licensee at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of the revocation. If requested, the City Manager
shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request. The City Manager shall render a written
decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing.
C. Liability Insurance Required: Vacation rental unit licenses shall be automatically revoked if a licensee fails to maintain
the minimum amount of liability insurance. If a license is automatically revoked due to failure of the licensee to
maintain the minimum liability insurance, no prior notice of said revocation shall be required; however, if such failure
becomes known to the Building and Neighborhood Services Division, he shall provide written confirmation of the
revocation within ten (10) days after his knowledge of the failure to maintain insurance.
D. Surrender License: In any case where a vacation rental unit license is revoked, the licensee shall immediately
surrender such license to the Building and Neighborhood Services Division. (Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-11: POWER TO ACT IN EMERGENCIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever unsanitary, unsafe, or other conditions are found in the
operation of the vacation rental unit which constitute a substantial and immediate hazard to the public health and safety,
the Building and Neighborhood Services Division or the Fire Chief may, without warning, notice or hearing, issue a
written notice to the licensee citing the condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, specifying the time period
within which such action shall be taken, and if necessary, stating that any or all vacation rental operations are to be
discontinued immediately. The licensee to whom such an order is issued shall immediately comply therewith, but may
request in writing, within ten (10) days, a hearing before the City Manager to abate such order. If requested, the City
Manager shall provide such a hearing within five (5) days of the written request. The City Manager shall render a written
decision within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. 2017-03)
5-17-12: REQUIREMENTS FOR HOSTING PLATFORMS:
A. A hosting platform shall comply with the requirements of title 7, chapter 9 of this Code by, among any other applicable
requirements, collecting and remitting all required taxes. A hosting platform shall maintain a record demonstrating
that the taxes have been remitted to the City of Carbondale.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, nothing in this section shall relieve an individual, business entity,
or hosting platform of the obligations imposed by any and all applicable provisions of State law and this Code
including but not limited to those obligations imposed by title 7, chapter 9 of this Code. Further, nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to limit any remedies available under any and all applicable provisions of State law and this Code.
(Ord. 2019-02)
5-17-13: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations authorized by this chapter shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 251/923
guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of any
tax due. Each day of any violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2018-29)
Title 6
CEMETERIES
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The City of Carbondale, Illinois.
GRAVE MARKER OR HEADSTONE: A stone intended to indicate the location of a particular grave, and shall be set on a
level with the ground, those on the west side of the monument to be placed at the head of the grave and those on the
east side at the foot.
INTERMENT: The opening and/or closing of a gravesite, including, but not limited to, original interments, disinterments,
or reinterments.
MAUSOLEUM: An aboveground memorial tomb containing one or more human remains in separate compartments.
MONUMENT: Any memorial structure, other than a marker, erected upon a lot, except a mausoleum.
MUNICIPAL CEMETERY OR CEMETERY: Refers to Oakland Cemetery and Woodlawn Cemetery unless otherwise
specified.
NATURAL BURIAL: A burial where remains are placed into a biodegradable casket or in a simple burial shroud and
interned without the use of burial vaults or other materials that would typically inhibit decomposition of the remains. Use
of non-biodegradable embalming fluid is prohibited for natural burials.
NATURAL BURIAL BLOCKS: A formal platted and recorded land area of Oakland Cemetery wherein only natural burials
are permitted.
PRIVATE CEMETERY: Refers to Snider Hill Cemetery, unless otherwise specified.
SEXTON: The person charged with the upkeep and repair of the Municipal cemeteries. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-2: ESTABLISHED; BOUNDARIES; EXCLUSIVE USE AS BURIAL PLACE:
The land owned by the City, known as Oakland Cemetery, together with a certain piece of land within the City limits
known as Woodlawn Cemetery, are and shall remain dedicated to burial purposes. In addition, land commonly known as
the Snider Hill Cemetery, is and shall remain dedicated to private burial purposes. No other cemetery shall hereafter be
established within the City limits.
A. Oakland Cemetery: The boundaries of Oakland Cemetery are as follows:
Part of the northeast quarter of section 17, township 9 south, range 1 west of the 3rd principal meridian, Jackson
County, Illinois, being more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at an iron pin and cap located at the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of said section 17;
thence north, along the east line of the northeast quarter of said section 17, a distance of 30.0 feet to a point; thence
westerly with a deflection angle to the left of 91°14'11", a distance of 25.0 feet to a "p-k nail" located in the westerly
right-of-way line of Oakland Avenue, being the point of beginning for this description: From said point of beginning;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 252/923
thence northerly with a deflection angle to the right of 91°14'11" along said westerly right-of-way line, being a line
25.0 feet westerly of and parallel with the east line of said quarter section, a distance of 1073.69 feet to an iron pin
and cap located in the former southerly right-of-way line of the abandoned Illinois Central Railroad; thence
northwesterly with a deflection angle to the left of 70°34'30", along said former right-of-way line, a distance of 1391.59
feet to an iron pipe located at a point of offset in said right-of-way line; thence southerly along said offset, with a
deflection angle to the left of 108°47'35", a distance of 15.68 feet to an iron pipe; thence continuing northwesterly
along said former right-of-way line with a deflection angle to the right of 108°47'35", a distance of 1441.52 feet to an
iron pin and cap located at a point of intersection with the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 17; thence
southerly along said west line with a deflection angle to the left of 109°43'21", a distance of 2077.76 feet to an iron
pin and cap located at the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of said section 17; thence easterly with a
deflection angle to the left of 90°30'31", a distance of 1324.21 feet to an iron pipe located at the southeast corner of
the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 17; said point also being the southwest corner of the
southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 17; thence continuing easterly with a deflection angle to the
left of 0°25'49" along the south line of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 17, a distance of
1180.48 feet to an iron pin and cap located in the westerly right-of-way line of Oakland Avenue; thence northerly
along said westerly right-of-way line with a deflection angle to the left of 88°12'23", a distance of 30.0 feet to an iron
pin and cap located at a point of intersection with the northerly right-of-way line of Rigdon Street; thence easterly
along said northerly right-of-way line, with a deflection angle to the right of 88°12'23", a distance of 156.68 feet to the
point of beginning.
Said Oakland Cemetery Tract containing 97.36 acres, more or less.
B. Woodlawn Cemetery: The boundaries of Woodlawn Cemetery are as follows: Outlot 33 in the City of Carbondale,
Jackson County, Illinois, as recorded in plat book G, page 373 in the Recorder's Office, Jackson County, Illinois. (Ord.
2018-35)
6-1-3: PLAT:
A. Oakland Cemetery: A replat of Oakland Cemetery bearing the legend, "Official Plat Of Oakland Cemetery", prepared
by the Public Works Department of the City, and officially adopted by the City Council by resolution 78-R-31, on June
5, 1978, and recorded in the Recorder's Office of Jackson County, shall remain the lawful plat of Oakland Cemetery,
and shall not be changed except by resolution of the City Council.
B. Woodlawn Cemetery: A plat of Woodlawn Cemetery bearing the legend "Plat Of Carbondale Cemetery, Outlot 33"
prepared by C. Barrow, County Surveyor, and recorded in the Recorder's Office of Jackson County on September 16,
1856, shall remain the lawful plat of Woodlawn Cemetery. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-4: SUPERVISION OF MUNICIPAL CEMETERIES:
All Municipal cemeteries shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works, who shall have charge,
management and control of such cemeteries, and of all affairs connected therewith. The Director shall see to it that the
grounds belonging to the same are properly cared for and protected, and that all provisions of the law and ordinances
relating to cemeteries and all rules for the government thereof are enforced. He shall supervise and direct the
ornamenting, adorning, embellishing and improving of the grounds thereof and the avenues, walks and squares therein.
(Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-5: SEXTON:
A. Appointment: The City Manager shall appoint some suitable person to act as sexton of cemeteries. The sexton shall
be governed by the nonunion personnel rules and regulations.
B. Duties: The sexton appointed under the preceding subsection shall, under direction of the Director of Public Works,
have charge of all Municipal cemeteries and shall keep and preserve in good order and repair the grounds, building,
avenues, walks and fences thereof, and shall also see that all the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances
relating to and all rules and regulations for the government of such cemeteries are enforced. (Ord. 2018-35)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 253/923
6-1-6: CARE OF CEMETERIES:
A. As long as the cemeteries shall remain the property of the City, the City shall have the authority to maintain all
cemetery roadways, walkways, and other appurtenances in a safe and reasonable condition; keep all cemetery
grounds mowed, trimmed and free from trash and leaves; repair (not replace) any monument, grave marker, or
headstone damaged by vandals and/or deemed necessary by the sexton; remove any coping, curb, private corner
posts or other structures illegally placed in the cemetery as deemed necessary by the sexton to allow easier
maintenance of the grounds; level or realign any monument, grave marker, or headstone as deemed necessary by
the sexton to assure proper and uniform maintenance of the grounds; tamp, fill, and seed all graves experiencing
settling as soon as the condition of the soil permits.
B. Care, maintenance, and future repair of a mausoleum is not considered as regular care, but may be provided by
special agreement entered into by the responsible parties and the City.
C. Private cemeteries within the City limits of the City of Carbondale, being Snider Hill Cemetery, shall remain the
property of private citizens, who shall have the obligation to maintain said private cemeteries, as well as all
appurtenances, cemetery roadways and walkways, in a safe and reasonable condition. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-7: PLANTINGS AND STRUCTURES RESTRICTED:
A. No planting or landscaping shall be allowed except by the City throughout all Municipal cemeteries.
B. No coping, curbs, private corner posts, or any other structures of any kind whatsoever shall be permitted within
Municipal cemeteries except when placed by the City or when otherwise permitted under the provisions of this
chapter.
C. There shall be no jars, glass, or metal receptacles, or other containers used on the premises for the holding of floral
bouquets. All such form of decorations shall be in approved containers. Approved containers are described as: vases
attached to the monument, hanging baskets, and monument saddles. A maximum of one shepherd's hook shall be
allowed on each space, at a location to be approved by the sexton.
D. The City shall not be responsible for any kind of planting damaged by the elements, vandals, thieves or by other
causes beyond its control. The sexton shall have the authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, as
in the judgment of the sexton, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, or diseased, or when they do not
conform to the rules and regulations of the cemetery.
E. The cemetery shall not be liable for floral pieces, baskets, or frames placed on or near gravesites that are damaged or
stolen.
F. Natural burial blocks have additional restrictions; please refer to section 6-3-7 of this title. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-8: GRADE OF LOTS:
The grade of lots in the Municipal cemeteries shall not be substantially changed from its position at the time of sale.
(Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-9: MARKERS; MONUMENTS; MAUSOLEUMS:
The following provisions shall apply to composition, size and placement of markers, monuments and mausoleums within
Municipal cemeteries:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 254/923
A. Restricted Blocks: All blocks other than those specifically named in subsection B of this section, shall be restricted to
having only one upright monument per four (4) graves and no more than one ground level marker per grave space.
B. Unrestricted Blocks: Blocks hereinafter specifically named are unrestricted, in as much as, there may be one upright
or ground level monument and one ground level marker per grave space:
1. Blocks 1 through 33, inclusive.
2. Blocks 37 through 39, inclusive.
3. Blocks 54 and 64.
4. Blocks 80 through 83, inclusive.
5. Blocks 310 and 320, inclusive.
C. Ground Level Restrictions: Blocks 207 through 212, inclusive, as of April 18, 1980, shall be restricted to flush (ground
level) markers and monuments. All natural burial blocks shall be restricted to one flush (ground level) marker per
space that is no larger than 24" by 12"; refer to section 6-3-7 of this title for additional information.
D. Upright Restrictions: Upright monuments shall be no larger than sixty inches by fourteen inches (60" x 14") at the
baseline with a six inch (6") border flush with the ground, and seventy two inches (72") in height. The placement
thereof shall be centered upon the common corner of the four (4) (2 opposing) grave spaces.
E. Prerequisite To Setting Markers And Monuments: No permanent monument or marker shall be set on a lot until total
payment for that lot has been received by the City and approval of the monument size, placement, and retailer has
been granted by the sexton; except when said marker or monument is furnished by the United States government
recognizing the interred for military service.
F. Exclusive Use: Mausoleums will be permitted only on lots sold for that purpose and no other stonework will be
permitted on a lot on which a mausoleum has been erected. A minimum of one (1) 8-grave lot must be provided for a
mausoleum.
G. Authority Of Sexton: These regulations notwithstanding, the sexton shall have the final authority to direct the location
and placement of markers, monuments and mausoleums.
H. Composition: All markers, monuments and mausoleums shall be constructed of granite, marble, or sandstone. No
manmade conglomerates or clay mixtures with or without cementing materials are permitted. Deviations from this
restriction shall receive the approval of the cemetery sexton prior to any installation. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-10: INJURY TO OR DESTRUCTION OF MONUMENTS:
No person shall remove or carry away, or wilfully, maliciously, or negligently break, deface, destroy or otherwise injure
any marker, monument, mausoleum, tree, shrub, plant, vase, paling, fence, gate or other property, article or thing
belonging to, or placed or erected in, any cemetery or private cemetery within or under control of the City, nor shall such
person pluck any flowers therein, or trespass upon or maltreat any grave therein, or violate any of the established rules
or regulations of the government thereof. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-11: TRESPASSING:
A. Hours: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to trespass upon any Municipal cemetery from sundown to
sunrise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 255/923
B. Animals: No dogs shall be permitted within Municipal cemeteries, except those used in support of disabled persons,
such as seeing eye dogs or dogs for the deaf. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-12: DISCHARGING FIREARMS OR FIREWORKS:
No person shall hunt, discharge firearms, or set off or explode fireworks, except as part of a burial or other service, in
any cemetery or burying ground within the City, or within or under the jurisdiction of the City. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-1-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2018-35)
Chapter 2
SALE OF SPACES, LOTS, BLOCKS
6-2-1: PRICE OF SPACES:
A. Oakland Cemetery: The sale price of a grave space in Oakland Cemetery shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. There shall be no additional sales of lots or spaces in blocks 1 through 27, 80 through
83, 310, and 320 in Oakland Cemetery.
B. Woodlawn Cemetery: There shall be no additional sales of grave spaces in Woodlawn Cemetery. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-2-2: APPLICATION; PAYMENT:
A. Application: All applications for the purchase of cemetery spaces, lots, or blocks shall be made to the City Clerk who
shall receive the price of the space, lot, or block.
B. Payment: Payment in full for the purchase of any cemetery space, lot or block shall be made in full at the time of
purchase. Persons wishing not to pay with cash may pay by check or with a credit card recognized and accepted by
the City at the time of purchase. If for any reason, payment made with means other than cash is not fulfilled, the
purchase of the space, lot, or block will be considered void and the parcels will be available for resale by the City.
(Ord. 2018-35)
6-2-3: DEEDS AND DEED BOOK:
Upon verification that payment for any cemetery space, block or lot has been paid in full, the Mayor and the City Clerk
shall execute and deliver to the purchaser of a space, lot, or block, a deed under the Corporate Seal of the City for such
space, lot or block. The City Clerk shall provide a book of blank deeds for cemetery lots, with stubs for each, on which
stub shall be entered the number of the space, lot, and block, the name of the grantee, the price of the same, and the
date. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-2-4: TRANSFER OF SPACE, LOT OR BLOCK:
Upon transfer of ownership of a space, lot or block between private individuals, the new owner of the space, lot or block
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 256/923
shall have said transfer recorded in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-2-5: PLAT RECORD AND NUMERICAL RECORD:
The City Clerk shall keep and preserve in his office the plats of the City cemeteries and also a record in numerical order
of the lots and blocks in such cemeteries, with the price at which each is for sale, and when any space, lot or block is
sold, the City Clerk shall make an entry opposite the number of the space, lot or block on the record of the name of the
purchaser, the amount sold for and the date of the same. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-2-6: ACCOUNTING FOR SALE OF SPACES, LOTS, BLOCKS:
A. Perpetual Care Principal Account: All funds received by the City from the sale of spaces, lots and blocks in the
Municipal cemeteries and twenty five percent (25%) of all fees collected by the City for grave openings and all funds
donated, bequeathed or devised to the City for grave openings and all funds donated, bequeathed or devised to the
City for the care, maintenance and operation of the Municipal cemeteries shall be deposited in a Perpetual Care
Fund designated restricted cash-perpetual care principal account. The City Treasurer shall invest the monies so
deposited in the manner prescribed by law. The principal of this Perpetual Care Fund shall be kept intact and
perpetually invested, except that the City Council may, by an appropriate ordinance or resolution, authorize the City
Treasurer to disburse funds from this account for the sole purpose of acquiring land for Municipal cemetery purposes.
B. Perpetual Care Interest Account: All interest generated by the investment of funds in the restricted cash-perpetual
care principal account shall be deposited in a separate account designated the restricted cash-perpetual care interest
account. The City Treasurer shall invest the monies in the restricted cash-perpetual care interest account in the
manner prescribed by law. All interest generated from such investment shall be deposited in the restricted cashperpetual
care interest account. Monies in this interest account shall be used for the sole purposes of operating and
maintaining the Municipal cemeteries in accordance with the City's annual budget.
C. Other Fees: Seventy five percent (75%) of the grave opening fee and all other fees collected by the City for services
provided by the City in Municipal cemeteries shall be deposited in the General Fund and credited to a separate
revenue account. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-2-7: EXCHANGE OF LOTS:
The City Clerk may not exchange City cemetery lots except under rare and special circumstances, which circumstances
shall be subject to the following provisions and standards which shall apply to all requests or applications to the City for
any exchange of City cemetery lots:
A. Exchange Criteria: Any such exchange by the City Clerk shall be made only if the applicant for exchange of lots is: 1)
divorced, and/or 2) remarried, and/or 3) has demonstrated a special case or hardship such as a historical purpose or
a purpose having a direct benefit to all the citizens of the City but all such requests based on the above category of
special case or hardship shall be permitted only on City Council approval.
B. Transfer Fee: A transfer fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one exchange, regardless of the number
of lots involved, shall be paid to the City.
C. Condition Of Exchanged Lot: Prior to any exchange of City cemetery lots, all applicants shall execute a sworn
statement before a notary public on forms provided by the City Clerk to the effect that any lots to be deeded back to
the City in an exchange have not previously been used for burial purposes, and any person making a false affidavit to
the City in violation of this exchange requirement shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and further, upon such conviction, such exchange
transaction shall be subject to a civil action by the City for a rescission of the exchange.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 257/923
D. Application; Contents: An application for the exchange of cemetery spaces, lots or blocks shall be made to the City
Clerk. Said application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Description of property currently owned by the applicant, which property is available for exchange.
3. Date the above property was purchased, name of original purchaser, and original purchase price.
4. Description of the property that the applicant wishes to acquire.
5. Purpose of the exchange.
E. Difference In Value Paid To City: That the applicant pay to the City the difference between the cost of the lot or lots as
originally purchased and the current selling price of the property to be acquired.
F. Quitclaim Deed Required: All such lot exchanges may be made only by a form type quitclaim deed provided by the
City Clerk which shall be recorded in the City Clerk's and County Clerk's Offices in order to maintain a chain of
ownership upon acceptance by the City Council. (Ord. 2018-35)
Chapter 3
INTERMENTS
6-3-1: APPLICATION FOR GRAVE OPENER PERMIT:
Provided that the cemetery lot on which the interment is being made has been previously purchased, any licensed
funeral director or his agent who wishes to make an interment in the cemetery, shall contact the sexton at least twenty
four (24) hours prior to the interment and shall apply to the City Clerk for a permit as soon as possible thereafter. In the
event the lot has not been previously purchased, the sexton shall be contacted at least thirty six (36) hours prior to the
time of interment to assure that payment and proper arrangements can be made. Upon payment of the proper fee, a
grave opener permit shall be prepared by the City Clerk and issued to the applicant. Failure to follow the provisions of
this section may result in a rescheduling of the burial except when religious practices require interment as soon as
possible following death. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-2: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A. Recognized Holidays: No permit shall be issued for interments on the following holidays recognized by the City:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King's birthday
Presidents' Day
Good Friday
Easter Sunday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Eve afternoon (after 12:00 noon)
Christmas Day
B. Observed Holidays Excluded: Permits may be issued for interments on observed holidays as follows:
1. In the event a recognized holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be the observed holiday. In the
event a recognized holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be the observed holiday.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 258/923
2. The day after Thanksgiving is considered an observed holiday and interment permits may be issued. (Ord. 2018-
35)
6-3-3: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
A. General Information: The permit issued under the preceding section shall state the name of the deceased and the
number of space, lot, and block in which the deceased is to be interred. The City Clerk shall keep a record of the
name of the deceased, date of death, age, funeral director, and date and time of interment.
B. Exception: If the deceased shall be a stranger or pauper without means and no person is chargeable with the
interment or liable therefor, the Clerk's permit shall so state. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-4: OPENING AND CLOSING FEES:
A. The fees received by the City for the opening and closing of each grave, and attending to the interment of the body
therein shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. A current copy of the fee schedule
shall be maintained by the City Clerk and the cemetery sexton.
B. Graveside equipment shall be furnished by the funeral director. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-5: SUPERVISION OF INTERMENT:
The sexton shall dig graves and properly inter the dead when called upon to do so in accordance with the regulations set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-6: RULES OF INTERMENT:
The sexton shall allow no interment without having first obtained the following:
A. A grave opener permit from the City Clerk authorizing interment. No interment shall be made in any other lot than the
one named in the permit.
B. A burial permit from the Public Health Officer as required by law.
C. Verification that the space in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for.
D. Verification that such lot is not used beyond its capacity. No more than two (2) burials in one (1) thirty six inch by
ninety six inch (36" x 96") grave space are allowed; provided that the second burial is a cremation urn unless the first
burial was made at a depth that is sufficient enough to allow for a second burial. Natural burial blocks shall not have
more than one burial in each grave space.
E. Verification that proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the
grave.
F. When an interment is to be made on a lot, the location of such interment shall be designated by the lot owner. Should
the lot owner fail or neglect to make such designation, the City reserves the right to make the interment at a location
agreed upon by the funeral director and the sexton.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 259/923
G. Interments in non-natural burial blocks require the containment of remains within a suitable casket or urn and casket
outer receptacles per section 6-3-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-7: SPECIAL RULES FOR NATURAL BURIAL BLOCKS:
A. Decedents are not to be embalmed or topically treated with sprays or compounds. The use of funeral home approved
non-toxic chemicals is permitted if required.
B. Decedents shall be placed inside burial containers/caskets, made from materials that are non-toxic, one hundred
percent (100%) biodegradable, plant-derived natural products, untreated softwoods, cardboard, seagrass, bamboo,
woven wicker and hemp, lined with cotton, linen or silk. Materials used in the construction and finishing of products
shall not contain plastics, acrylics or similar synthetic materials.
C. Optionally decedents may also be wrapped from head to toe in a simple cotton shroud, quilt, or wool blanket and be
supported on a solid board for stability for lowering into the grave. A flat board, minimum of one inch (1") thick and
twelve inches (12") wide by the length of the body is suitable. Plywood and particle board materials are not
acceptable due to their adhesive chemical composition.
D. Only one interment is allowed per grave space, including cremations.
E. The use of vaults of any kind is prohibited in natural burial blocks.
F. Graves will be excavated four and one-half feet (4.5') to five feet (5.0') deep depending on the type of burial
container/casket used. Family members cannot excavate or dig the graves.
G. Decedent shall be respectfully lowered into the grave by the funeral home director (or their designee) that is in
responsible charge of the services.
H. Family members and friends are welcome to participate in closing the grave by shoveling some soil back into the
excavation; however, due to safety concerns, arrangements must be made in advance with the cemetery sexton. All
graves will be mounded and allowed to return to their natural level. Cemetery workers will adjust the ground around
uneven graves throughout the year.
I. Flush ground level grave markers are suggested but not required. Engraved flat natural fieldstone or quarried stone,
approximately 12" x 24" and four inches (4") thick, may be used as a marker. The stone may not be machine cut or
polished and should appear more natural with simple engraving. Grave marker must be installed flush with the
ground as directed by the cemetery sexton; absolutely no above grade markers will be allowed in natural burial
blocks.
J. No trees, shrubs, or other plants may be planted on individual spaces or lots. No artificial flowers, vases, wreaths,
glass, flags, statues, stones, shepherds hooks, or any other similar decorations will be all allowed. The placing of
temporary natural cut flowers and the like is allowed so long as all items are easily biodegradable and can be mowed
over during maintenance. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-8: HOURS OF INTERMENT:
Funeral processions shall be allowed to enter the cemetery between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and three thirty
o'clock (3:30) P.M. of each day, except on those holidays as outlined in section 6-3-2 of this chapter. Those processions
entering the cemetery later than three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. shall cause the funeral director of record to be subject to
applicable overtime charges as specified by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2018-35)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 260/923
6-3-9: USE OF CASKET OUTER RECEPTACLES REQUIRED:
The interment of any casket without being enclosed in an outer receptacle or vault fabricated of concrete with a one
piece lid, or of steel, or of other material approved by the sexton, is prohibited unless the interment is being made in a
formally platted natural burial block of Oakland Cemetery.
Upon approval of the sexton, it is permissible to use a two-piece polymer "butter dish" style outer receptacle/vault without
the flat bottom section in non-natural burial blocks of Oakland Cemetery. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-10: INTERMENT OF REMAINS, OTHER THAN HUMAN BODIES, PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to inter any remains, other than human bodies, in all Municipal cemeteries. (Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-11: MONTHLY CHECK OF INTERMENT PERMITS:
On the first Monday of each month, the sexton shall return to the City Clerk all the burial permits received by him during
the preceding month, and they shall be compared with the entries on the Clerk's books to see if they correspond thereto.
(Ord. 2018-35)
6-3-12: INTERMENT REGISTER:
It shall be the duty of the sexton to keep a well bound book in which he shall register all interments, stating the number of
the space, lot, block, and cemetery or private cemetery, the name of the person buried and the age. Any person
arranging burials in a private cemetery, shall have filed with the sexton, the necessary information to be registered. (Ord.
2018-35)
6-3-13: UNLAWFUL INTERMENT:
It shall be unlawful to make any interment or bury the dead body of any person within the City limits, except in Oakland
Cemetery or Snider Hill Cemetery. (Ord. 2018-35)
Title 7
FINANCE, TAXATION AND BUSINESS AFFAIRS
Chapter 1
FUNDS; DEPOSITORIES; TAXES
7-1-1: DISPOSITION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS:
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the
payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made, and such money shall be used for no other purpose
whatsoever unless to reimburse a corporation for money expended for such improvement. (1929 Code § 36-2)
7-1-2: DEPOSITORIES:
The following financial institutions are hereby designated as depositories for the money of the city:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 261/923
A. Bank Of Carbondale, Carbondale, Illinois.
B. First Bank, Carbondale, Illinois.
C. First Southern Bank, Carbondale, Illinois.
D. MidCountry Bank, Carbondale, Illinois.
E. Old National Bank, Carbondale, Illinois.
F. Regions Bank, Carbondale, Illinois.
G. Illinois Funds - Custodian U.S. Bank, Springfield, Illinois. (Ord. 2010-31)
7-1-3: LIBRARY TAX:
The maximum tax rate limited for the library fund of the city shall be and is hereby established at twelve one-hundredths
percent (0.12%) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the full, fair cash value of all taxable property in the municipality as
ascertained and set by law. (Ord. 1064)
7-1-4: GARBAGE TAX:
There shall be levied annually upon all the personal and real property within the corporate limits of the city, subject to
taxation for each fiscal year, a tax not to exceed one mill on the dollar, according to the last valuation of the same made
for the purpose of state and county taxation by the last assessment in the city, which tax shall be levied for the purpose
of establishing and maintaining a garbage system for the collection and disposal of garbage in the city. "Garbage", within
the meaning of this section, is any refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, attending
the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, grain or vegetables. This definition of
"garbage" is to receive a strict construction. The annual garbage tax shall be in addition to the amount authorized to be
levied for general purposes as provided by Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 736)
Chapter 2
HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
7-2-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE OF TAX:
A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the City of
Carbondale. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.50%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business. (Ord. 2017-29)
7-2-2: PERSONAL PROPERTY EXCEPTED FROM TAX:
The tax imposed by section 7-2-1 of this chapter shall not apply to the sale of an item of tangible property titled or
registered with an agency of the government of the State of Illinois and to the sale of food for human consumption which
is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. 2017-29)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 262/923
7-2-3: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The tax imposed by section 7-2-1 of this chapter and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall
be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have
the full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-29)
Chapter 3
HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
7-3-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE OF TAX:
A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service in the City of Carbondale. The tax
imposed by this section shall be at the rate of two and one-half percent (2.50%) of the selling price of all tangible
property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as
an incident to a sale of service. (Ord. 2017-29)
7-3-2: PERSONAL PROPERTY EXCEPTED FROM TAX:
The tax imposed by section 7-3-1 of this chapter shall not apply to the sales of food for human consumption which is to
be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. 2017-29)
7-3-3: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The tax imposed by section 7-3-1 of this chapter and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall
be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have
the full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-29)
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL LEASING OCCUPATION TAX
7-4-1: TAX RATE:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting or leasing tangible personal property to the
users thereof at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the gross receipts from such renting or leasing made in the
course of such business while this Chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1292 § 1)
7-4-2: LEASER'S REPORT:
Every person engaged in such business in the City shall file with the State Department of Revenue the return in the
manner as required by the Leasing Occupation Tax Act, adopted by the 74th General Assembly, as amended. (Ord.
1292 § 2)
7-4-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
At the time such return is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 263/923
imposed on account of the receipts from renting or leasing tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord.
1292 § 3)
Chapter 5
WATER, GAS AND ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER'S TAX
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
AMEREN ILLINOIS: Ameren Illinois or its successor.
CITY: The city of Carbondale, Illinois.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages or for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas, water, or electricity for use or consumption and not for resale as the case may be; and for all
services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money, or otherwise, including cash,
credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction of account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of the materials used, labor or service cost, or any other
expenses whatsoever.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure,
corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state
university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this state,
directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation, facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales
office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for
resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal
code1, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes transmitted messages, electricity, gas, or water within the corporate
limits of the city of Carbondale which is acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: A person, corporation or entity engaged in the business of the occupations or privileges as stated in
section 7-5-2 of this chapter.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person to person communication, shall
include the furnishing, for a consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased) or both, to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in turn, receive any consideration in
connection therewith, but shall not include, such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages are furnished for a
consideration, by such persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages. (Ord. 2015-34)
7-5-2: TAX RATES:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: (Ord. 98-47)
A. Repeal Of Tax Act: If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, is repealed or
becomes ineffective for any reason, or if chapter 8 of this title is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 264/923
ordinance 98-47, passed August 18, 1998, as it pertains to this tax shall be deemed in full force and effect as of the
date public act 92-0526 or chapter 8 of this title is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2002-69)
B. Electricity2:
1. The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the city at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
a. For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.446 cents per kilowatt hour;
b. For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.292 cents per kilowatt hour;
c. For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.263 cents per kilowatt hour;
d. For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.256 cents per kilowatt hour;
e. For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.248 cents per kilowatt hour;
f. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.234 cents per kilowatt hour;
g. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.230 cents per kilowatt hour;
h. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.226 cents per kilowatt hour;
i. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.223 cents per kilowatt hour;
j. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month: 0.219 cents per kilowatt
hour.
The tax rates set forth in the preceding table will be used at least through December 31, 2008, are proportional
to the rates enumerated in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2 (as modified by public act 90-561), and do not
exceed the revenue that could have been collected during 1997, using the rates enumerated in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2 (as modified by public act 90-561).
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in this subsection B1 shall be effective: a)
on September 1, 1999, for residential customers; and b) on the earlier of 1) the last bill issued prior to December
31, 2000, or 2) the date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104, for
nonresidential customers.
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, subsection B2 of this section shall specifically remain in effect: a) for
receipts attributable to residential customers, until August 31, 1998; and b) for receipts attributable to
nonresidential customers, the earlier of 1) through the last bill issued prior to December 31, 2000, or 2) the date
of the first bill issued to such nonresidential customer pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104. (Ord.
99-44)
2. Any user or consumer that is not subject to the provisions of subsection B1 of this section shall be subject to the
following method of collection: persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling
electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
3. The tax imposed under this subsection B shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers, i.e., tax collector. This tax shall constitute a debt
of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and
in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
4. Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the
city by the tax collector; provided, that the tax collector shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of
electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are
thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
5. A tax collector shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. A tax collector shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent
(3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying date to the city upon request. For purposes of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 265/923
chapter, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be
for the delivery of electricity.
C. Gas: Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption
within the corporate limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts
therefrom.
D. Water: Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling water for use or consumption
within the corporate limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts
therefrom. (Ord. 98-47)
7-5-3: EXEMPTIONS:
A. No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to
which such business may not, under the constitution or laws of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this
state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas, water or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to
taxation under the provisions of this chapter for such transactions as are or may be subject to taxation under the
provisions of the municipal retailers' occupation tax act3 authorized by the Illinois municipal code.
B. No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to all current and future properties owned or operated by the city of
Carbondale, the current list of which properties is set out in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein; and in
addition, no tax is imposed on the property owned by Amtrak on South Washington Street designated with account
number 7142001716. (Ord. 2015-34)
7-5-4: TAX IN ADDITION TO OTHER TAXES, FEES AND REVENUE MEASURES:
A. Additional Tax: Such tax shall be in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the city, the
state or any other political subdivision of the state, including, but not limited to, the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to this municipality as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
B. When Imposition Of Tax Not Allowed: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the tax shall not be
imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the constitution or laws of the state of
Illinois or the United States. (Ord. 98-47)
7-5-5: TAX COLLECTOR'S RETURN:
A. Monthly Return: On or before the fifteenth day of each and every month, each tax collector shall make a return to the
city clerk for the preceding month, stating:
1. Full name.
2. Principal place of business.
3. Any information requested by the city manager, or his designee, regarding the use or consumption during those
months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
4. The amount of tax.
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 266/923
B. Estimated Prepayment Authorized: The tax collector making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the finance director, revenue division, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided, that in
connection with any return the tax collector may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts
previously billed) with prompt adjustments of late payments based upon any differences between such billings and
the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 98-47)
7-5-6: CREDIT OR REFUND:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no
person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this chapter unless the person files a claim for
refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted. (Ord. 98-47)
7-5-7: TIME LIMITATION ON ACTIONS TO RECOVER DELINQUENT TAX:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter shall be commenced more than three (3)
years after the due date of such amount. (Ord. 98-47)
7-5-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector, and every person required to pay the tax imposed by this chapter, shall keep accurate books and
records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that give rise,
or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this chapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day. (Ord. 98-47)
7-5-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city manager, or his designee, is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 98-47)
7-5-10: PENALTIES:
Any tax collector or person who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. In addition, the city may pursue any remedy provided
by law through a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 98-47)
Chapter 6
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY UNDER CITY CONTRACTS
7-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and ensure equal opportunity without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age,
disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry, or unfavorable discharge from
military service in city employment and employment related to all contracts with the city. (Ord. 2003-66)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Where used in this chapter unless the context otherwise clearly requires, the following terms shall have the meanings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 267/923
herein ascribed to them:
AGE: The chronological age of a person who is forty (40) but not yet seventy (70) years old.
CITY: The city of Carbondale, Illinois.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT: Any "contract" as defined in this section for the construction, rehabilitation, alteration,
conversion, extension, landscaping, repair or other improvements of buildings, highways, or other real property.
CONTRACT: Any contract, purchase order, lease, or other agreement or understanding, written or otherwise, between
the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and any other person for the procurement of any thing or service of value, merchandise,
goods, materials, labor or services for or by the city and further means any loan or grant by the city of Carbondale,
Illinois, from which such a contract, purchase order, lease, or other agreement or understanding may be financed in
whole or in part.
CONTRACTING AGENCY: Any office, department, board, agency, commission, institution or other entity of the city who
may enter into any contract.
CONTRACTOR: Any person who bids or applies for, who is considered for, or who has been awarded a contract by the
contracting agency either through a competitive bidding procedure or otherwise.
HANDICAPPED PERSON: Any person who:
A. Has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities,
B. Has a record of such impairment or is regarded as having an impairment.
A "major life activity" means "any mental or physical function or activity which if impaired, creates a substantial barrier to
employment".
MARITAL STATUS: The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced or widowed.
MINORITY: Includes the following categories:
A. Black (all persons having origins in any of the black African racial groups not of Hispanic origin).
B. Hispanic (all persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American origin, regardless of race).
C. Asian and Pacific Islander (all persons having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast
Asia, the Indian subcontinent, or the Pacific Islands).
D. American Indian or Alaskan native (all persons having origins in any of the original peoples of North America, and
who maintain cultural identification through tribal affiliation or community recognition).
NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which a person or one of his ancestors was born.
PERFORMANCE SUBCONTRACT: A "subcontract" as defined in this section.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, governments, governmental entities or agencies, political subdivisions,
municipal corporations, proprietorships, partnerships, associations, corporations, mutual companies, joint stock
companies, unincorporated organizations, legal representatives, trust, trustees, receivers, trustees in bankruptcy or any
other legal or commercial entity.
RELIGION: Any belief protected by the free exercise clause of the first amendment to the United States constitution.
RESPONSIBLE: Describes any person who conforms to the equal employment opportunity requirements of this chapter
and istherefore eligible to bid on or be awarded a contract or subcontract.
SEX: The biological or physical characteristics of male and female, which includes genital, hormonal and chromosomal
aspects of male and female bodies.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: Having or being perceived as having an emotional, physical, or sexual attraction to another
person without regard to the sex of that person or having or being perceived as having an orientation for such attraction,
or having or being perceived as having a gender related self-identity, appearance, expression, or behavior, whether or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 268/923
not traditionally associated with the person's designated sex at birth.
SUBCONTRACT: Any agreement, arrangements or understanding, written or otherwise, between a contractor and any
person (in which the parties do not stand in the relationship of an employer and an employee):
A. For the furnishing of supplies or services or for the use of real or personal property, including lease arrangements,
which in whole or in part, is utilized in the performance of any one or more contracts; or
B. Under which any portion of the contractor's obligation under any one or more contracts is performed, undertaken
or assumed.
SUBCONTRACTOR: Any person having a subcontract from or with any contractor or subcontractor.
SUPPLY SUBCONTRACT: A "subcontract" as defined in this section.
UNDERUTILIZATION: Having fewer minorities or women in a particular job classification than would reasonably be
expected by their availability.
UNFAVORABLE MILITARY DISCHARGE: Includes discharges from the armed forces of the United States, their reserve
components or any national guard or naval militia which are classified as RE-3 or the equivalent thereof, but does not
include those characterized as RE-4 or "dishonorable".
VETERANS: Disabled veterans and veterans of the Vietnam era.
WOMEN: Women of all races (including minorities). (Ord. 2003-66)
7-6-3: EQUAL OPPORTUNITY CLAUSE:
Each contracting agency shall ensure that every contract to which it is a party shall contain the following clause:
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
A. In the event of the contractor's noncompliance with the provisions of this Equal Employment Opportunity Clause,
the Illinois Human Rights Act, the Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Department of Human Rights (Department),
the City's Affirmative Action Program, or this Chapter, the contractor may be declared ineligible for future contracts or
subcontracts with the City of Carbondale, Illinois (City) or the State of Illinois and the contract may be canceled or
voided in whole or in part, and such other sanctions or penalties may be imposed or remedies invoked as provided by
statute or regulation. During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows:
(1) That it will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color,
religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry, or any
unfavorable discharge from military service; and further that it will examine all job classifications to determine if
minority persons or women are underutilized and will take appropriate affirmative action to rectify any such
underutilization.
(2) That, if it hires additional employees in order to perform this contract or any portion thereof, it will
determine the availability (in accordance with this Chapter) of minorities and women in the area(s) from which
it may reasonably recruit and it will hire for each job classification for which employees are hired in such a way
that minorities and women are not underutilized.
(3) That, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by it or on its behalf, it will state that all
applicants will be afforded equal opportunity without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, age,
disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry, or an unfavorable
discharge from military service.
(4) That it will send to each labor organization or representative of workers with which it has or is bound by a
collective bargaining or other agreement or understanding, a notice advising such labor organization or
representative of the contractor's obligations under the Illinois Human Rights Act and the Department's Rules
and Regulations, the City's Affirmative Action Program and this Chapter. If any such labor organization or
representative fails or refuses to cooperate with the contractor in its efforts to comply with such Act, Rules or
Regulations, or thisChapter, the contractor will promptly so notify the City and the contracting agency and will
recruit employees from other sources when necessary to fulfill its obligations thereunder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 269/923
(5) That it will submit reports as required by the City, furnish all relevant information as may from time to time
be requested by the City or the contracting agency, and in all respects comply with the Illinois Human Rights
Act, the Department's Rules and Regulations, the City Affirmative Action Program and this Chapter.
(6) That it will permit access to all relevant books, records, accounts and work sites by personnel of the
contracting agency and the Department for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the Illinois
Human Rights Act, the Department's Rules and Regulations, the Affirmative Action Program, and this Chapter.
(7) That it will include verbatim or by reference the provisions of this clause in every subcontract it awards
under which any portion of the contract obligations are undertaken or assumed, so that such provisions will be
binding upon such subcontractor. In the same manner as with other provisions of this contract, the contractor
will be liable for compliance with applicable provisions of this clause by such subcontractors; and further it will
promptly notify the contracting agency and the City in the event any subcontractor fails or refuses to comply
therewith. In addition, the contractor will not utilize any subcontractor declared by the Illinois Human Rights
Commission to be ineligible for contracts or subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its political
subdivisions or municipal corporations.
(8) Incorporation by Operation of the Regulations. All contract specifications furnished by any contracting
agency to bidders or contractors shall contain the Equal Employment Opportunity Clause set forth in
Subparagraph A of this section and such clause shall be included as a material term of any contract.
(9) Subcontractors. Each contractor and subcontractor shall in turn include the Equal Employment Opportunity
Clause set forth in Subparagraph A of this section in each of its subcontracts verbatim or by reference so that
provisions of paragraphs 1 through 7 of said clause will be binding upon subcontractors of every tier; provided,
however, that only paragraphs 1, 5, 6, and 7 need included in every "subcontract" as defined in Section 7-6-2
of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2003-66)
7-6-4: DUTIES OF CONTRACTORS AND SUBCONTRACTORS:
A. General:
1. No contractor or subcontractor shall discriminate or permit discrimination against any applicant for employment, in
the terms or conditions of employment of any employee, or in connection with any apprenticeship or other training
program, because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation,
national origin or ancestry, or unfavorable discharge from military service.
2. Each contractor and subcontractor shall examine all its job classifications to determine if minority persons or
women are underutilized in any such classifications (see subsection B of this section). If underutilization exists in
any job classification, the contractor or subcontractor shall take appropriate affirmative action to rectify any such
underutilization.
3. If a contractor or performance subcontractor hires additional employees in order to perform any contract or any
portion thereof, it will determine the availability (see subsection B of this section) of minorities and women in the
area(s) from which it may reasonably recruit and will hire for each job classification for which employees are hired
in such a way that minorities and women are not underutilized.
B. Identification Of Underutilization: "Underutilization of minorities" means having fewer minority workers in a particular
job classification than would reasonably be expected by their availability. The availability of minority workers for any
job classification shall be determined by the minority population percentages of the area(s) from which the contractor
or subcontractor may reasonably recruit and the unemployment rates of minorities as compared to unemployment
rates of nonminorities in such area(s). In addition, the contractor or subcontractor shall consider in such recruitment
area(s):
1. The size of the minority unemployment force;
2. The numbers of minorities having requisite skills;
3. The promotable and transferable minorities within the contractor's or subcontractor's organization;
4. The existence of training institutions capable of training persons in the requisite skills; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 270/923
5. The degree of training which the contractor or subcontractor is reasonably able to undertake as a means of making
all job classifications available to minorities.
C. Affirmative Action Plan:
1. When required pursuant to subsection A of this section or section 7-6-5 of this chapter, contractors and
subcontractors shall develop and implement written affirmative action plans, acceptable to the city, to overcome
underutilization of minority persons and/or women. An acceptable affirmative action plan shall include:
a. A description of the contractor's or subcontractor's work force analysis made in accordance with subsection B of
this section; and
b. Goals and timetables to which the contractor's or subcontractor's recruitment, hiring or promotion efforts shall be
directed to correct any identified underutilization.
c. In addition, an affirmative action plan may, but need not, include a detailed description of positive steps taken or
to be taken to overcome underutilization and to attain the established goals, such as for example:
(1) Specific programs established to more vigorously and effectively recruit minorities and/or women;
(2) Solicitations to appropriate labor organizations, apprenticeship and training programs, etc., for support and
participation;
(3) The manner in which the contractor or subcontractor has disseminated its equal employment policy among
employees and potential sources of minority and/or female applicants;
(4) A thorough reevaluation of current hiring promotion criteria, techniques and procedures for relevant job
classifications;
(5) The contractor's or subcontractor's establishment of an involvement in training and/or apprenticeship
programs to instruct minorities and/or women in skills necessary for employment and advancement; and/or
(6) Utilization of minority and/or female subcontractors, and commercial institutions.
2. Affirmative action plans developed pursuant to another governmental program may be accepted by the city.
Contractors or subcontractors found by the city not to be underutilizing minorities or women according to
subsection B of this section shall not be required to develop an affirmative action plan.
D. Information And Report: Contractors and subcontractors shall complete and file all appropriate reports as required
under section 7-6-5 of this chapter and shall supply the city, the appropriate contracting agency, or their staffs, with
such relevant information, reports, and documents, and personnel as may be required in order to determine
compliance with this chapter. Information obtained in this manner shall be used only in connection with the
administration of this chapter.
E. Recruitment Of Employees: In all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by it or on its behalf, each
contractor and performance subcontractor shall state that all applicants will be afforded equal employment
opportunity without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status,
sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry, or unfavorable discharge from military service. Contractors and such
subcontractors shall also advise in writing their personnel, their employee referral sources, and any labor
organizations or representatives with which they have collective bargaining agreements or other agreements or
understandings of the contractor's or subcontractor's obligation under this chapter and the city's affirmative action
plan. If any labor organization with which such contractor or subcontractor has an exclusive hiring or referral
arrangement fails or refuses to refer minority or female applicants to the contractor or subcontractor in numbers
sufficient for it to meet its obligations under this chapter and the city's affirmative action plan, the contractor or
subcontractor shall solicit and employ minority or female applicants from other sources. It shall be no excuse that the
labor organization with which the contractor or subcontractor has such an agreement failed to refer sufficient minority
or female employees.
F. Segregated Facilities: Each contractor and subcontractor shall provide facilities for employees at its places of business
without segregation except where separate facilities for a person of the opposite sex are required. Each contractor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 271/923
and subcontractor shall further ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that employees are not assigned to work at
any location where facilities are so segregated.
G. Subcontracts: No contractor shall, during the performance of any contract, enter into a subcontract with any person
which has been determined by the state of Illinois, U.S. department of labor, or the city to be nonresponsible and
therefore ineligible for contracts or subcontracts. In the same manner as with other provisions of its contract, every
contractor shall be liable for compliance with the applicable provisions of the equal employment opportunity clause by
all its subcontractors; and further, it shall promptly notify the city and the appropriate contracting agency if any
subcontractor fails or refuses to comply therewith. (Ord. 2003-66)
7-6-5: PROCEDURE:
Prequalifications as to equal employment opportunity responsibility:
A. File Proper Form: No person shall be eligible to be awarded a contract subject to the competitive requirements of the
city unless such person at least three (3) days prior to bid award has filed with the Illinois department of human rights
a properly completed and sworn employer report form (form PC-1) which iscurrently valid. Each person who submits
such a form to the department of human rights will be issued a bid number as evidence of its eligibility.
B. Exemptions: The city may exempt any person, upon written request, which request shall state the reasons therefor,
from the requirements of this section when it deems that exceptional circumstances and the public interest so require.
Such exemption shall be granted for a specified purpose and duration but may be withdrawn by the city at any time;
provided, however, that such withdrawal of exemption shall not apply to contracts awarded prior to the withdrawal.
(Ord. 2003-66)
Chapter 7
INDUSTRIAL AND POLLUTION CONTROL REVENUE BONDS
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this Chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall
have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, system, fixture,
improvement, addition, appurtenance, machinery or equipment or any combination thereof, and all real and personal
property deemed necessary in connection therewith, for use by any person, provided that the existence of such
economic development project will create or retain employment opportunities in the Municipality.
MUNICIPALITY: The City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation (including public utilities), association,
joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, State agency, or any other legal entity, or its legal representative,
agent or assigns.
POLLUTION: Any form of environmental pollution including, but not limited to, water pollution, air pollution, land pollution,
solid waste pollution, thermal pollution, radiation contamination, or noise pollution as determined by the various
standards prescribed by this State, the Federal government or other governmental entities and including but not limited
to, anything which is considered as pollution or environmental damage in the Environmental Protection Act, compiled as
415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 and any amendment thereto and substitution therefor.
POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY: Any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement,
appurtenance, addition, machinery or equipment, or any combination thereof, andall real and personal property deemed
necessary therewith, having to do with, or the end purpose of which is, reducing, controlling or preventing pollution.
PROJECT: Any economic development project or pollution control facility or any combination thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 272/923
PROJECT COSTS: Means and includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to the acquisition,
construction, reconstruction repair, alteration, improvement and extension of a project including without limitation the cost
of studies and surveys, plans, specifications, architectural and engineering services; legal, marketing or other special
services; financing, acquisition, demolition, construction, equipment and site development of new and rehabilitated
buildings, rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing buildings and all other necessary and incidental
expenses including an initial bond and interest reserve together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project on a
date six (6) months subsequent to the estimated date of completion. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-2: LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared that the purpose of this Chapter is to provide a financing device which will aid in
financing the cost of projects in order to relieve conditions of unemployment and to encourage the increase of industry
within the Municipality, thereby reducing the evils attendant upon unemployment and to provide for the increased welfare
and prosperity of the residents of the Municipality; it is hereby further determined and declared to be the purpose of this
Chapter to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of pollution control facilities in order to eliminate,
abate or reduce the serious dangers to the public health and welfare caused by environmental pollution; and the same
are hereby declared and determined to be public purposes and functions pertaining to the government and affairs of the
Municipality. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-3: ADDITIONAL POWERS:
A. In addition to powers which it may now have, the Municipality shall have the power under this Chapter:
1. To construct, acquire by gift, purchase or lease to reconstruct, improve, better or extend and to finance one or
more projects, whether or not now or hereafter in existence, within the Municipality or within ten (10) miles of the
City limits, and, if desirable, to acquire by gift, purchase or lease lands or rights in land in connection with any
project. (Ord. 83-75)
2. To issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project costs of any project and to designate an
appropriate name for such bonds.
3. To rent, lease or sell any project to any person in such manner that payments to be received with respect to the
project shall produce revenues and receipts sufficient to provide for the prompt payment at maturity of principal,
interest and redemption premiums, if any, upon all bonds issued to finance the cost of such project.
4. To pledge to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under this Chapter, the interest thereon, and the
redemption premiums, if any, the revenues and receipts to be received from such project.
5. To mortgage such project in favor of the holder or holders of bonds issued therefor.
6. To sell and convey such project, including without limitation, the sale and conveyance thereof subject to a
mortgage, if any, as provided in this Article, for such price and at such time as the governing body of the
Municipality may determine. However, no sale or conveyance of such project shall ever be made in such manner
as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders of any bonds issued to finance the project costs of such
project.
7. To issue its bonds to refund in whole or in part, bonds therefore issued by such Municipality under authority of this
Chapter.
B. It shall not be necessary for the Municipality to take or hold title to any project financed hereunder. In lieu of a lease or
sale agreement, the Municipality shall have the power to enter into an agreement with any person with respect to any
project whereby the Municipality agrees to loan the proceeds of its bonds to such person in order to cause the
acquisition, construction and equipping of such project, and such person shall agree to pay to the Municipality or for
its account an amount sufficient to pay the principal of, interest, and the redemption premium, if any, on the bonds of
the Municipality issued with respect to such project. (Ord. 82-25)
C. Property acquired by the Municipality pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be exempt from the imposition
and collection of taxes thereon while owned by the Municipality, but the use of such property is subject to taxation to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 273/923
be paid by the lessee or occupant as provided in section 26 of the Revenue Act of 1939, filed May 17, 1939, or as
may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-4: EXERCISE OF POWERS; BONDS:
A. Exercise Of Powers: The exercise of all powers granted by this Chapter may be authorized, and bonds may be
authorized to be issued under this Chapter for the purposes set forth in this Chapter, by ordinance of the government
body of the Municipality which may be adopted at the same meeting at which it isintroduced and shall take effect
immediately upon adoption.
B. Bonds: The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, payable at such times, may be in one or more series, may
bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective dates,
may be payable in such medium of payment at such place or places, may carry such registration privileges, may be
subject to such terms of redemption at such premiums, may be executed in such manner, may contain such terms,
covenants and conditions, and may be in such form, either coupon or registered, as such ordinance may provide or
as may be subsequently determined by the governing body before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at
public or private sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by the governing body of
the Municipality. Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts or certificates in such form and with
such provisions as the governing body of the Municipality may determine, may be issued to the purchaser or
purchasers of bonds sold pursuant to this Chapter. The bonds and interim receipts or certificates shall be deemed to
be securities and negotiable instruments within the meaning and for all purposes of the Uniform Commercial Code.
(Ord. 74-17)
7-7-5: COVENANTS OF BONDS:
Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this Chapter may contain covenants as to:
A. The use and disposition of the revenues and receipts from the project for which the bonds are to be issued, including
the creation and maintenance of reserves;
B. The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to the project or any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations,
enlargements or additions thereto;
C. The maintenance and repair of such project;
D. The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of insurance monies;
E. The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the State, having the necessary trust powers as
trustee for the benefit of the bondholders, paying agent, and bond registrar;
F. The investment of any funds held by such trustee; and
G. The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any portion thereof or any trustees therefor, are
entitled to the appointment of a receiver. Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this Chapter may
provide that the principal or any interest on any bonds issued under this Chapter shall be secured by a mortgage or
indenture of trust covering such project for which the bonds are issued and may include anyimprovements or
extensions thereafter made. Such mortgage or indenture of trust may contain such covenants and agreements to
properly safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the ordinance authorizing such bonds and shall be executed
in the manner as may be provided for in the ordinance. The provisions of this Chapter and any such ordinance or
ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall constitute a contract with the holder or holders of the
bonds and continue in effect until the principal of, the interest on, and the redemption premiums, if any, on the bonds
so issued have been fully paid, and the duties of the Municipality and its corporate authorities and officers under this
Chapter any such ordinance or ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall be enforceable by any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 274/923
bondholders by mandamus, foreclosure of any such mortgage or indenture of trust or other appropriate suit, action or
proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction; provided the ordinance or any mortgage or indenture of trust
under which the bonds are issued may provide that all such remedies and rights to enforcement may be vested in a
trustee for the benefit of all the bondholders, which trustee shall be subject to the control of a majority of the holders
or owners of any outstanding bonds. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-6: SIGNATURES OF OFFICERS ON BONDS; VALIDITY OF BONDS:
The bonds shall bear the signature of such officers of the Municipality as may be designated in the ordinance authorizing
such bonds, and such signatures shall be the valid and binding signatures of the officers of the Municipality,
notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payments therefor any or all of the persons whose signatures
appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the Municipality issuing such bonds. The validity of the bonds is not
dependent on nor affected by the purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment or
extension of the project for which the bonds are issued. The ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide that the bonds
shall contain a recital that they are issued pursuant to this Chapter, which recital shall be conclusive evidence of their
validity and of the regularity of their issuance. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-7: LIEN OF BONDS:
All bonds issued under this Chapter have a lien upon the revenues and receipts derived from the project for which the
bonds have been issued, and the governing body may provide in this Chapter or ordinances authorizing such bonds for
the issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon such revenues and receipts or may
provide that the lien upon such revenues and receipts is subordinate. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-8: LIABILITY FOR BONDS:
All bonds issued under and pursuant to this Chapter shall belimited obligations of the Municipality payable solely out of
the revenues and receipts derived from the project with respect to which such bonds are issued. No holder of any bonds
issued under this Chapter has the right to compel any exercise of taxing power of the Municipality to pay the bonds, the
interest or premium, if any, thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an indebtedness of the Municipality or a loan of
credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision. It shall be plainly stated on the face of each
bond that it has been issued under the provisions of this Chapter and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of the
Municipality or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provisions. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-9: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
The Municipality, or any trustee on behalf of the Municipality, may invest any funds held by it pursuant to this Chapter in
bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or other securities constituting direct obligations of the United
States of America; in certificates of deposit or time deposits constituting direct obligations of any bank as defined by the
Illinois Banking Act, as heretofore and hereafter amended; provided, however, that investments may be made only in
those certificates of deposit or time deposits in banks which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, if
then in existence; or in short term discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage Association. Any such securities
may be purchased at the offering or market price thereof at the time of such purchase. (Ord. 74-17)
7-7-10: EXEMPTION FROM CONSTRUCTION AND BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC
BUILDINGS:
The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to any requirements relating to public buildings,
structures, grounds, works or improvements imposed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes or any other similar requirements
which may be lawfully waived by this Section, and any requirement of competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the
procedure for award of contracts for such purpose or the lease, sale or other disposition or property of the Municipality is
not applicable to any action taken under authority of this Chapter. (Ord. 74-17)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 275/923
7-7-11: POWERS CONFERRED AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL TO LIMITATIONS
IMPOSED; EFFECT:
The powers conferred by this Chapter are in addition and supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this Chapter
shall not affect, the powers conferred by any law or any other ordinance. Projects may be acquired, purchased,
constructed, reconstructed improved, bettered, equipped, extended andfinanced, and bonds may be issued under this
Chapter for such purposes, notwithstanding that any law or any other ordinance may provide for the acquisition,
purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, extension and financing of a like project, or
the issuance of bonds for like purposes, and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations or other
provisions contained in any law or any other ordinance. (Ord. 74-17)
Chapter 8
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall be defined as follows, unless a different meaning
clearly appears in the text below:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in such municipality regardless of where such
amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in such
municipality and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used,
labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included
only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point
within this state, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within this state, and charges for that
portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within Illinois. However, "gross charge" shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this
chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the
internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of
section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering
any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or
the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not
limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting
equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any
source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of
such exemption and during the period of time specified by the department of commerce and community affairs;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent
corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 276/923
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not
otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable
federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall
report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication devices; or
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that eitheroriginate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture,
corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any
court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or
other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department
may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining
a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure
collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in
this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within
this state. The permit may be revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any retailer, or other like term, having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority
of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state
universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are
originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's
place of primary use as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air toground systems and
the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by
this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation,
messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications
service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable oneway
or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this
chapter, "private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to
exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one
or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications. Carrier access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 277/923
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as
sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax
imposed under this act. For purposes of this section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as
defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupations tax act. (Ord. 2002-69)
7-8-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
A. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a
person at a rate of five and seventy-fifth of one hundredth percent (5.75%) of the gross charges for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
B. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a
person at a rate of five and seventy-fifth of one hundredth percent (5.75%) of the gross charges for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or privilege that
is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state
on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a
credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
C. The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality. (Ord.
2002-69)
7-8-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in
this state and shall be remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as
authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department
shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the
tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the
manner prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the
retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at
retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly
to the department in the manner provided by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and
apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2002-69)
7-8-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned
with appropriate forms and information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the
department to implement this act. (Ord. 2002-69)
7-8-5: RESELLERS:
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such
person shall apply to the department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the
department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this chapter on any of such purchases and shall
furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 278/923
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such
number to the applicant. The department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or
which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or
which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales.
C. Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall
not be made tax free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from
the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to
such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2002-69)
7-8-6: REPEALER:
If public act 92-0526, entitled the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, is repealed or becomes ineffective for
any reason, or if this chapter is repealed or becomes ineffective for any reason, then ordinance 97-142, passed
September 23, 1997, titled the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee shall be deemed in full force and
effect as of the date public act 92-0526 or this chapter is repealed or becomes ineffective. (Ord. 2002-69)
Chapter 9
HOTEL OR MOTEL ROOM TAX
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
Where used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall be defined as follows, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
HOTEL ROOM OR MOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to
the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment, lodging house, or place where sleeping, rooming, office, conference or
exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals. One room offered for rental
with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered as a single hotel or motel room.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel or motel.
OWNER: Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in conducting the operation of a hotel and motel
room or receiving the consideration for the rental of such hotel and motel room so as to entitle such person or persons to
all for a portion of the net receipts thereof.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room or rooms in motel or hotel for
more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club,
company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government, corporation, municipal corporation, district or other
political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or
other representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstance. (Ord.
82-13; Ord. 2015-7)
7-9-2: TAX:
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting a hotel or motel room within the city of
Carbondale a tax of nine percent (9%)1 of the rental or leasing charge for each such hotel or motel room or rooms
rented for each twenty four (24) hour period or any portion thereof, provided, however, that the tax shall not be levied
and imposed upon any permanent resident or to a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel. (Ord.
2014-11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 279/923
B. The ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of
occupying any such hotel or motel room or rooms, said person hereinafter referred to as "renter".
C. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner,
manager or operator of every hotel or motel to act as trustee for and on account of the city and to secure said tax
from the renter of the hotel or motel room and pay over to the city treasurer said tax under procedures prescribed by
the city treasurer or as otherwise provided in this chapter.
D. Every person required to collect the tax levied by this chapter shall secure said tax from the renter at the time he
collects payment for the rental of the hotel or motel room or rooms. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or
memorandum of the payment given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount due under the tax provided in
this chapter shall be stated separately on said documents, or combined with the amount of the Illinois hotel operator's
occupation tax act2.
E. The city treasurer may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
concerning the enforcement and application of this chapter. The term "rules and regulations" includes, but is not
limited to, a case by case determination whether or not the tax imposed by this chapter applies. (Ord. 82-13)
7-9-3: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The city treasurer or any person certified as his delegate may, during regular business hours, enter the premises of the
hotel or motel for inspection and examination of books and records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this
chapter and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder or interfere with the city treasurer or his duly authorized delegate in the discharge of his duties and the
performance of this chapter. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to
which the city treasurer or his delegate shall at all times have full access, which records shall include: a) the amount of
taxable receipts collected within the twenty four (24) hour period, and b) the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected
for the dates or period in question. (Ord. 82-13)
7-9-4: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUES:
A. The owner or owners of each hotel or motel within the city shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received during
each month period on forms prescribed by the city treasurer. The returns shall be due on or before the last calendar
day of the calendar month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period.
B. The first taxing period for the purpose of this chapter shall commence on May 1, 1982, and the tax return and
payment for such period shall be due on or before June 30, 1982. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax payments
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. At the time of filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to
the city treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applied.
C. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one and a half percent (1.5%) per monthly filing
period, or portion thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added and collected. (Ord. 82-13)
7-9-5: COLLECTION:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the city attorney shall, upon the request of the city
treasurer, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 82-13)
7-9-6: PROCEEDS OF TAX, FINES AND PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 280/923
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter including fines and penalties may be used to pay
for general corporate and municipal purposes, supporting tourism in Carbondale, and paying the administrative
expenses of collecting the tax. (Ord. 2014-11)
7-9-7: SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
If the city council of said city, after hearing held by it, shall find that any person has wilfully avoided payment of the tax
imposed by this chapter, the city council may suspend or revoke all city licenses held by such tax evader. The owner,
manager, or operator of the hotel or motel shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than
five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to the said owner, manager or
operator at his last known place of business. (Ord. 82-13)
7-9-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations authorized by this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
Each day of any violations of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 82-13; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 10
MOTOR FUEL TAX
7-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BULK USER: Any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage facilities located within the city of
Carbondale, which facilities are owned, leased or controlled by said person, for subsequent dispensing into the supply
tanks of internal combustion engines operated by said person.
GASOHOL: A fuel used chiefly in internal combustion engines which is comprised chiefly of gasoline and ethyl alcohols
in variable quantities.
GASOLINE OR DIESEL FUEL: A volatile, highly flammable or combustible, liquid mixture of hydrocarbons produced by
the fractional distillation of petroleum and used chiefly as a fuel in internal combustion engines, but shall not include
mixtures commonly known as kerosene and aviation fuel, or mixtures used in the heating of buildings.
MOTOR FUEL: "Gasohol" and "gasoline" and "diesel fuel" as defined in this section.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club,
company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or
any officers, agents, employees, or other representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity,
or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
RETAIL GASOLINE DEALER: Any person who engages in the business of selling motor fuel in the city of Carbondale to
a purchaser for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE, RESALE, SELLING: Any transfer of ownership or possession, or both, exchange or barter, conditional or
otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for valuable consideration. (Ord. 86-09)
7-10-2: TAX IMPOSED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 281/923
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of motor fuel, or fraction thereof, sold at retail
within the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale, a tax at the rate of seven cents ($0.07) per gallon, effective July
1, 2016. The proceeds resulting from the imposition of the seven cent ($0.07) tax, including penalties, shall be
credited to and deposited in the local improvement fund. (Ord. 2016-34)
B. In the event motor fuel is dispensed in a unit of measure other than the gallon, the tax shall be imposed at the same
ratio to one cent ($0.01) as the unit is to the gallon. The tax shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges.
C. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne by the retail purchaser of motor fuel.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupations of persons engaged in the retail sale
of motor fuel.
D. It shall be the duty of every retail gasoline dealer to secure the tax from the purchaser at the time the dealer collects
purchase price for the motor fuel and to pay over the tax to the city finance department as provided in this chapter.
E. A retail gasoline dealer may make tax free sales only when the sale is made to the federal government, the state of
Illinois, any municipality or unit of local government as those terms are defined by section 1 of chapter VII of the
constitution of the state of Illinois, or any school district. (Ord. 2005-23)
7-10-3: TAX AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL:
A. Every retail gasoline dealer shall transmit to the finance department of the city of Carbondale on or before the last day
of each calendar month the sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax collected for the preceding calendar
month, accompanied by a report upon forms supplied by the city, which indicates the gross gallons of motor fuel sold
for the preceding calendar month and such other information as the finance department may require for the
enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 86-29)
B. Every bulk user shall transmit to the city finance department on or before the last day of each calendar month a sum
of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax owing for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by a report
upon forms supplied by the city, which indicates the gross gallons of motor fuel purchased for the preceding calendar
month and such other information as the finance department may require for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
86-09; Ord. 86-29)
7-10-4: RECORDS, INSPECTION:
A. Every retail gasoline dealer shall keep complete and accurate books and records, including, but not limited to, records
showing all purchases, receipts, sales and losses through any cause. (Ord. 86-29)
B. Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records of purchases of motor fuel, including the dates of
purchases, the gross gallons purchased on each of the dates and the names and addresses of the gasoline dealers
from which each of the purchases were made.
C. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the finance department shall have the right to inspect all
books, records and reports of retail gasoline dealers and bulk users during their normal business hours. (Ord. 86-09)
7-10-5: PENALTY:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day during which the violation continues
shall be regarded as a separate punishable offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 282/923
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month on the amount
of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided
herein, an action to enforce the payment shall be brought on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to
enforce this chapter and collect any delinquent tax, interest and penalties. (Ord. 86-09; Ord. 86-29; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 11
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES
7-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall be defined as follows, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45, et seq.".
CITY: The city of Carbondale, Illinois.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The mayor and city council members of the city of Carbondale.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The local tax administrator for the city of Carbondale shall be the city manager, or the
city manager's designee, who shall be in charge of the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes. The city manager, or his designee, shall direct and authorize staff, employees and/or agents to act
on behalf of the city in the administration and collection of these taxes pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
chapter. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and/or the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX: Each tax imposed by the city that is collected or administered by the
city, not an agency or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the
city'slocally imposed and administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the city council that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person
upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the city. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-2: PURPOSE; SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city's procedures in connection with all of the city's locally imposed and
administered taxes. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-3: NOTICE:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing, mailed no less than
seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax
administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator by first class, express or overnight mail, addressed
to the person(s) concerned at the person(s) last known address, or by personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-4: PAYMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 283/923
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to the tax due for the
applicable period; b) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the applicable
period. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be
considered late unless it is: a) physically received by the city on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or
other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the
city, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-6: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event
thata locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction.
However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the
facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar
year in which payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the city.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in
error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a
statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim;
and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest
and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax
administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant
and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the
grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three
hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of
mailing of a refund check or thegrant of a credit. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-7: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 284/923
chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax
administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less
than seven (7) days, nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the
audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing,
that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original
source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and
available for inspection by the city.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the city. If
the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax
administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the
best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit indicates there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit,
written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the city's
determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator
shallnotify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-8: APPEAL:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a
protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall
include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment
may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the
taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax
administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 285/923
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14)
days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to
all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit
or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with
interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a
written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be
reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 2000-
68)
7-11-9: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timelywritten protest and petition for hearing under section 7-11-8 of
this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of
the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed
fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to
the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not
apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.
(Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the
tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or
nonpayment of the tax, to be six percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and
the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling
tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed, along with late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due. If no return is filed within the
time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or
notice of tax liability, then a failure-to-file penalty shall be assessed equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax due
for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall
not apply if a failure-to-file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-11: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 286/923
failure-to-file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a
filing. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax
ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to
pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days
delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the
delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract
with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-
68)
7-11-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform
taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment
may be issued by the city, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period
was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit,
investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax
administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to
pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the
application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary
disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for anyperiod before the date the
application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer
is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the
result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment
of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application
or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final
determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2000-68)
7-11-15: INTERNAL REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall be responsible for reviewing any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. If the
local tax administrator determines that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is
determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall timely remove the lien at the city's expense, correct the
taxpayer's credit record, and correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 2000-68)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 287/923
Chapter 12
FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
7-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or terms shall have the
meanings respectively applied to them:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of
alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR FACILITY: Any establishment licensed under title 2 of this code.
FOOD: Food is any solid, liquid, powder or item intended by the seller primarily for human internal consumption, whether
simple, compound or mixed, including foods such as condiments, spices, seasonings, vitamins, bottled water and ice.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, representative, or entity.
PREPARED FOOD: Food that is prepared or made ready by a retailer to be eaten without substantial delay after the final
stage of preparation by the retailer.
A. Prepared food includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. All hot foods, whether sold in a restaurant, delicatessen, grocery store, discount store, concession stand,
bowling alley, vending machine or any other location. At a grocery store and convenience store, hot foods
include, but are not limited to, pizza, soup, rotisserie or fried chicken and coffee; other examples of food
prepared for immediate consumption include popcorn or nachos sold at a movie concession stand; hot dogs sold
by a street vendor; food sold by food truck vendors; and hot precooked meals sold to customers, such as a
Thanksgiving dinner. For purposes of this section, "hot" means any temperature that is greater than room
temperature;
2. Sandwiches, either hot or cold, prepared by a retailer to the individual order of a customer;
3. Salad, olive or sushi bars offered by a retailer at which individuals prepare their own salads (hot or cold);
4. All coffee, tea, cappuccino and other drinks prepared by a retailer for individual consumption, whether hot or
cold;
5. All food sold for consumption on the premises where sold;
6. Doughnuts, cookies, bagels or other bakery items prepared by a retailer and sold either individually or in another
quantity selected by the customer;
7. Whole breads, pies and cakes prepared by a retailer, even when prepared to the individual order of a customer;
8. Sandwiches that are prepared by a retailer and placed in a deli case or other storage unit;
9. Cold salads, jellos, stuffed vegetables or fruits sold by weight or by quart, pint or other quantity by a retailer.
B. "Prepared food" does not include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 288/923
1. Cheese, fruit, vegetable or meat trays prepared by a retailer, either to the individual order of a customer or
premade and set out for sale;
2. Food items sold by a retailer that are not prepared or otherwise manufactured by that retailer, such as
prepackaged snacks or chips, unless these items will be consumed on the premises where sold (e.g., in a
sandwich shop). For grocers, such items include, but are not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meats, milk, canned
goods and yogurt.
PREPARED FOOD FACILITY: Any person or establishment which sells food at retail which has been prepared for
immediate consumption, whether or not such prepared food facility use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a
common premises or business establishment.
A "prepared food facility" includes, but is not limited to, those establishments commonly called an inn, restaurant,
eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service,
coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor,
tearoom, delicatessen, movie theater, mobile food or beverage or ice cream vehicle, hotel, motel, or club, or any
other establishment which sells at retail food which has been prepared for immediate consumption.
A "prepared food facility" does not include churches, public or private schools, boarding houses, day care centers,
nursing homes, retirement centers or similar residential care facilities, or programs for the central preparation of
meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences of invalids or the elderly, or other facilities of not for
profit associations or not for profit corporations.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for consideration, whether in the form of money,
credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale.
RETAILER: Any person who sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption and not for resale. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the purchaser for the purchase of prepared foods and
alcoholic liquor at retail at any prepared food facility or alcoholic liquor facility within the city, at a rate of two percent
(2.0%) of the purchase price of such prepared food and alcoholic liquor. The ultimate incidence of and liability for
payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser thereof. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER:
The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and
severally have the duty to collect and account for said tax from each purchaser at the time that the consideration for such
purchase is paid. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and
severally have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the gross receipts for
sales of prepared food and alcoholic liquor and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the city for
examination and for audit by the city upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-5: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX COLLECTION:
The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and
severally have the duty to cause to be filed a sworn return with the finance department for each such facility and for each
such licensed premises located in the city. The return shall be prepared and submitted on forms prescribed by the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 289/923
The return shall be filed with the city by the twentieth day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter as
shown in the following table:
Calendar Quarter Due Date
January, February, March April 20
April, May, June July 20
July, August, September October 20
October, November, December January 20
The return shall also be accompanied by payment to the city of all taxes imposed by this chapter which are due and
owing for the period covered by said return. The return shall also be accompanied with a copy of the return(s) filed with
the Illinois department of revenue for sales within the city of Carbondale covering the same reporting period. (Ord. 2016-
45)
7-12-6: TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTION:
If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby but which amount is purported to be
the collection of said tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so imposed
herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who paid the same before filing the return for the
period in which such occurred, said person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the city along with the tax
properly collected. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-7: LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this chapter who has the control, supervision, or
responsibility of filing returns or collecting and making payment of the amount of tax herein imposed and who fails to file
such returns or to collect and to make payment to the city shall be personally liable for such amounts, including costs of
collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall survive the dissolution of the
corporation. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-8: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter, including penalties, interest, fines and costs of
collection shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be credited to and deposited into the general corporate fund
of the city; all proceeds shall be expended and be split evenly between capital expenditures and public pension
contributions. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-9: PENALTY, INTEREST, FINES AND COSTS OF COLLECTION:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day during which the violation continues shall be
recorded as a separate punishable offense. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty as set out in chapter
11 of this title shall apply.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an action to enforce the payment shall be brought on
behalf of the city of Carbondale in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this chapter and collect any delinquent
tax, interest, and penalties and also the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred by the city in
enforcing any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-45)
7-12-10: EFFECTIVE DATE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 290/923
This chapter and the tax imposed herein shall be effective on January 1, 2017. (Ord. 2016-45)
Chapter 13
PACKAGE LIQUOR TAX
7-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or terms shall have the
meanings respectively applied to them:
PACKAGE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent
(0.5%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
PACKAGE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR FACILITY: Any establishment licensed under title 2 of this code which is licensed to
sell alcoholic liquor in its original container for consumption off of the licensed premises.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, representative, or entity.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for consideration, whether in the form of money,
credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale.
RETAILER: Any person who sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption and not for resale. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-2: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the purchaser for the purchase of package alcoholic liquor
at retail from a package alcoholic liquor facility within the city, at a rate of four percent (4.0%) of the purchase price of
such package alcoholic liquor. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of which shall be borne by the
purchaser thereof. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER:
The owner and the operator of each package alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and severally have the
duty to collect and account for said tax from each purchaser at the time that the consideration for such purchase is paid.
(Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The owner and the operator of each package alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and severally have the
duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the gross receipts for sales of packaged
alcoholic liquor and the taxes collected each day, which shall be made available to the city for examination and for audit
by the city upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-5: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX COLLECTION:
The owner and the operator of a package alcoholic liquor facility within the city shall jointly and severally have the duty to
cause to be filed a sworn return with the finance department for each such facility and for each such licensed premises
located in the city. The return shall be prepared and submitted on forms prescribed by the city. The return shall be filed
with the city by the filing date and at the same time intervals or frequencies as the retailers occupation tax return, form
ST-1, is due to be filed with the Illinois department of revenue. The return shall also be accompanied by payment to the
city of all taxes imposed by this chapter which are due and owing for the period covered by said return. The return shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 291/923
also be accompanied with a copy of the return filed with the Illinois department of revenue for sales within the city of
Carbondale covering the same reporting period. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-6: TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTION:
If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby but which amount is purported to be
the collection of said tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so imposed
herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who paid the same before filing the return for the
period in which such occurred, said person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the city along with the tax
properly collected. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-7: LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this chapter who has the control, supervision, or
responsibility of filing returns or collecting and making payment of the amount of tax herein imposed and who fails to file
such returns or to collect and to make payment to the city shall be personally liable for such amounts, including costs of
collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall survive the dissolution of the
corporation. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-8: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter, including penalties, interest, fines and costs of
collection shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be credited to and deposited into the general corporate fund
of the city; all proceeds shall be expended solely for capital construction projects or for capital equipment purchases of
the city. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-9: PENALTY, INTEREST, FINES AND COSTS OF COLLECTION:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day during which the violation continues shall be
recorded as a separate punishable offense. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty as set out in chapter
11 of this title, shall apply. In addition to the above penalties, a failure to pay may result in the suspension or revocation
of the package alcoholic liquor facility's liquor license.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an action to enforce the payment shall be brought on
behalf of the city of Carbondale in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this chapter and collect any delinquent
tax, interest, and penalties and also the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred by the city in
enforcing any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-36)
7-13-10: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter and the tax imposed herein shall be effective on October 1, 2016. (Ord. 2016-36)
Title 8
FIRE PREVENTION AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
8-1-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 292/923
A. Code Adopted By Reference: The international fire code, 2003 edition, is hereby adopted by reference except for
such provisions as are specifically hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and except when the city code is more
restrictive, such as, but not limited to, subsection 4-1-1E of the city code. (Ord. 2013-12)
B. Compliance With Chapter: Every existing building, structure or part thereof shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Copy On File: One copy of the international fire code, including all amendments made in this section shall be kept on
file in the office of the city clerk.
D. Amendments: The following sections are hereby amended from the international fire code, 2003 edition, adopted in
subsection A of this section:
Chapter 1 Administration: Section 101.1 Title Insert: City of Carbondale.
(Ord. 2003-75)
8-1-2: BUILDINGS TO CONFORM TO FIRE CODE:
No wall, structure, building, or part thereof, shall hereafter be built, enlarged, or altered, until a sketch of the work,
together with a statement of the materials to be used, shall have been submitted in duplicate to the building and
neighborhood services manager for inspection and investigation to see if same be found to be in accordance with the
provisions of the international fire and building codes prior to the issuance of a building permit for the proposed
construction. Structures hereafter erected without permit or not in conformity with the international fire code shall be
removed. (Ord. 2003-75)
8-1-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of the international fire code, 2003 edition, and as amended, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). If any violation
of a provision or provisions of this chapter shall continue, each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
2003-75)
Chapter 2
KEY LOCK BOX
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTOR: An alarm initiating device that automatically detects heat, smoke or other products of
combustion.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUSPENSION SYSTEM: An engineered system utilizing carbon dioxide (CO2), foam, wet or dry
chemical, a halogenated extinguished agent or an automatic sprinkler system to detect automatically and suppress a fire
through fixed piping and nozzles.
CENTRAL STATION FIRE PROTECTIVE SIGNALING SYSTEM: A central office, connected to remote alarm and
supervisory signaling devices, where personnel are in attendance at all times to monitor the system activity and
investigate signals. The central station personnel takes immediate and appropriate action upon receipt of an alarm
signal.
KEY LOCK BOX: Any metal or other fire resistant box containing keys and other information about the building or its
contents to be used by fire officials in the event of fire. (Ord. 94-49)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 293/923
8-2-2: KEY LOCK BOX REQUIREMENT:
All occupancies served by an automatic fire detection or automatic fire suppression system, having a connection to a
central station fire protection signaling system, shall be provided with a key lock box, approved by the Carbondale fire
department except the following:
A. Exception 1: Those buildings which provide proprietary services, such as, but not limited to, hotels and motels.
B. Exception 2: Those buildings which have the control valves for automatic suppression systems located on the outside
of the building and no automatic fire detection system present. (Ord. 94-49)
8-2-3: KEY LOCK BOX FOR APARTMENT COMPLEXES:
All apartment complexes served by manual fire alarm system shall be required to install a key lock box. The location of
the key lock box shall be determined by the fire department of the city. Only apartment complex owners, management
companies, or managers may purchase key lock boxes. (Ord. 94-49)
8-2-4: KEY LOCK BOX LOCATION:
The key lock box shall be located at or near the recognized public entrance, adjacent to the fire annunciator panel, on
the exterior of the structure, or above the fire department connections, when occupancy is serviced by a fire sprinkler
system with internal control valves and wall mounted fire department connections. The key lock box shall be located at a
height of not less than five feet (5') and not more than twelve feet (12') above final grade. No steps, displays, signs or
other fixtures, or structure protrusions shall be located under the box which would allow access to the box without
assistance. The box shall be connected to the NFPA 72A fire alarm control panel, when provided. Wiring shall be as
required in NFPA 72A. Tampering or opening of the box shall produce a supervisory signal or supervisory zone 1. The
signal will then be transmitted through the NFPA 71 panel as a supervisory signal. (Ord. 2002-60)
8-2-5: KEY LOCK BOX CONTENTS:
The key lock box shall contain material safety data sheets and a detailed floor plan when required. The key lock box
shall contain clearly labeled keys for the following:
A. The main entrance door (mixed occupancies and strip shopping center keys shall be provided only for occupancies
where system control valves or fire alarm system panel exists).
B. Alarm room.
C. Mechanical rooms and sprinkler control rooms.
D. Fire alarm control panel.
E. Electrical rooms.
F. Pull stations or other fire protection devices.
G. Elevator keys.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 294/923
H. All other rooms as specified during the plan review process. (Ord. 94-49)
8-2-6: INSPECTION BY FIRE DEPARTMENT:
A. New Structures: The Carbondale Fire Department shall be responsible for the administration of this standard and shall
indicate specific requirements.
B. Existing Structures: The Carbondale Fire Department shall be responsible for administration of this standard and
notify the owner or operator by proper notice for compliance, with one or all of the following notations:
1. Contact a licensed fire alarm contractor.
2. Contractor may obtain application for key lock box from the Carbondale Fire Department.
3. Only licensed fire alarm contractors may obtain key lock boxes.
4. Contractors must obtain a Carbondale Fire Department permit to install key lock box.
5. Owner or manager must obtain a Carbondale Fire Department permit to install lock box.
C. Applications For Key Lock Boxes: Applications for key lock boxes may be obtained from the Fire Department, City of
Carbondale, 200 S. Illinois Avenue, P.O. Box 2047, Carbondale. (Ord. 94-49; 1998 Code)
8-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). If any violation of a provision or provisions of this Chapter shall
continue, each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 94-49; Ord. 97-166; 1998 Code)
Chapter 3
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
8-3-1: PAYMENT GENERALLY PERCENTAGE OF GROSS RECEIPTS:
All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of the state which are engaged, within the
limits of the city, in writing fire insurance, shall pay annually to the foreign fire insurance board, for the use and support of
the fire department of the city, the sum of two percent (2%) of the gross receipts of their agencies in the city. All such
corporations, companies and associations shall pay at the rate of two percent (2%) upon the gross amount of premiums,
which shall have been received for any insurance effected or agreed, within the limits of the city, during each year ending
July 1 by each association or company, respectively. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-2: AGENTS TO REPORT PREMIUMS:
Every person who shall act within the city as agent or otherwise for or in behalf of any corporation, company or
association as referred to in section 8-3-1 of this chapter shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to the city clerk
a full, true and just account, verified by affidavit, of all the premiums which shall have been received by such agent for
fire insurance during the year ending July 1, preceding such report, in behalf of such corporation, company or
association. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-3: PAYMENT REQUIRED; COMPANIES IN DEFAULT NOT TO TRANSACT BUSINESS:
Every person who shall act within the city as agent or otherwise for or in behalf of any corporation, company or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 295/923
association as referred to in section 8-3-1 of this chapter shall, on behalf of the corporation, company or association
represented, pay annually to the foreign fire insurance board, at the time of making the report referred to in section 8-3-2
of this chapter, two percent (2%) of the gross receipts or premiums of his agency, for which the corporation, company or
association represented by the person making such report is chargeable by virtue of this chapter. If such account be not
rendered on or before the day designated in this chapter or if the rate above fixed remains unpaid after that date, it shall
be unlawful for such corporation, company or association, so in default, to transact any business within the limits of the
city until the above requirements have been fully met; but this provision shall not relieve any such corporation, company
or association from the payment of any risk taken in violation hereof. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-4: PENALTY PROVISIONS FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any person acting as agent or otherwise for, or in behalf of, any fire insurance company, corporation or association, as
referred to in section 8-3-3 of this chapter, in effecting fire insurance within the limits of the city, who shall fail to make the
report, required in this chapter or fail to pay over the amount due from any such corporation, company or association at
the time designated for that purpose, or who shall effect or attempt to effect any contract of fire insurance in behalf of any
such corporation, company or association which has not complied with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); provided, that any prosecution brought by the city to enforce the penalty
for the violation of this chapter shall not interfere with the rights of the city to recover by appropriate action the sum due
the city, at the rate fixed in this chapter, from any such corporation, company or association, its agents or
representatives. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-5: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a foreign fire insurance board which shall consist of seven (7) members as set out in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-2. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-6: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of sections 8-3-5 through 8-3-10 of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BOARD: The foreign fire insurance board.
DEPARTMENT: Carbondale fire department.
MEMBERS OF DEPARTMENT: Any sworn members of the Carbondale fire department actively employed by the
Carbondale fire department in the following positions: firefighter, captain, assistant chief and chief.
SPECIAL ACCOUNT: Foreign fire insurance tax restricted account. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-7: ELECTION OF OFFICERS OF BOARD:
A. The board shall consist of seven (7) members. The fire chief of the department shall be a member by virtue of his
rank.
B. The members of the department shall elect six (6) members, two (2) of whom shall serve as members of the board in
the following capacity: 1) chairman; 2) treasurer. These six (6) members shall be elected at large by the sworn
members of the department from among themselves. The chief of the department shall serve as member and shall
have a vote in all proceedings of the board.
C. Member elections shall be held annually prior to April 1 pursuant to the board's rules and regulations, and board
members shall serve three (3) year terms as set out in the board's rules and regulations and until their successors
are elected and installed, except as hereinafter provided. The board shall meet at least once in the month of April
following the annual election of members.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 296/923
D. Elections of chairman and treasurer shall be held annually, and shall be done at the first scheduled meeting in April.
Officers shall serve a one year term and until their successors are elected and installed, except as hereinafter
provided.
E. Vacancies shall be filled pursuant to the board's rules and regulations for the balance of the unexpired term.
F. Election procedures consistent with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-2 and this chapter shall be made available to
all members at a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to any subsequent election. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-8: SPECIAL ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED:
A. All funds received by the foreign fire insurance board from foreign fire insurance gross receipts tax shall be deposited
in a special separate account.
B. No expenditure shall be made from the restricted account without the approval of the board.
C. All checks drawn on the restricted account shall be processed and executed according to the current board rules and
regulations.
D. The treasurer of the board shall give sufficient bond to the city which shall be approved by the city manager.
E. The board's funds shall be audited to verify that they have been expended by the board only for the maintenance,
use, and benefit of the department. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-9: MEETINGS, OFFICERS, QUORUM:
The board shall establish a regular time and place for its meetings. The chairman shall preside at the meetings. The
secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the board, and these records shall be open to
the public. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. The
affirmative vote of those members of the board shall constitute approval of business before it. Special meetings may be
called by the chairman or by no less than three (3) members of the board. Any person shall be entitled to appear and be
heard on any matter before the board. (Ord. 2016-25)
8-3-10: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The board shall have the power to approve the expenditures of monies from the restricted account for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the department.
B. The board may adopt rules and regulations for governing the board and the execution of duties of the board.
C. The board may amend or revoke its rules and regulations adopted. (Ord. 2016-25)
Chapter 4
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCIES OR INCIDENTS
8-4-1: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 297/923
"Hazardous material" as used in this Chapter means a substance or material in a quantity and form determined by the
United States Department of Transportation to be capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health and safety or
property when transported in commerce. (Ord. 91-48)
8-4-2: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
A. Authority To Control And Eliminate: The Carbondale Fire Department is hereby authorized to control and eliminate
hazardous materials and hazardous material emergencies. The Fire Department shall have the authority to
summarily remove, abate, and remedy all hazardous material emergencies or incidents within or without the
corporate limits of the City which are dangerous or prejudicial to public health, safety or property. Expenses incurred
by the Carbondale Fire Department shall be the joint and severable liability of the owner or owners of the hazardous
material, the owner of the means of transport, and all other persons having responsibility for or contributing to the
hazardous material emergency or incident whether resident or nonresident.
B. Hazardous Materials Specialist Sought; Expenses: The Carbondale Fire Department as determined by its Chief or his
designee is hereby authorized to seek and obtain the services of an independent hazardous material specialist or to
seek and obtain the service of a hazardous material specialist associated with the company or companies
responsible for the hazardous material emergency or incident. The expenses of removal, abatement, or remedy of a
hazardous material emergency or incident shall include but shall not be limited to charges for all materials used; a
charge for all firefighting services including equipment and manpower; charges for experts, specialists, or other
consultants; and all other charges associated or related to the hazardous material emergency or incident.
C. Fire Chief Ascertain Expenses; Notify Responsible Party: The Fire Chief of the Carbondale Fire Department shall
ascertain the expenses incurred in removing, abating, or remedying the hazardous material emergency or incident
and shall notify the responsible party informing said party that all expenses and charges are due and payable
immediately from date of notice ofthe charges. Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay the expenses of removal,
abatement, or remedy shall be responsible for all attorney fees, collection costs, and other expenses incurred by the
City in effecting collection of the amounts owing. Monies collected hereunder as expenses for removal, abatement, or
remedy of any hazardous material emergency or incident shall be used by the City to purchase materials, training,
and programs for controlling and containing hazardous material emergencies and incidents. (1998 Code)
Title 9
TRANSPORTATION
Chapter 1
TAXIS AND TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES
9-1-1: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter regulates the operation of motor vehicles to transport passengers for hire but not operating on a fixed route.
The following types of transportation services are not licensed or regulated by this chapter:
A. Buses;
B. Limousine services;
C. Vehicles operated by governmental units;
D. Vehicles operated by not-for-profit organizations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 298/923
E. Rented vehicles not for hire actually operated by the lessee; and
F. Vehicle or driver operating per a ridesharing arrangement as defined by the State of Illinois Ridesharing Arrangements
Act1. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the following definitions, unless otherwise specified in this chapter:
BUSINESS LOCATION: The location from which any taxicab service receives calls for taxicab service, dispatches
taxicabs, repairs taxicabs, or stores or parks taxicabs.
CITY: The City of Carbondale.
CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
DRIVER: The operator of the taxicab or TNC vehicle.
LICENSE: A taxicab or TNC driver's license issued by the City Clerk authorizing the licensee to operate a vehicle for hire
by the public within the City.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE: A luxury, chauffeur driven motor vehicle used in the City to carry passengers for hire for a fare
that is not determined by the distance traveled.
MANAGER: The City Manager of the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
MORAL TURPITUDE: An act or behavior that gravely violates moral sentiment or accepted moral standards of the
community and is a morally culpable quality held to be present in some criminal offenses as distinguished from others.
Examples include crimes of theft, bribery, dishonesty or fraud.
PARCEL: Any baggage, package, or item of any kind.
PERSON: Includes any individual, corporation or other legal entity, a partnership and any unincorporated association.
TAXI STAND: Any area commonly used by persons providing taxicab services to solicit or wait for fares or for persons
desiring to use taxicab services.
TAXICAB: Shall mean any motor vehicle licensed under this title to carry passengers for hire and displaying distinctive
registration plates issued by the State of Illinois.
TAXICAB SERVICE: The operation of motor vehicles to transport passengers for hire but not operating on a fixed route.
TAXIMETER: Any mechanical, electric or electronic device installed in a public passenger vehicle, which calculates and
indicates the fares, measures the distance traveled and time elapsed, and indicates other charges which may be due.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC): Includes any service offering transportation of persons from one
location to another location for a fee, and includes, but is not limited to, such services as Uber and Lyft.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY OPERATOR: Any person operating a motor vehicle offering rides from one
location to another location for a fee.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY VEHICLE: Any vehicle which meets the minimum requirements of this
Code and is registered with the City to be used by a TNC driver. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A. Policy Of Insurance: No license shall be issued, or remain valid unless the applicant submits to the City Clerk a copy
of the policy of insurance, which shall cover each and every vehicle and shall insure such owner against liability in a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 299/923
manner consistent with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-101 et seq., and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/10 as
adopted or hereafter amended. The insurance policy shall contain a description of each motor vehicle, giving the
manufacturer's name and number and State license number. The licensee shall require the insurance carrier to
submit a copy of the certificate of insurance directly to the City Clerk. The licensee shall immediately inform the City
Clerk in writing of any changes in its policy or renewal and submit a copy of such changes or renewal.
B. Failure To Comply: If such licensee fails to meet or remain in compliance with the requirements of this section, the
City Clerk shall summarily suspend the license until written proof is submitted showing that the requirements of this
section are met. If written proof is not submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of initial
suspension, then the City Clerk may revoke the license. This section shall be subject to the hearing provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-4: DESIGNATION OF TAXICABS OR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY VEHICLE:
Each taxicab or TNC vehicle shall bear lettering or company logo not less than two inches (2") in height, the name or
trade name of the owner on the right rear corner of the vehicle. The letters shall be professional, neat and clean in
appearance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Clerk. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-5: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. License Required: No person shall operate a taxicab or TNC vehicle for which a license to operate within the City
limits is required unless that person has been issued a current driver's license by the City.
B. Approval Of City Clerk: All applications for driver's licenses under this title, shall be subject to the approval of the City
Clerk. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-6: APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S LICENSE:
A. Information Required: An application for a driver's license shall be filed with the City Clerk upon forms provided by the
City. The application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information:
1. The applicant's Illinois driver's license number and the date of expiration of said license. (A copy of such license
shall be provided to the City Clerk.)
2. A verification by the applicant that he has adequate and legally acceptable eyesight to safely operate a vehicle,
and is not subject to any infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab or
TNC vehicle.
3. The address of every place that the applicant has resided within the last three (3) years.
4. The social security number and date of birth of the applicant.
5. The height, weight, eye color, and hair color of the applicant.
6. Any and all information pertaining to any criminal history of the applicant, including dates of arrest and disposition
of the charge(s).
7. A statement of each occurrence, if any, in which the applicant's driver's license has been suspended or revoked
and the reasons for such suspension or revocation.
8. A statement of any moving violations with which the applicant has been charged in the last five (5) years and the
disposition of said violations.
9. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been charged with driving under the influence and/or reckless
driving and, if so, the disposition of said charge.
10. Such further information as the City Clerk may require.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 300/923
B. Denial Of Application: An application for a driver's license that does not include the required information nor payment
of the required fees and costs may be denied by the City Clerk.
C. Investigation/Costs: The City Clerk has the right to conduct an investigation for the purpose of determining the
accuracy of the application and the character, fitness and qualifications of the applicant. Said investigation shall
include a background check to determine the accuracy of the application and the character, fitness and qualifications
of the applicant. The findings of the investigation shall be submitted to the City Manager for his consideration. The
applicant shall be responsible for payment in full of all costs required for said investigation, including the background
investigation, and shall pay such costs in full, in advance, at the time the application is submitted to the City Clerk.
The actual costs required to complete the investigation shall be nonrefundable. If it is determined that the costs
associated with the background investigation exceed the fees paid by the applicant, such excess costs must be paid
in full to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of the driver's license.
D. Change In Information: The applicant shall update his application with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of any
change in the information provided on the application, including providing any and all convictions for traffic violations.
E. License Issued: Licenses shall be issued not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days from receipt of the
application. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-7: ISSUANCE OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
A. Contents Of License: Upon verification of the application and qualifications of the applicant and upon payment of all
applicable fees and costs, the City Clerk may issue to the applicant a driver's license. Such license shall contain the
year for which the license is valid, a photograph of the applicant, the name of the applicant, the number of the
license, and any other information the City Clerk deems necessary.
B. License Displayed; Exclusive Use: The license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at a location on the front
dash or front visor of the vehicle that is in clear view of the passengers of said vehicle during any time that the
licensee is operating the vehicle. No licensee shall loan or permit the use of his license by any other person.
C. Expiration: Every driver's license shall expire on December 31 of each year. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-8: DENIAL OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
A. Mandatory Denial: An application for a driver's license shall be denied by the City Clerk if the applicant has been
either convicted, found guilty by a court of any jurisdiction, in custody, under parole or under any other noncustodial
supervision resulting from a conviction in, finding or determination of guilt by a court of any jurisdiction for the
commission of the following: any "forcible felony" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-8, and as amended
hereafter; a felony conviction for a crime involving moral turpitude; a misdemeanor conviction for a crime involving
moral turpitude committed in the last five (5) years; any crime involving the illegal sale or possession of any controlled
substance; solicitation of a child; criminal sexual abuse; or a felony conviction for a crime involving the operation of a
motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or narcotic drugs. If the Clerk determines that such person now
warrants the public trust, a driver's license may be issued.
B. Discretionary Denial: An application for a driver's license may be denied by the City Clerk based upon any of the
following:
1. The applicant has been either convicted, found guilty by a court of any jurisdiction, in custody, under parole or
under any other noncustodial supervision resulting from a conviction in, finding or determination of guilt by a court
of any jurisdiction for: reckless driving, a misdemeanor resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or narcotic drugs, or been in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-601 (mandatory
insurance requirement) or similar local ordinance two (2) or more times in the previous five (5) years;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 301/923
2. The applicant has been either convicted, found guilty by a court of any jurisdiction, in custody, under parole or
under any other noncustodial supervision resulting from a conviction in, finding or determination of guilt by a court
of any jurisdiction for the commission of any traffic violation which, in the opinion of the City Clerk, would reflect
unfavorably on the fitness of the applicant to provide safe and adequate transportation services to the public; or
3. The applicant has been either convicted, found guilty by a court of any jurisdiction, in custody, under parole or
under any other noncustodial supervision resulting from a conviction in, finding or determination of guilt by a court
of any jurisdiction for the commission of any crime against another person which, in the opinion of the City Clerk,
would reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the applicant to provide safe and adequate transportation services to the
public; or
4. The applicant has been either convicted, found guilty by a court of any jurisdiction, in custody, under parole or
under any other noncustodial supervision resulting from a conviction in, finding or determination of guilty by a court
of any jurisdiction for any crime involving moral turpitude which resulted in a misdemeanor disposition committed
more than five (5) years ago.
5. The City Clerk finds that it is not in the best interest of the City to issue the applicant a driver's license. (Ord. 2017-
27)
9-1-9: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
A. Discretionary: The City Clerk may suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter if the licensee:
1. Violates any of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Violates any City ordinance or State or Federal law which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer
safe, adequate public transportation; or
3. Provides false or incomplete information on his application for a driver's license.
B. Mandatory: The City Clerk shall revoke a license issued under this chapter if the licensee is either convicted, found
guilty by a court of any jurisdiction, in custody, under parole or under any other noncustodial supervision resulting
from a conviction in, finding or determination of guilt by a court of any jurisdiction for the commission of the following:
1. Reckless driving; or
2. Driving while under the influence of narcotic drugs or alcohol; or
3. Any "forcible felony" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-8, and as amended hereafter; or
4. Any crime involving moral turpitude which results in a felony disposition; or
5. Any crime involving the illegal sale or possession of any controlled substance; or
6. Solicitation of a child; or
7. Criminal sexual abuse; or
8. Operating a motor vehicle while their Illinois driver's license is suspended or revoked; or
9. Found to be operating a motor vehicle registered as a taxicab or TNC vehicle without valid insurance.
C. Suspension Of License: The City Clerk may summarily suspend a driver's license pursuant to subsection 9-1-24B of
this chapter.
D. Notice Provided: The licensee shall be provided with reasonable notice and given an opportunity to be heard, both in
accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-10: ZONES; RATES OF FARE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 302/923
All rates and charges for taxicab or TNC service in the City of Carbondale shall be fair, reasonable and competitive.
Every operator shall establish a method for calculating rates and fares. The following methods are approved: a)
taximeters, b) zone rates, c) individual written contract terms or prearranged fare by agreement, d) per person or flat
rates, e) mileage, or f) hourly. All licensees, at time of application or upon renewal of license, shall provide the City Clerk
with a written schedule of the rates charged, including but not limited to, per person or flat rates, zone rates, taximeter
rates, flag, mileage, hourly rates, and rates for transportation and carrying of luggage, hand luggage and parcels. The
Clerk shall be notified in writing ten (10) days prior to the effective date of any rate changes.
It shall be a violation for any taxi or TNC driver to charge or attempt to charge any passenger a greater fare than that to
which such driver is entitled pursuant to the rates of fare submitted to the City Clerk's Office at time of application. (Ord.
2017-27)
9-1-11: DISPLAY OF FEE AND CHARGE SCHEDULE:
Except for those fares or range of fares which are agreed upon or consented to in advance through written contract or an
agreement through an application, the entire schedule of fees and charges for services provided must be prominently
and accurately displayed in the interior of each licensed vehicle and clearly visible to all passengers at all times. It is a
violation of this chapter for a licensee to fail to post said schedule in the vehicle. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-12: DOCUMENTATION OF SERVICE AND RECEIPTS:
A. Receipt: The licensee shall provide a receipt of fare upon request to the passenger. Such receipt shall be in legible
type, writing, or digital format showing the date and amount of fare paid, the trade name of the taxicab or TNC, and
the name and the license number of the driver.
B. Records: The licensee, taxicab service, and the TNC shall be required to maintain adequate records, files and logs or
dispatch tape recordings of each trip, transport or service provided by the licensee, his employees and any taxicab
driver or TNC operator using his business location or service (i.e., times, pick up location, destination, fee charged,
baggage weight, etc.). Such information shall be provided to the City upon request. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-13: PERSONAL ARTICLES LEFT IN VEHICLES:
All articles, parcels or objects found in a vehicle by the driver of such vehicle shall be turned over to the Police
Department within twenty four (24) hours of the finding thereof, unless the property, in the meantime, is claimed by the
owner. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-14: RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF PASSENGERS:
No licensee shall allow their vehicle to exceed the seating capacity of the vehicle. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-15: DUTY TO ACCEPT PASSENGERS:
The driver of a taxicab or TNC vehicle shall accept as a passenger, any person who seeks to use the taxicab or TNC
vehicle for hire, provided such person does not act in an alarming or disturbing manner or disturb the peace of another
person. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-16: CONDUCT OF DRIVERS:
No licensee while on duty shall use any profane or obscene language, shout or call to prospective passengers, alarm or
disturb the passengers, or disturb the peace in any way. (Ord. 2017-27)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 303/923
9-1-17: CONDITION OF VEHICLES:
A. Inspection Checklist: No taxicab or TNC vehicle shall be operated within the City limits unless it passes all items
included on a Chilton's Safety Inspection Checklist, as such form may be updated by the Supervisor of the City
Garage from time to time.
B. Cleanliness Required: While in operation, every taxicab or TNC vehicle shall be kept in a neat, clean condition and
the interior shall be clean and free of foreign material or substance, the windows shall be clear and free from cracks
and shall be kept clean, and the upholstering shall be free of dirt or other foreign substances likely to soil clothing and
shall be free of rips, tears, or loss of padding.
C. Subject To Inspection: Every taxicab or TNC vehicle shall be subject to inspection, so often as may be necessary, by
a qualified ASE certified mechanic that is employed at a registered automotive business with the City to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section.
D. Certificate Of Safety: A license shall not be issued until all vehicles that are to operate by the licensee are examined
and issued a certificate of safety at an official testing station licensed by the State or by a registered mechanic. If any
taxicab or TNC vehicle is involved in an accident, the vehicle, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, may be required
to be tested following the accident. Said inspections shall be at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle. A
copy of all such certificates of safety shall be filed with the City Clerk.
E. Registered Inspection Center: Any automotive business with a primary location within the City of Carbondale may
register with the City Clerk to be a registered taxicab or transportation network company vehicle inspection center.
These inspections will only be conducted by an ASE certified mechanic employed by the registered inspection center.
The inspection center may establish the fee for conducting the initial inspection and any subsequent inspection as
may be required and shall submit the fee structure for the inspections to the City Clerk, who shall maintain a list of
registered inspection centers and their fees for service. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-18: SMOKING IN TAXICABS OR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY VEHICLES:
No person shall smoke within a taxicab or a TNC vehicle. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-19: USE OF VEHICLE FOR CRIME; ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; NARCOTIC DRUGS:
A. No person shall knowingly permit any taxicab or TNC vehicle to be used in the perpetration of a crime.
B. No driver of any taxicab or TNC vehicle in or upon the streets and public ways of the City shall have in his possession
or in or about the driver's compartment of the vehicle any alcoholic liquor.
C. No driver of any taxicab or TNC vehicle shall be under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or any narcotic drugs
while operating any taxicab or TNC vehicle for hire. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-20: FILING OF FALSE APPLICATIONS:
A person commits the offense of filing a false application if he knowingly makes a misstatement of fact or knowingly fails
to provide accurate information on an application for a driver's license. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-21: ILLEGAL RATE ASSESSMENT:
A person commits the offense of illegal rate assessment if he charges fare to any passenger or group of passengers in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 304/923
excess of the rates set out by resolution and in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-22: REFUSAL TO PAY LEGAL FARE:
A person commits the offense of refusal to pay legal fare if: a) he refuses to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles
mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, or b) he hires any vehicle for service with the intent to defraud the
person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-23: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense. In addition to such penalty, the violation shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the "license" as previously defined in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
City or any person from seeking civil remedies against any person who is in violation of this chapter. Each day that an
offense continues to occur shall be considered a separate offense for purpose of assessing a penalty. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-24: HEARINGS:
A. Evidentiary Hearing:
1. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, a license shall not be suspended or revoked prior to an
evidentiary hearing as provided in this section. The licensee shall be given written notice of the charge or charges
against him not less than three (3) days prior to such hearing. The licensee may, if he so chooses, be represented
at his own expense by legal counsel at the evidentiary hearing.
2. The evidentiary hearing shall be presided over by the City Manager. The City Manager shall have the right to issue
subpoenas for witnesses, to place witnesses under oath, to rule on objections, and to conduct the evidentiary
hearing in an efficient manner. The City Manager shall be responsible for securing the services of a certified court
reporter at the evidentiary hearing. The initial costs and fees of the court reporter shall be paid by the City.
3. The City shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the charges alleged against the
licensee. After the City has presented its evidence, the licensee may present evidence in his defense. After the
licensee has presented his evidence, if any, the City shall have the right to present rebuttal evidence. The
evidentiary hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
4. The City Manager, after the close of the evidentiary hearing, shall issue a report and recommendation to the City
Council. This report and recommendation shall include a recital of the evidence presented, findings of fact, and
conclusion of law.
5. The City Council, during a regular or special meeting, shall take action to accept, reject or accept in part/reject in
part the City Manager's report and recommendation. The City and the licensee shall have the opportunity to make
objections to the City Manager's report and recommendation. However, no new or additional evidence regarding
the charges shall be presented to the City Council. After reviewing the report and recommendation and any
objections, the City Council shall by an affirmative vote of a simple majority adopt, reject or adopt in part/reject in
part the City Manager's report and recommendation.
6. If the City Council determines that the charges against the licensee have been proven by a preponderance of the
evidence, the City Council may suspend or revoke the license as provided in this chapter.
7. Any action taken by the City Council shall be considered final for purposes of appeal and shall be subject to the
appeal process under the Administrative Review Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
B. Summary Suspension: Upon being presented with reliable evidence of a violation of this Code or State or Federal law
which the City Clerk reasonably believes poses a danger or threat to the health, safety or welfare of the community,
the City Clerk may take action to summarily suspend a license without first holding a hearing. Upon such suspension,
the licensee shall immediately cease to operate. An evidentiary hearing shall be held no later than seven (7) days
after the date of the suspension, giving the licensee the opportunity to be heard on the matter. Said hearing shall be
pursuant to subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2017-27)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 305/923
9-1-25: ENFORCEMENT:
The Police Department is hereby given the authority to watch, observe and investigate the conduct of a taxicab service,
TNC service, or licensees operating under this chapter. (Ord. 2017-27)
9-1-26: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS:
The City Manager is hereby given the authority to promulgate such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this
chapter, as he shall find necessary to effectuate the purpose and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-27)
Title 10
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND STORAGE
Chapter 1
STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivation shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
BUILDING: A structure used in whole or in part for human habitation, manufacturing, sales, and other purposes.
CALLBACK FEE: A fee charged to a resident and/or property owner whose refuse and/or recycling was not placed at the
curbside prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the morning of their collection day; when, at the request of the customer, it
becomes necessary for the collection truck(s) to make a return trip to collect said refuse and/or recycling from the
premises or property. Callbacks can only be requested by the resident and/or property owner on their regular collection
day.
CARTS, SIZE: Roll-out carts are referenced herein in nominal sizes as readily available from various manufacturers;
referenced cart sizes approximate and will vary on the manufacturer's specific standards and molds. Actual roll-out cart
sizes/volumes will vary plus or minus three (±3) gallons.
CITY: The City of Carbondale, Illinois.
CITY COLLECTION STICKER: A placard sold by the City or agents of the City which may be affixed to an appropriate
bag of landscape waste, tied bundle, or a special refuse item for the purpose of identifying prepayment for services
rendered by the City for landscape and special waste collection services.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected Governing Body of the City.
CITY DESIGNATED SOLID WASTE COLLECTIONS: The collection of solid waste left at curbside within the City limits of
Carbondale, Illinois, at specified dates designated by the City Manager. The collections will be operated by the City of
Carbondale, in addition to regularly scheduled collections. Said collections shall be billed to the property owners of
record and/or resident at rates set by resolution of the City Council.
CITY REFUSE CUSTOMER: Any person who: a) selects the City as the designated collector of that person's building or
premises which qualifies for residential refuse collection, or b) fails to select a designated collector other than the City
within seven (7) days after occupying the person's building or premises which qualifies for residential refuse collection.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE CUSTOMER (QUALIFICATIONS): City facilities and properties and businesses that utilize the
City's dumpster enclosures located in City parking lots in the downtown area. No other agencies, properties or entities
shall qualify as a commercial refuse customer. Any commercial customers currently being served by the City as of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 306/923
September 1, 2011, may continue their service with the City at a separate rate as determined by resolution of the City
Council.
CURBSIDE: A location on the public right-of-way in front of a particular building and/or premises where the owner and/or
person occupying such property places their refuse or landscape waste for collection. Said location is normally between
the curb or edge of street when no curb exists and the sidewalk or right-of-way line when no sidewalk exists. Should
room not be sufficient between curb and sidewalk, refuse may be placed behind the sidewalk at a location approved by
the MES Manager.
DEMOLITION OR CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Refuse which is incidental to construction, renovation or demolition of
buildings, other structures, or appurtenances on a premises.
DESIGNATED COLLECTOR: The City or other licensed collector who has been selected by an owner and/or person to
collect refuse, landscape waste, and/or recyclable materials from a building or premises.
EXTRA VOLUME CHARGES: Charges that are automatically imposed should a qualifying residential refuse customer's
volume exceed the capacity of the roll-out cart (95 gallons or 45 gallons) on their regular scheduled collection day.
Residents being charged for a second cart will incur extra volume charges after they exceed the combined capacity of
the two (2) carts. All items not contained completely within the cart or carts are subject to extra volume charges. These
charges are set by resolution of the City Council and become a part of the regular bill for said refuse collection services.
FINANCE DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Finance within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, disposal and/or
consumption of food. Cans, bottles, paper or plastic plates, plastic eating utensils, wrappings, etc., which contain or are
soiled with putrescible animal or vegetable waste heretofore described shall be considered to be garbage. Dead animals
or portions thereof shall also be considered as garbage.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Material comprised of leaves, yard waste, tree branches, and wood free of all other debris and/or
refuse.
LANDSCAPE WASTE COLLECTION: Landscape waste picked up from buildings and premises which qualify for
residential and commercial refuse collection, but does not include demolition/construction debris.
LEAF COLLECTION BAG: A commercially manufactured paper lawn waste bag with a capacity of not more than thirty
(30) gallons.
LEAVES: Yard waste resulting from deciduous and coniferous seasonal deposition.
LICENSED COLLECTOR: Any person, firm or corporation whom the City has licensed for the collection, removal, and
disposal of garbage or rubbish.
MES MANAGER: The Manager of Maintenance and Environmental Services or his designee.
OWNER: Any person or entity who shall have a legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the subject real estate, or any
improvements thereto; or any type of leasehold interest in the subject real estate, or any improvements thereto; or a
capacity to manage the subject real estate or any improvements thereto pursuant to an order of court, power, or
agreement.
PERSON: The owner, proprietor, occupant, or agent in charge of any building and/or premises.
PREMISES: A parcel of land within the City of Carbondale including the adjoining street right-of-way or legal easement,
separated from adjacent parcel of land by legal description.
PUBLIC STREET: A street or roadway that permits unrestricted travel by the general public and that is maintained by a
government entity; and/or a street or roadway that permits unrestricted travel by the general public that is privately
maintained whereupon the City has written authorization from the owner(s), of said street or roadway, to operate its
equipment and collect solid waste. At no time shall an alley or driveway be considered a public street. The MES
Manager shall determine if a privately maintained street or roadway is adequate for the collection of solid waste and may
require maintenance of the same by the private owner(s) for the safe and efficient operation of solid waste collection.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Newsprint and aluminum, glass, plastic and ferrous metal containers, for which there is in
effect a recycling program operated by the City or pursuant to a franchise granted by the City to a special collector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 307/923
REFUSE: Garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION (QUALIFICATIONS): The following buildings or premises qualify for residential
refuse collection: single-family dwellings and duplex dwellings; triplex and fourplex dwellings may qualify only if all units
contained in the building are signed up for refuse collection services; and limited small business establishments located
in residential districts that generate ninety five (95) gallons (or up to 190 gallons if being charged for an extra cart) or less
of refuse per week. All buildings or premises must have frontage on a public street to quality for residential refuse
collection.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
SOLID WASTE: All wastes, both putrescible and nonputrescible, combustible and noncombustible, except human body
waste and including, but not limited to: garbage, refuse, recyclables, and landscape waste.
SPECIAL COLLECTOR: Any person, firm, or corporation whom the City has granted a franchise for the collection,
removal, and disposition of recyclable material.
SPECIAL WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES: Collection of special wastes for recycling via a Prepayment Sticker
Program. Special wastes include items such as: household appliances, water heaters, passenger and light truck tires,
and other items as determined by the MES Manager.
TIED BUNDLES: Items of rubbish or landscape waste such as lumber, tree branches, or wood stacked and secured by
string or twine (not wire) into bundles not exceeding five feet (5') in length or twenty five (25) pounds in weight.
TREE BRANCHES: Small tree limbs, brush cuttings, and other woody growth having a diameter of one-half inch (1/2"),
but less than three inches (3").
VACUUM LEAF COLLECTION (CURBSIDE LEAF VACUUM SERVICE): The collection of loose leaves from properties
that qualify for residential refuse collection. Leaves must be raked to the curbside and conform to the guidelines as set
by the MES Manager. Vacuum collection of loose leaves is requested via a call in scheduling basis, fees for this service
are set by resolution of the City Council.
VOLUNTARY EXTRA SOLID WASTE COLLECTION: Requests for collection of solid wastes by residents and/or owners
of properties that qualify for residential refuse collection. Requests for this service shall be made in writing to the
designated City division; fees for said service shall be as set by resolution of the City Council.
WOOD: Tree limbs stripped of branches and trees having a diameter of three inches (3") and over up to twelve inches
(12") inclusive. Construction and demolition debris and trees and limbs over twelve inches (12") are not included as
wood.
YARD WASTE: Grass clippings, lawn thatch, weeds, hedge clippings, garden waste, shredded tree branches, twigs no
longer than two feet (2') in length and less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter, and other such waste which can safely
be placed into a yard waste bag without damaging the container. See also definition of landscape waste.
YARD WASTE BAG: See definition of leaf collection bag. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-2: RECYCLABLE MATERIAL PROPERTY OF CITY:
Ownership of recyclable material set out for collection or deposition at a City operated recycling drop off facility in
accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be vested in the City. No person shall collect, remove or dispose of
recyclable material set out for collection or deposited at a City operated recycling drop off facility, except:
A. A "special collector" pursuant to the terms of its franchise.
B. The City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 308/923
No person or entity, except a licensed special collector or the City, shall collect, remove, or dispose of recyclable material
set out for curbside collection. Any person or entity found violating this requirement shall be subject to a fine of not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every separate offense. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-3: COLLECTION REQUIRED:
A. Authorized Collectors; Days And Hours For Collection: The owner and/or person in control of and/or occupying any
building and/or premises shall provide for the collection of refuse from said building and/or premises in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. All residential refuse, except recyclable material and landscape waste, shall be
removed and disposed of by the City or a licensed collector once each week, with an interval of at least two (2) days
between each collection. The City shall make no collection on Sundays or holidays designated by the City. Further, all
collections made by the City or a licensed collector shall be made in sections of the City zoned primarily for
residential uses as stated in sections 15.2.9 through 15.2.16 of this Code only between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and/or persons in control of and/or
occupying any commercial establishments to collect, remove, and dispose of all commercial refuse and landscape
waste; provided, however, that if no reasonable method of collection, removal, or disposal can be found, the City may
remove such refuse by special agreement with such commercial owner and/or person.
B. Same Day Collection: Whenever a curbside recycling program operated by the City or a special collector authorized
by the City is in effect, recyclable material shall be collected in each area of the City on the same day of the week as
the City refuse collection in that area.
C. Recyclable Material: Whenever a recycling program operated by the City or an authorized special collector is in effect,
occupants of dwellings which produce residential refuse may place authorized recyclable material at curbside for
collection by the City or special collector if recycling bins have been provided to the residence by the City or special
collector. Recyclable materials to be placed at curbside for collection shall comply with the requirements for collection
as specified in section 10-1-10 of this chapter. The curbside collection as specified is available to occupants of
dwellings which produce residential refuse whether or not such dwelling receives curbside refuse pick up service
from the City. Occupants of dwellings which produce refuse other than residential refuse shall remove the recyclable
material periodically from premises so as to not constitute an accumulation of material that would be hazardous to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the general public.
D. Landscape Waste: Landscape waste and/or yard waste shall be removed from each occupied building and/or
premises by a licensed collector once every thirty (30) days or more frequently as volume exceeds storage
capacities.
1. No owner and/or person may knowingly mix other refuse with landscape waste or yard waste that is intended for
collection and/or final disposal at a landscape waste processing facility or by means of land application.
2. No owner and/or person may knowingly mix landscape waste or yard waste with other refuse that is intended for
collection and/or final disposal at a sanitary landfill.
It is not the intent of this provision to prohibit composting of landscape and/or yard waste as permitted by chapter 2
of this title. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-4: FEES:
A. Solid Waste: The owner and/or person in control of and/or occupying any building and/or premises shall pay a
reasonable fee to the Finance Director for the removal and disposal of solid waste, when removed by the City. Said
fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
B. Recycling Program: The owner and/or person in control of and/or occupying any building or premises in the City for
which a City water or sanitary sewer bill is issued shall pay a reasonable fee to the Finance Director for the operation
of the City's Recycling Program. The fee for the Recycling Program shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2017-24)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 309/923
10-1-5: BILLING PROVISIONS:
A. Refuse Service; Joint Billing: The charge for refuse service for owners and/or persons in control of and/or occupying
those buildings and/or premises served and/or who are refuse customers of the City will be billed to each user
monthly, along with the bill for water, sewer, and/or other services and will carry the same due date, grace periods
and penalties as the water and/or sewer bills or bills for other services rendered by the City. Such bill shall not be
considered to be paid in full, unless such payment is accompanied with the refuse service charge. The failure to pay
the refuse charge herein provided for when due shall be cause for discontinuing and disconnecting of the water
and/or sewer service of the building and/or premises served.
B. Vacuum Leaf Collection; Separate Or Joint Billings: The charge for vacuum leaf collection (curbside leaf vacuum
service) for owners and/or persons in control of and/or occupying those buildings and/or premises utilizing the service
may be billed separately, in which case the bill shall carry its own due date and grace periods, but will include the
same penalties as the water and/or sewer service bill when not paid in full. The failure to pay the vacuum leaf
collection charge herein provided for when due shall be cause for discontinuing and disconnection of the water and/or
sewer service of the building and/or premises served.
C. Recycling Program; Joint Billing: The charge for operation of the Recycling Program will be billed monthly, along with
the bill for water and/or sewer services and will carry the same due date, grace periods and penalties as the water
and/or sewer bills. Such bill shall be considered to be paid in full, unless such payment is accompanied with the
recycling charge. The failure to pay the recycling charge herein provided for when due shall be cause for
discontinuing and disconnecting of the water and/or sewer service of the building and/or premises served.
D. City Designated Solid Waste Collections; Separate Or Joint Billing: The charge for City designated solid waste
collection for owners and/or persons utilizing the service may be billed separately, in which case the bill shall carry its
own due date and grace periods, but will include the same penalties as the water and/or sewer service bill when not
paid in full. The failure to pay the City designated solid waste collection charge herein provided for when due shall be
cause for discontinuing and disconnecting of the water and/or sewer service of the building and/or premises served.
E. Voluntary Extra Solid Waste Collections; Separate Or Joint Billing: The charge for voluntary extra solid waste
collection for owners and/or persons utilizing the service may be billed separately, in which case the bill shall carry its
own due date and grace periods, but will include the same penalties as the water and/or sewer service bill when not
paid in full. The failure to pay the voluntary extra solid waste collection charges herein provided for when due shall be
cause for discontinuing and disconnecting of the water and/or sewer service of the building and/or premises served.
(Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-6: DEPOSITS:
All deposits made by users of City water and/or sewer service, as required by City ordinance to guarantee payment of
water and/or sewer bills, may also be applied to pay delinquent or defaulting City solid waste collection charges of the
owner and/or person who made the deposit. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-7: CHANGE OR CANCELLATION OF SERVICE:
Except for as provided below, the owners or occupants of dwellings that qualify for residential refuse collection shall be
billed as City customers. Owners or occupants of dwellings that qualify for residential refuse collection may not change
service with the City except upon notice to the Finance Director or his designee. Said notice shall be received by the
Finance Director at least thirty (30) days prior to the change of service and shall be accompanied by documentation from
a licensed collector that refuse service has been retained by said licensed collector for that specific qualifying residential
dwelling. Carts are to remain upon the premises to which they are assigned/billed; removal of the cart from the premises
will result in the customer/resident being charged seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a replacement cart. Upon the
customer/resident's change or cancellation of service the Finance Director or his designee will inform the
customer/resident to set their roll out cart curbside for pickup on a specific day. The MES Manager or his designee will
then have the cart removed from the premises; failure to place the cart curbside for pickup will result in the
customer/resident being charged for service until the cart is returned to the City and/or being charged seventy five
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 310/923
dollars ($75.00) for a replacement cart. The City has the right to request verification of refuse service by a licensed
collector from any owner or occupant of residential dwellings that qualify for residential refuse collection; failure to
provide such verification shall result in the qualifying residential dwelling(s) being billed as City customers. Additionally,
each licensed collector shall submit to the Finance Director or his designee on or before the last day of each month a list
of his customers. Such list shall include the names and addresses of customers added or removed from their service. All
owners or occupants of dwellings that qualify for residential refuse service or accounts not shown on the list of any
licensed collector shall be billed as City customers. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall be
grounds for revocation of a collector's license. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-8: CONTAINERS, PREPARATION AND STORAGE OF REFUSE:
A. Criteria For Containers: All residential and commercial garbage shall be kept in containers which meet the following
criteria: constructed of rigid plastic or metal; provided with insect and rodent proof covers; free of holes, cuts, or tears;
and watertight. The covers shall be tightly placed on the container so as to keep it closed whenever there is garbage
in the container. There shall be sufficient containers to hold all the garbage accumulating on the premises between
collections. Garbage from the residences shall be drained, wrapped in paper or placed in sanitary bags, and kept dry
in an approved container until removal by the City or a licensed collector (except as indicated in section 10-1-10 of
this chapter when set out for collection). All containers shall be maintained in a good and sanitary condition by the
owner thereof.
B. Storage Within An Enclosed Building: All nongarbage residential and commercial refuse when stored within a
completely enclosed building shall be kept in containers described in subsection A of this section or in some other
enclosure such as a closed plastic bag that will allow for orderly storage without creating a harborage for insects and
rodents.
C. Outdoor Storage Of Residential Refuse: All residential refuse when stored outdoors or not in a completely enclosed
building shall be stored as follows:
1. All residential garbage shall always be stored as required in subsection A of this section.
2. All other residential refuse except leaves, grass rakings, sticks, and tree limbs, when stored outdoors or not in a
completely enclosed building, shall be stored in containers described in subsection A of this section.
3. All residential refuse and refuse containers when not in a completely enclosed building shall be placed and kept at
all times on private property adjacent to the owner and occupant's house or building or building at a location which
is not between the front of the dwelling or building and the adjoining street. If stored beside rather than behind the
dwelling or building, such refuse and refuse containers shall be screened from view from the street. In the case of a
corner lot, the dwelling or building shall be considered to have two (2) fronts and the determination of side versus
rear of the structure shall be by prevailing yard patterns in the block. In the case of a "through lot or double
frontage lot" as defined in section 15.11.4 of this Code, front versus rear will be determined by prevailing yard
patterns.
4. Combustible materials such as sticks, tree limbs and lumber when not stored in approved containers shall be
stored a sufficient distance from the house or building so as to not create a fire hazard that would endanger the
house or building.
D. Outdoor Storage Of Commercial Refuse: All commercial refuse when stored outdoors or not in a completely enclosed
building shall be stored as follows:
1. All commercial garbage shall always be stored as required in subsection A of this section.
2. All other commercial solid waste shall be stored in closed dumpsters, closed garbage cans, or equivalent closed
containers unless such refuse is stored in a completely fenced and visually screened area of sufficient height to
preclude access by animals and to avoid wind blown dispersal of such refuse.
3. No commercial refuse containers shall be stored on public rights-of-way. Provided, however, that in the case of
structures in the downtown area where buildings were heretofore built up to all the property lines, dumpsters or
other containers may be stored at the edge of an alley only as long as such containers do not obstruct traffic and
only if such dumpsters or containers are fastened by chains, cables, or similar devices to the buildings so as to
prevent the dumpsters or containers from being accidentally or mischievously pushed into the trafficway. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 311/923
location and placement of such containers is subject to the approval of the Public Works Director or his designee.
The owner of the building and the tenant(s) of the building are responsible to see that the dumpsters are properly
fastened to the building. The Public Works Director or his designee may remove any commercial refuse container
stored on public right-of-way not in compliance with the terms of this subsection D3.
4. Commercial refuse containers shall not be stored between a building and a street adjoining the property upon
which the building is situated unless the containers are stored in an enclosure designed to screen the containers
from view from the street.
5. Properties for which a site plan has been approved shall have refuse stored only in the manner and location
approved in the site plan.
E. Construction And Remodeling Debris: Construction and remodeling debris produced during an active construction or
remodeling project may be stored in commercial containers such as large dumpsters without lids as long as
provisions are made to prevent blowing of debris.
F. Leaves And Grass Rakings: Leaves and grass rakings may be stored in high strength bags which are tightly fastened.
G. Sticks And Tree Limbs: Sticks and tree limbs may be stored in tied bundles.
H. Storage Of Recycling Bins: Recycling bins provided by the City or a special collector shall be stored in a completely
enclosed building. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-9: CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
Each and every owner, manager, agent, tenant, housekeeper, or other person in control of or occupying any room,
dwelling house, apartment, or other building or portion thereof, including business establishments, and producing or
responsible for the disposal of refuse which is to be collected by the City, shall be provided one (1) 95- or 45-gallon rollout
cart of their choice. Upon request, one (1) additional 95- or 45-gallon cart per residence will be available for an
ongoing monthly fee equal to fifty percent (50%) of the then in effect monthly refuse collection fee. Customer requests for
changing cart sizes, after the initial selection of a cart size and delivery of selected cart, will incur a thirty dollar ($30.00)
cart switching fee. The City will replace and/or repair carts that have been damaged due to normal wear and tear.
Replacement carts or carts damaged due to negligence or otherwise lost or stolen will be replaced for a one-time cart
replacement fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) as determined by the MES Manager or his designee. If using a private
hauler the customer or hauler shall provide a sufficient number of appropriate containers to hold the refuse accumulating
therein. The City or an authorized special collector will make available recycling bins. One (1) bin will be available at no
cost for each dwelling at which occupants produce residential refuse, but only if the City or special collector is able to
provide curbside recyclable material collection for that dwelling. In the event that the recycling bin is lost, damaged,
stolen, or additional recycling bins are desired, the City or special collector may charge for the replacement bins.
Recycling bins and carts issued to a property shall remain with the property when occupancy of the property changes. All
recycling bins and roll out carts remain the property of the City or the special collector and shall be returned at the
request of the City or special collector. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-10: CURBSIDE COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Compliance With Chapter: Except as provided in section 10-1-15 of this chapter, only refuse generated from buildings
and/or premises qualifying for residential refuse collection shall be set at curbside for collection. Such refuse shall be
placed at ground level next to the curb and/or in the boulevard area adjacent to the street in such a manner as not to
impair pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. All refuse placed at curbside shall be contained, prepared and packaged
according to the requirements of this chapter. Residential refuse collection shall be limited to a maximum quantity of
one (1) cart (95 gallons or 45 gallons) per week, unless the customer is paying for an additional cart, wherein the
volume per week will be the combined volume of the two (2) carts (a maximum of 190 gallons). All refuse shall be
contained completely within the provided cart(s); any additional volume shall be subject to additional charges as set
forth below.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 312/923
B. Acceptable Containers: Except as provided in section 10-1-15 of this chapter and subsections C, D and E of this
section, only those containers commercially manufactured for the express purpose of garbage containment will
qualify as an acceptable container in which to hold garbage, rubbish, and/or other refuse when placed at curbside. All
City refuse customers shall only use the cart(s) as provided by the City; the following standards shall be met for any
residents/properties who are not using the City as their refuse disposal service:
1. All containers shall be in reasonably good condition without holes, cuts, or tears which are dangerous or which will
allow contents to spill out of the container.
2. All containers shall have at least two (2) usable handles on the outside.
3. The containers shall have a capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons (2.5 bushels) nor more than ninety five
(95) gallons.
4. All contents of the containers shall be covered with a tightfitting lid while at curbside awaiting collection unless all
contents are enclosed in one (1) or more plastic bags as specified in subsection C of this section.
5. All non-City provided containers used at a building or premises that has more than one (1) dwelling unit (i.e., a
duplex, triplex, fourplex, etc.) shall have the address number and unit number clearly labeled on the side of the
container in four inch (4") black letters. City provided carts will be provided with serial numbers that are specific to
each refuse collection account; labeling City provided carts is prohibited with anything other than removable stick
on black lettering of four inches (4") or less in height on the backside (hinge side) of the cart. Spray painting,
engraving, or otherwise defacing or damaging of City provided carts is strictly prohibited and subject to penalties in
section 10-1-20 of this chapter.
C. Plastic Bags: Plastic bags will qualify as a suitable container in which to contain garbage, and other refuse when
placed at curbside for collection provided that the following standards are met:
1. The plastic bag shall have a capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons (2.5 bushels) nor more than thirty three
(33) gallons (4.1 bushels) with the contents thereof not weighing more than twenty five (25) pounds.
2. The plastic bag shall be at least one and zero tenths (1.0) mils thick for a twenty (20) gallon (2.5 bushels) capacity
bag. Larger capacity bags shall be thicker commensurate with size and the weight of the contents.
3. The plastic bag shall be watertight and have no holes or tears present and shall be tightly fastened at the top so
that it can be grasped and supported from the top with one (1) hand without the bag failing.
4. The plastic bag shall not contain broken bottles, mirrors, window glass, sharp metal, or other like objects which
might cut through or puncture the bag resulting in injury of workers or passersby unless such objects are
appropriately shielded to prevent such an occurrence. All medical syringes, needles, and other similar products
shall be properly capped and sealed within "sharps" containers that are designed for the safe disposal of these
items; failure to comply with this requirement shall be cause for citation and fines per section 10-1-20 of this
chapter.
D. Oversized Residential Refuse: Other residential refuse which, because of the size of the items, will not fit within the
provided cart(s) may also be set at curbside for collection provided that all items are presented in a neat, clean, and
sanitary condition and meet the standard set forth below. Additional charges shall be imposed for refuse that does not
fit completely within the provided cart(s), these charges shall be set by resolution of the City Council as "extra volume
charges" and shall automatically be added to the monthly refuse and utility bill.
1. Appliances, white goods, and tires are recyclable and cannot be disposed of as refuse, these items can be
disposed of through the City's Special Waste Program.
2. Miscellaneous building materials shall be cut to a length not to exceed five feet (5') and tied into bundles or
packages not exceeding twenty five (25) pounds in weight so as to allow them to be handled by one (1) person.
3. Furniture and other similar nonpackagable refuse shall be placed in a manner which will prevent blowing or
strewing on public and/or private premises.
4. Cardboard boxes which will not readily fit in a qualified container or cart shall be broken down and tied into bundles
not exceeding twenty five (25) pounds in weight. At no time will a cardboard box be considered as a qualifying
container to hold refuse. Clean cardboard boxes can be recycled and should be placed at the curbside within or
next to your recycling bin(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 313/923
5. Automobiles and similar sized objects shall not be placed at curbside for collection.
6. Construction debris generated by a contractor cannot be disposed of as refuse.
E. Recyclable Materials: Whenever a curbside recycling program operated by the City or a special collector authorized
by the City is in effect, persons occupying dwellings producing residential refuse may place recyclable material at
curbside provided that the items are presented in conformity with the following:
1. The recyclable materials shall be placed in recycling bins provided by the City or special collector.
2. Only those recyclable materials specifically authorized from time to time by the MES Manager shall be placed at
curbside for collection.
3. Within the recycling bins recyclable materials shall be sorted into different categories as specified from time to time
by the MES Manager (for example, the MES Manager may specify that all recyclable metal containers shall be
separated from glass containers and from newsprint).
4. When setting out recycling bins for collection, care should be taken to prevent recyclable materials, especially
paper products, from being blown or strewn about.
F. Time Restrictions: Persons placing refuse at curbside for collection shall comply with the following time restrictions:
1. Except as provided below, refuse carts and containers shall not be set at curbside earlier than six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. of the evening prior to the scheduled pick up day but shall be set at curbside no later than seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. on the morning of the scheduled pick up day. Said containers shall be removed from the curbside and
returned to a location permitted by section 10-1-8 of this chapter as quickly as possible after pick up, but not later
than eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on the evening of the scheduled pick up day.
2. Refuse in qualifying plastic bags shall not be set at curbside earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the morning of
the scheduled pick up day, but shall be set at curbside no later than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on that morning.
3. Recyclable material set at curbside for collection as part of a recycling program provided by the City or a special
collector shall not be set at curbside earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the evening prior to the scheduled pick
up day, but shall be set at curbside no later than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the morning of the scheduled pick up
day. Recycling bins shall be removed from the curbside and returned to within a completely enclosed building as
quickly as possible after pick up but no later than eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on the evening of the
scheduled pick up day.
4. Refuse and/or recycling that is not placed at the curbside prior to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the morning of their
collection day shall be subject to a callback fee, as determined by resolution of the City Council, should it be
necessary for the collection truck(s) to make a return trip to collect refuse and/or recycling from a premises or
property. Said fee shall be automatically imposed and become a part of the regular refuse/utility bill for the
premises or property. Callbacks can only be requested by the resident or property owner on their regular collection
day. Refuse and/or recycling placed curbside on any other day shall be removed via the procedures and fees as
outlined in section 10-1-18 of this chapter.
G. Responsibility For Spilled Waste: The property occupant and owner remain responsible for garbage and other refuse
(including recyclable material) placed at curbside until collected. Thus, for example, if a refuse container is knocked
over or a plastic bag is torn open, the occupant/owner remains responsible and is responsible for picking up any
garbage, other refuse or recyclable material that falls out of a container, bag, bundle or package.
H. Defective Containers: Defective containers and plastic bags may, at the discretion of the collector, be rejected for
collection. Collectors may refuse to empty containers with holes, cuts or tears which are dangerous or which will
allow the contents of the containers to spill or containers without proper handles. They may also refuse to pick up
plastic bags with holes, cuts or tears or that are so heavily overloaded that they are likely to break open. If the
collector refuses to collect the refuse for these reasons, the occupant/owner will be notified to replace the container
or bag or rebundle and/or repackage the refuse and again place it out for collection on the scheduled pick up day.
I. Refusal To Accept Materials: Collectors of recyclable material may refuse to accept materials which are improperly
sorted, cleaned, prepared, packaged or otherwise not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter including
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 314/923
such other rules as the MES Manager establishes pursuant to this chapter. If the collector refuses to collect the
recyclable material, the occupant/owner will be notified to correct the deficiency.
J. Improper Day Curbside Placement Violation: Except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter, the placement of any
garbage, refuse, recycling or other household items curbside within the corporate limits of the City of Carbondale on
any day other than the regularly scheduled collection day for that property is a violation of this Code. Upon posting of
this violation the property owner of record and/or resident shall have twenty four (24) hours to properly remove and
dispose of all items from the curbside. Any items remaining at the curbside after twenty four (24) hours shall hereby
constitute permission for the City to cause the removal and disposal of all items and bill the property owner of record
and/or resident as per the rates outlined in section 10-1-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-11: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PLACES:
No owner, person, licensed collector, or corporation shall dispose of any refuse by depositing the same in or on any
public alley, street, roadway, highway, vacant lot, or property of any kind or character within the City or in any stream or
body of water within the City, except as provided in this chapter. No person shall transport by any means garbage or
other refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business or other site to and deposit such material in, around or on
top of refuse receptacles placed along public streets or in other public places. Furthermore, no person shall transport
such garbage or refuse to and deposit such material in, around, or on top of refuse containers on private property of
another person or public property unless the owner or person in control of said property consents to the deposit of such
material. Refuse containing items bearing the name of a person and found deposited in, on or around the refuse
containers of other persons or on the property of other persons or on public property shall be presumed to have been
deposited by the person whose name appears on the item; but such presumption may be rebutted. This section shall not
be construed as to prevent pedestrians or motorists from depositing refuse generated during the normal course of
walking or motoring into refuse containers made available to the public for the deposit of said refuse. Furthermore, this
section shall not be construed as preventing persons authorized in section 10-1-16 of this chapter from depositing
recyclable material in a recycling drop off facility in conformity with the provisions of said section 10-1-16 of this chapter.
Additionally this section shall not be construed to allow persons owning or having interest in a property to transport solid
waste, or other materials from that property to another property with the purpose and/or intent that said materials will be
collected and disposed of by the City and/or to avoid paying the required fees associated with disposal of said materials.
(Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-12: PRIVATE COLLECTORS TO BE LICENSED; FEE:
A. License Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful for any private person, firm, or corporation to haul or collect garbage and
rubbish within the City unless and until they have been duly licensed to do so by the City. Every applicant for a
license to collect garbage and rubbish in the City shall first provide documentation that all vehicles used by him in the
collection and disposal of said garbage and rubbish have been properly inspected and licensed as required by the
State of Illinois. No license shall be issued hereunder until said vehicle or vehicles have been found to be in a safe
and sanitary condition and proof of insurance as outlined below has been provided. All vehicles shall be enclosed, or
covered by canvas, so as to completely contain all collected refuse. The annual license fee hereunder shall be the
sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per private person, firm or corporation with one (1) collection vehicle; fifty dollars
($50.00) per private person, firm or corporation with two (2) collection vehicles; or seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
private person, firm or corporation with three (3) or more collection vehicles. All licenses, inspections, documentation,
proof of insurance, and fees that are required by this chapter shall be due on May 1 of every year. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as prohibiting the City from making periodic inspections of licensed vehicles at any time
during the licensing year. Provided, however, that no such license shall authorize a licensed collector to haul or
collect recyclable material which has been set out for collection in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Failure
to comply with the requirements as set forth herein shall result in revocation of said license and penalties per section
10-1-20 of this chapter.
B. Insurance Required: No license shall be issued, or remain valid unless the applicant submits to the City Clerk a copy
of the policy of insurance, which shall cover each and every vehicle and shall insure such owner against liability in the
minimum amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for bodily injury to, or death of, any person, and
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damage to property. The insurance policy shall contain a description of each
motor vehicle, giving the manufacturer's name and number and State license number. The certificate holder shall
require the insurance carrier to submit a copy of the certificate of insurance directly to the City Clerk. The certificate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 315/923
holder shall immediately inform the City Clerk in writing of any changes in its policy or renewal and submit a copy of
such changes or renewal.
C. Recyclable Material Handled Separately: It shall be unlawful for any person including licensed collectors to haul or
collect within the City any recyclable material which has been separated and set out for collection by the City or a
special collector in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-13: SUPERVISION OF SOLID WASTE COLLECTION:
All refuse intended to be collected by the City shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of under the supervision of the
MES Manager. The MES Manager shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collection, type
and location of waste containers and such other matters pertaining to collection, conveyance, and disposal as he shall
find necessary for the clean, safe, healthy and efficient operation of solid waste collection, including such rules for how
materials shall be cleaned, prepared, and packaged or bundled for collection, and to change and modify the same after
notice as required by law provided that such regulations are not contrary to the provisions hereof. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-14: BURNING; COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
No person shall hereinafter burn or set fire to, or cause to be burned or set fire to, any refuse, including leaves or sticks,
or any other combustible material whatsoever, within the City unless such material is burned in an incinerator approved
by the Division of Building and Neighborhood Services in accordance with the requirements of Illinois Compiled Statutes,
with the exception of the following:
A. Fires set by a public official in the performance of an official duty;
B. Fires used for private or public recreational purposes;
C. Cooking fires in outdoor fireplaces designed and used for cooking food. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-15: LANDSCAPE AND SPECIAL WASTE COLLECTION:
The City will provide landscape and special waste collection service to all buildings and premises within the corporate
limits of Carbondale provided the owners and/or persons occupying said property desire such service and follow the
regulations as set forth herein.
A. Placed At Curbside: All landscape and special waste shall be set at curbside for collection.
B. Landscape Waste Collection: Landscape waste collection shall be facilitated through a call in scheduling basis.
Collection shall be scheduled and set out in the following manner:
1. Owners and/or persons wishing to schedule a collection of their landscape waste shall notify the Office of the MES
Manager of their need. The MES Manager will schedule a date for collection which normally will be no later than
five (5) working days after notification.
2. Yard waste and leaves set out for collection shall be contained within a paper lawn waste bag having a capacity of
not more than thirty (30) gallons. The bag shall be closed by draw strings or twist ties and of a durable strength to
withstand the contents contained therein, and shall not exceed twenty five (25) pounds in weight. At no time shall
yard waste or leaves be double bagged or shall smaller bags be grouped together into larger bags.
3. When set out for collection, tree branches and smaller pieces of wood shall be contained in tied bundles not
exceeding five feet (5') in length or twenty five (25) pounds in weight; while larger pieces of wood shall be set out
individually for collection and shall not exceed five feet (5') in length or twenty five (25) pounds in weight.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 316/923
4. Landscape waste not contained as specified shall not be collected by the City and the owner and/or person
occupying the building and/or premises shall be responsible to rebag and/or rebundle the yard waste for collection
at the next scheduled date.
5. While waiting collection, all yard waste bundles shall be tied securely so that they all can be grasped and
supported with one (1) hand without failing. Individual pieces of wood shall be neatly stacked so that they can be
easily accessed by the collector.
6. When the City provides landscape waste collection services at the curbside for landscape waste contained in
paper lawn waste bags, bundles, and/or individual pieces of wood, the fee for collection shall be paid by
purchasing and affixing one (1) City landscape and special waste collection sticker per bag, bundle and/or
individual item of wood which has been placed at the curbside for collection.
C. Vacuum Leaf Collection: The Vacuum Leaf Collection Program shall be available to buildings and/or premises
qualifying for residential refuse collection only.
1. To participate in this program, leaves must be raked to the curbside in loose piles for collection by the City's
vacuum truck. At his discretion, the MES Manager may also set other guidelines as he determines necessary to
safely and efficiently operate this program.
2. Owners and/or persons wishing to schedule vacuum collection of their leaves shall notify the Office of the MES
Manager of their need. The MES Manager will schedule a collection which normally will be no later than ten (10)
working days after notification.
3. When the City provides vacuum leaf collection services to a building and/or premises for leaves raked loose to the
curbside, the fee for collection and disposing of said loose leaves shall be as determined by resolution of the City
Council and shall apply per leaf stop and/or separate pile.
4. During the months of November, December, and January of each year a discounted seasonal vacuum leaf
collection rate may be offered as determined by resolution of the City Council.
D. Special Waste Collection: Special waste collection shall be facilitated through a call in scheduling basis. Collection
shall be scheduled and set out in the following manner:
1. Owners and/or persons wishing to schedule a collection of their special waste shall notify the Office of the MES
Manager of their need. The MES Manager will schedule a date for collection which normally will be no later than
five (5) working days after notification.
2. White goods, appliances, and tires shall be free of other debris and refuse. Refrigerators, freezers and the like
shall have the doors removed or tied shut to prevent persons from becoming trapped inside.
3. Furniture, lumber and other such items are not eligible for collection as special waste and shall be disposed of as
refuse as detailed within this chapter.
4. When the City provides special waste collection services at the curbside the fee for collection shall be paid by
purchasing and affixing the required number of City landscape and special waste collection stickers to the item(s)
and placing them at the curbside for collection. The required number of landscape and special waste collection
stickers for each item shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-16: RECYCLING DROP OFF FACILITY REGULATIONS:
A. Determining Acceptable Materials: Whenever the City or a special collector has in place one (1) or more recycling
drop off facilities, persons who occupy or conduct business on the premises for which a recycling fee has been paid
may bring to the drop off center those recyclable materials for which the City has provided a recycling receptacle. The
MES Manager shall, from time to time, designate those recyclable materials which may be deposited at the drop off
center.
B. Materials To Be Sorted: Persons who bring recyclable materials to the drop off center shall sort the recyclable
materials and place them into the receptacle designed to receive each type of recyclable material. No recyclable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 317/923
material or any other material shall be left at the drop off facility on the ground, on top of drop off receptacles or
outside the drop off facility.
C. Other Rules: The MES Manager may establish such other rules as are necessary for the clean, safe, healthy and
efficient operation of recycling drop off facilities. Included in such rules may be provisions for how recyclable material
deposited at the drop off facility shall be cleaned, prepared and sorted. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-17: CITY DESIGNATED SOLID WASTE COLLECTIONS:
A. Specific Dates Designated: At such dates as designated by the City Manager other than regular solid waste collection
days, the presence of residential refuse and commercial refuse, including recyclable material and landscape waste,
located at curbside will be notice to the City that a collection from that respective dwelling or property is desired.
Once a collection has been completed, the owner or person in control of the property shall be responsible for charges
imposed for the City designated solid waste collections.
B. Rates Set By Resolution: The owner and/or person in control of the property shall be responsible for charges imposed
for the City designated solid waste collections and will be charged according to this chapter, at a rate set by
resolution of the City Council of the City. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-18: VOLUNTARY EXTRA SOLID WASTE COLLECTIONS:
A. Voluntary Extra Solid Waste Collections: Voluntary extra solid waste collections shall be available to buildings and/or
premises qualifying for residential refuse collection only; all refuse shall be set curbside and shall conform to section
10-1-10 of this chapter.
1. Owners and/or persons wishing to schedule a voluntary extra solid waste collection shall notify the Office of the
MES Manager in writing of their request by filling out an "extra solid waste pickup request" form. Upon receiving a
properly filled out and signed form, the MES Manager will schedule a collection which shall be normally no later
than two (2) working days after notification.
2. When the City provides voluntary extra solid waste collection services to a building and/or premises the fees for
collection and disposing of said extra waste shall be as determined by resolution of the City Council and shall apply
per minute or fractional minute of collection as rounded up to the next whole minute.
3. Said fees shall be added to and become a part of a water and/or sewer bill for the resident and/or property owner
of record. (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-19: COMMERCIAL COLLECTION SERVICE (LIMITED):
A. Commercial Collection Service: Commercial collection (dumpster) service shall be available to commercial refuse
customers as defined in section 10-1-1 of this chapter; no other entities, agencies, or properties shall be served.
1. The fees for commercial collection service shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
Fees shall be based on the number of containers and frequency of collection as desired by the customer; and shall
be billed monthly as a part of the regular refuse/utility bill for the premises.
2. Commercial collection containers (dumpsters) shall be provided by the City and shall remain the property of the
City; containers shall have a nominal capacity of two (2) cubic yards.
3. All refuse shall be properly placed into the provided containers (dumpsters) such that the lid can remain closed at
all times. Any refuse or materials placed on top of or outside of the container shall result in extra fees being
automatically imposed, said fees shall be as referenced in section 10-1-18 of this chapter. Any extra fees shall
become a part of the refuse/utility bill for the business/premises.
4. It is the responsibility of the customer to keep the dumpster enclosures free of debris, litter, and other items.
Should it become necessary for the City to pick up or remove debris, litter, and other items; extra fees will be
imposed and distributed evenly to the customers utilizing the dumpster enclosure. Said fees shall be as referenced
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 318/923
in section 10-1-18 of this chapter and shall become a part of the refuse/utility bill for the customers, businesses,
and/or premises using the enclosure.
5. The MES Manager shall have the right to adjust frequency and/or number of containers should it become
necessary to accommodate refuse volume(s) from specific customer(s). The MES Manager shall also have the
right to determine and set other rules as deemed necessary for the clean, safe, healthy, and efficient operation of
commercial collection services.
6. It is permissible for businesses that qualify for and utilize the City's commercial collection service to share a single
container (dumpster); provided that the parties fill out the proper form and submit it to the MES Manager for
approval. Said form shall designate all of the parties sharing the container(s) and shall clearly and equitably share
the costs for service. The City is not responsible for and shall not divide or separately bill charges for shared
container(s); the billing for shared container(s) shall be sent to the designated business or individual who will in turn
be responsible for seeking reimbursement from the other parties. At no time shall any additional charges be
imposed or passed on to the other parties who share the container(s). (Ord. 2017-24)
10-1-20: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2017-24)
Chapter 2
LITTER CONTROL
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural
number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall"
is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air.
The word "aircraft" shall include all helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A litter storage or collection container as described in Section 10-1-8 of this
Chapter.
BACKYARD COMPOSTING FACILITY: An area enclosed by wood, wire mesh, concrete blocks, metal drum or other
suitable materialdesigned only for depositing compostable waste for the production of compost. Such a facility shall be
located no closer to the street than the principal building on the property.
CITY: The City of Carbondale, Illinois.
COMPOST: The humus-like product of the process of composting waste which may be used as a soil conditioner or
mulch.
COMPOSTABLE WASTE: Organic plant material including leaves, grass, weeds, garden waste, vegetables, fruit, brush
and twigs less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. Kitchen wastes which include grease, fat, meat, bones, whole eggs
or dairy products are not acceptable compost materials. Human or pet feces are also not acceptable compostable
materials.
COMPOSTING: The biological treatment process by which microorganisms decompose organic material producing
compost.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, disposal and/or
consumption of food.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 319/923
HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
A. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; or
B. Which directs attention to any business or animal or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
C. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind; or
D. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an
advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse", and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited
as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or detracts from the appearance of the
community.
MULCH: Shredded leaves, grass clippings and shredded wood products properly used to provide a cover around trees,
shrubs, garden areas and plant beds for the purpose of retarding weedgrowth, retaining moisture, providing fertilizer or
other landscaping purposes.
NEWSPAPER: Any "newspaper" of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the
Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with Federal status or regulation, and any newspaper filed
and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.
OWNER: Any person or entity who shall have a legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the subject real estate, or any
improvements thereto; or a reversionary leasehold interest in the subject real estate, or any improvements thereto; or a
capacity to manage the subject real estate or any improvements thereto pursuant to an order of court, power or
agreement.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the City, owned or used by
the City or other unit of government and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for
private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include
any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building, or other structure.
PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS OR RECREATION: Includes but is
not limited to drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business parking lots, car washes, shopping centers,
industrial parking lots, shopping malls, commercially operated parks, or drive-in movies.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings.
PUBLIC RECEPTACLE: A litter storage or collection receptacle placed, authorized, or caused to be placed by the City or
other unit of government in a public place.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including but not limited to garbage,
rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, plastic products, grass clippings, leaves, concrete, bricks, lumber, appliances, furniture,
dirt, tree limbs, abandoned automobiles and parts thereof, solid market and industrial wastes, etc.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1998 Code)
10-2-2: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 320/923
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the City except in public
receptacles. (1998 Code)
10-2-3: PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to
prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property. (1998 Code)
10-2-4: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter
from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning, controlling or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1998 Code)
10-2-5: MERCHANTS' DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER:
No person owning, controlling or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning, controlling or occupying places of business within the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of
their business premises free of litter. (1998 Code)
10-2-6: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place
within the City, or upon private property. (1998 Code)
10-2-7: TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded,
and covered as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public
place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the City, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or
deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. (1998
Code)
10-2-8: LITTER IN PARKS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except in public receptacles and in such a manner that
the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street
or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (1998 Code)
10-2-9: LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or
elsewhere within the City. (1998 Code)
10-2-10: THROWING OR DEPOSITING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 321/923
No person shall throw or deposit any handbills in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City. (1998
Code)
10-2-11: PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES:
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in
any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a handbill to any occupant
of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (1998 Code)
10-2-12: DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES:
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant. (1998 Code)
10-2-13: PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE PROPERTY POSTED:
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not
to do so, or if thee is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the
words: "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisements", or any similar notice, indicating in any matter
that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises. (1998 Code)
10-2-14: DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS AT INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES:
A. Prohibited; Exception: No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then
present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not
posted, as provided in this Chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may
place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by Federal postal
law or regulations.
B. Exemption For Mail And Newspapers: The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the
United States, nor to newspapers (as defined in Section 10-2-1 of this Chapter) except that newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such a matter as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. (1998 Code)
10-2-15: DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT:
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any litter, handbill or any other object. (1998
Code)
10-2-16: POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED:
No person shall post or affix or authorize or direct the posting or affixing of any notice, poster, handbill or other paper or
device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any public utility pole or facility; public light post, tree, bush,
sidewalk, sign, signpost; or upon any public structure or building; except as may be authorized or required by law. The
owner or person in control of any business or endeavor which is promoted by such notice, poster, handbill or other paper
or device shall be presumed to have posted or affixed, authorized or directed the posting or affixing of said notice,
poster, handbill or other paper or device; but such presumption may be rebutted. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 322/923
10-2-17: LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the City, whether owned by such person or
not, except as follows:
A. Private Receptacles: The owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles
for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
B. Backyard Composting Facility: The owner or person in control of private property may deposit compostable waste into
a properly located and maintained backyard composting facility.
C. Proper Use Of Mulch: The owner or person in control of private property may place mulch around trees, shrubs,
garden areas and planting beds to a depth not to exceed six inches (6"). (1998 Code)
10-2-18: OWNER AND PERSON IN CONTROL TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
Each owner and each person as manager, agent, tenant, or otherwise in control of any private property shall, at all times,
maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this Section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in
authorized private receptacles for collection or the placement of compostable waste in a backyard composting facility or
the proper use of mulch as provided for in subsection 10-2-17C of this Chapter. (1998 Code)
10-2-19: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the City whether owned by such
person or not. (1998 Code)
10-2-20: CLEARING OF LITTER FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY BY CITY:
A. Notice To Remove: The City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any
private property within the City or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's
property which is dangerous to public health, safety and welfare or detracts from the appearance of the community.
Such notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to said owner or agent at his last known address and by posting
upon the affected property.
B. Action Upon Noncompliance: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly
dispose oflitter fourteen (14) days after the written notice provided for in subsection A above is mailed by the City, the
City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter by private
persons working under the direction of the City or to order its disposal by the City. A bill for disposing of such litter
shall be mailed to the owner of the property or to the agent of such owner.
C. Recorded Statement Constitutes Lien: Where the full amount due the City is not paid by such owner or agent within
thirty (30) days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in subsections A and B of this Section, then, and in
that case, the City Manager or his designee shall cause to be recorded in the office of the Jackson County Clerk a
sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of
the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and
privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus
costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Sworn statements recorded in accordance
with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the
work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of
the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and
that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 323/923
10-2-21: PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGE, TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS; PLACING AND
MAINTAINING RECEPTACLES FOR LITTER:
In order to assist the public in complying with this Chapter, the owner or person in control of any property which is held
out to the public as a place for assemblage, the transaction of business, or recreation, shall cause to be placed and
maintained receptacles for the deposit of litter of sufficient volume, in sufficient numbers and at appropriate locations to
meet the needs of the numbers of people customarily coming in or using the property. If the owner or person in control of
such property has placed litter receptacles on his property but the number, size, or location of such receptacles has
proved inadequate to meet the needs of the numbers of people coming on or using that property as indicated by the
condition and appearance of that property, the owner or person in control shall provide additional and/or appropriately
located receptacles within ten (10) days after being made aware of the need to do so by written notice from the City
Manager or his designee. (1998 Code)
10-2-22: PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF BACKYARD COMPOSTING FACILITIES AND
PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Backyard composting facilities shall be located no closer to the street than the principal building on the property. Only
material defined as "compostable waste" shall be deposited in the backyardcomposting facility. Enclosures shall prevent
the dispersion of compostable waste from being carried away by the elements. Backyards composting facilities shall be
enclosed and maintained to prevent noxious odors, undesirable vermin or other health, safety or environmental hazards.
(1998 Code)
10-2-23: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than seventy
five dollars ($75.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such a violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2011-50)
Title 11
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
11-1-1: SALE OF DISEASED ANIMALS, POULTRY, FISH OR ADULTERATED MILK:
No person shall knowingly sell, expose or offer for sale any sick or diseased animals, poultry or fish to be used or eaten
for food, or the flesh of any sick or diseased or otherwise unwholesome dead animal, poultry or fish, or the flesh of any
animal, fowl or fish not usually used or deemed wholesome for food, or any unwholesome provisions or articles of food
whatsoever, or any adulterated or pernicious milk, drink or liquors. (R.O. 1929 Ch. XXV § 60)
11-1-2: IMPORTATION, SALE OF FOOD OR OTHER THINGS DEEMED NOXIOUS:
The legally constituted local health authority may, when the safety or preservation of the public health demands it,
prohibit the bringing into the City or the sale or giving away or use within the limits of the City of any articles of food or
other things deemed noxious to or liable to endanger health or to induce the introduction or spread of disease. (R.O.
1929 Ch. XXXII § 11)
11-1-3: HEALTH CERTIFICATES FOR FOOD HANDLERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 324/923
A. Certificate Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to engage in the manufacture for sale of bread, pastry, candy, ice
cream or any other article of food or handle any food that is to be served to customers in any restaurant or hotel in
the City without first having procured and filed with the legally constituted local health authority of the City a
certificate signed by a regularly licensed physician, who is approved by such authority, that such person has been
examined by such physician within thirty (30) days and shows no evidence of any communicable disease. Such
examination shall include any laboratory tests that the legally constituted local health authority may by resolution
prescribe. Like certificates shall thereafter be procured and filed every three (3) months, on January 1, April 1, July
1, and October 1 of each year, based upon examinations made during the previous months.
2. It shall be unlawful for any new employee, owner, employer or proprietor to engage in the manufacture or handling
of any food as provided in the preceding subsection without first having so procured and filed a certificate as
provided in such subsection.
B. Forms Furnished By Local Health Authority: All such certificates shall be on forms furnished by the legally constituted
local health authority and shall give the name of every person examined. (Ord. 710 § 2)
Chapter 2
MOSQUITO CONTROL
11-2-1: COLLECTIONS OF WATER IN WHICH MOSQUITOES MAY BREED PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit upon property or premises within the
corporate limits any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such
collection of water is treated so as to effectually prevent such breeding, as provided by this Chapter. (Ord. 737 § 1)
11-2-2: COLLECTIONS OF WATER DEFINED:
Collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed are those contained in ditches, pools, ponds,
excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs,
urns, bird-baths basins, cans, bottles, boxes, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other
similar water containers. (Ord. 737 § 2)
11-2-3: TREATMENT OF COLLECTION OF WATER REQUIRED:
A. Method Of Treatment: Collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed shall be treated by
methods approved by the legally constituted local health authority.
B. Health Authority Judgment Final: In determining when and where it is necessary to use prevention methods and in
determining which of such methods shall be used, the judgment of the legally constituted local health authority of the
City shall be final. (Ord. 737 §§ 3,9)
11-2-4: FAILURE TO TAKE PREVENTION MEASURES:
Should any person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary
measures to prevent the same, the legally constituted local health authority, or its accredited agent, is hereby authorized
to do so, and all necessary cost incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner, or other
person offending as the case may be. (Ord. 737)
11-2-5: HEALTH AUTHORITY TO TREAT COLLECTIONS OF WATER AT ITS OWN EXPENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 325/923
The legally constituted local health authority may, if it deems it necessary, immediately treat, at its own expense, to stop
the breeding of mosquitoes, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes are found to be breeding on
public or private property. (Ord. 737 § 7)
11-2-6: PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES IMPOSED BY CHAPTER:
Any person charged with any duty imposed by this Chapter failing therein, or within the time stated in the notice of the
legally constituted local health authority to perform such duty, or to carry out the necessary measures to the satisfaction
of the legally constituted local health authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 737 § 6)
11-2-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY OF LEGALLY CONSTITUTED LOCAL HEALTH AUTHORITY:
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, the legally constituted local health authority, or its duly
accredited agent, acting under its authority, may at all reasonable times enter in and upon premises within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 737 § 6)
11-2-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The legally constituted local health authority shall have the power to make such rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Chapter as may be proper in the administration and enforcement of this Chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. (Ord. 737 § 9)
Chapter 3
SANITARY SEWERS
11-3-1: HEALTH DISTRICT:
All of that part of the City lying within any sanitary sewer district or which is accessible to any sanitary sewer or is within a
hundred foot (100') distance therefrom is hereby declared to be within the limits of what shall be known as the "Health
District" in said City. (Ord. 1055 § 1)
11-3-2: MUST CONNECT WITH SANITARY SEWER; PENALTY:
Every privy or vault within said "Health District" shall have connection with the City sanitary sewer, and every privy or
vault within said "Health District" not so connected with said City sanitary sewer is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and the owner or owners of the premises whereon the said privy or vaults are situated, and the person in
actual possession of said premises, or either of them, as tenants or otherwise, shall be subject to a penalty of not less
than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for their failure or neglect to have such failure,
neglect or refusal, after notice to have such connection made, by the proper City authorities, shall constitute a distinct
offense, and subject the offender to the penalty above set forth. (Ord. 1055 § 1)
11-3-3: NUISANCES:
Title 13 of this Code, entitled "Nuisances", shall apply with full force and effect to such privies and vaults within said
"Health District". (Ord. 1055 § 1)
Chapter 4
REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND OTHER MATTER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 326/923
11-4-1: WEEDS AND OTHER MATTER:
A. Controlled: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no owner and no person in control of any lot, place or
area within the city and no agent of such owner or person in control, shall permit on such lot, place or area or upon
any abutting area between the right of way line/property line and street surface or pavement, any weeds or grass
over eight inches (8") in height, or deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter that may be growing,
lying, or located thereon. (Ord. 2003-52)
B. Exemptions: The following are generally exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
1. Lands zoned forestry as designated in title 15, chapter 2 of this code and shown on the official zoning map of the
city; and
2. Lands zoned agriculture as designated in title 15, chapter 2 of this code and shown on the official zoning map of
the city unless used for nonagricultural purposes. For purposes of this subsection "agricultural use" shall be
construed to mean vacant land or the production of products such as field crops, livestock, fowl and other
conventional agricultural pursuits; and
3. Lands zoned industrial as designated in title 15, chapter 2 of this code and shown on the official zoning map of the
city which is being used for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 2013-21)
Provided, however, that the portions of those lands exempted by this subsection which are within twenty feet (20')
of the right of way of a public street or alley maintained for traffic or within twenty feet (20') of the property line of
adjacent lands used for nonagricultural or nonforestry purposes (for example, church, school, store, factory, house,
apartment building, offices, etc.) shall not be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-31)
11-4-2: NOTICE TO DESTROY:
The city manager, or his designee, annually, at or near the commencement of the growth season, shall notify, by general
publication in a newspaper published within the city, all such owners, person in control, or agents, to cut, destroy, or
remove any such weeds, grass, growths, or matter found growing, lying or located on such properties and areas
regulated by section 11-4-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 81-37)
11-4-3: ACTION UPON NONCOMPLIANCE:
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any such owner, person in control or agent so notified to cut, destroy or remove
such weeds, grass, growths or matter, after publication of the notice provided for in section 11-4-2 of this chapter, the city
or its authorized agent shall cut, destroy or remove such weeds, grass, growth or matter, and any expense incurred by
the city or its authorized agent in so doing shall be a charge against the owner, person in control or agent so failing,
which charge may be recovered in an appropriate action at law; provided, however, that no land clearance made
necessary by excessive growth shall be done unless the city or its authorized agent shall first post a notice on such
property to clear such excessive growth, and such owner, person in control or agent shall fail for seven (7) days after
such notice to so clear such land. (Ord. 79-25)
11-4-4: NOTICE OF LIEN:
If such weeds, grass, growth or matter are cut, destroyed or removed by this city or its agent, a notice of lien of the cost
and expense thereof incurred shall be recorded in the following manner: The city or its agent shall file notice of lien in the
office of the recorder of deeds of Jackson County, Illinois. Such notice of lien shall contain a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service, and the date or dates when said costs and expense were incurred. Such notice shall be under oath and shall be
filed within one year after the cost and expense is incurred. Such liens are assessed to recover the expenses incurred by
the city and shall not serve as an exemption from any penalties imposed for violation of this chapter. If, for any one
parcel, the city incurs expenses for the removal of weeds or other matter on more than one occasion during the course
of one year, then the municipality may combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single notice of
lien. (Ord. 2016-26)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 327/923
11-4-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any owner, person in control, or agent who does not maintain property subject to section 11-4-1 of this chapter in
compliance with the provisions of said section 11-4-1 of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such a violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 88-21; Ord.
97-166)
11-4-6: FORECLOSURE OF LIENS:
In addition to any other legal remedy available under this code or applicable state or federal law, any lien filed pursuant
to this chapter may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as in the case of mortgage or mechanic's liens under
Illinois law, against the property subject to said lien for the collection of weed cutting costs incurred by the city plus any
and all administrative, filing and/or legal fees or costs for the enforcement of the provisions under this chapter. Such
action shall be commenced only upon those liens which equal or exceed a total amount of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) collectively against a parcel of property (i.e., 1 or more weed lien filed on the same property for weed cutting
costs, including administrative, filing and legal fees) and has been recorded in the Jackson County recorder's office for a
one year period or longer. (Ord. 2000-27)
Chapter 5
SMOKE FREE CARBONDALE
11-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises
and that derives no more than ten percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
Bar includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
DEPARTMENT: The department of public health.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits
or a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or
nonprofit entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or
windows, exclusive of doorways, or b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways that extend from
the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa,
boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general
public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions or recreational activities or to
witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois gaming board rules of the
Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or
supplies are operated for the purposes of accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or
emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals,
rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and
offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 328/923
Healthcare facility includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to
enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places
of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section 11-5-11 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited;
offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; breakrooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A
private residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care, or other
similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment", nor are enclosed laboratories, not open to
the public, in an accredited university or government facility where the activity of smoking is exclusively conducted for the
purpose of medical or scientific health related research.
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: a) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3)
years prior to January 1, 2005, whether incorporated or not, b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion
thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, c) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic,
political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and d) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its
operation. For purposes of this definition, private club means an organization that is managed by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a
constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax
as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home,
townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition,
a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or
assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the
building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public
entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section 11-
5-11 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A public place does not include a private residence unless the private
residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A public
place includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators,
indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes,
auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities,
polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and
vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the state or state subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping
centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities,
public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other
similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: A. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and
private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and
B. A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. Restaurant includes
a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue
from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco
store" includes an enclosed workplace that manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco products, when, as
a necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing, or distributing a tobacco product for
the eventual retail sale of that tobacco or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco
product is tested, provided that the involved business entity: a) maintains a specially designated area or areas within the
workplace for the purpose of the heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not create a facility that
permits smoking throughout; b) satisfies the eighty percent (80%) requirement related to gross sales; and c) delivers
tobacco products to consumers, retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of its business. Retail
tobacco store does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any
establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 329/923
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette,
hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment.
STATE AGENCY: All officers, boards, commissions and agencies created by the constitution, whether in the executive,
legislative or judicial branch, but other than the circuit court; all officers, departments, boards, commissions, agencies,
institutions, authorities, universities, bodies politic and corporate of the state; and administrative units or corporate
outgrowths of the state government which are created by or pursuant to statute, other than units of local government and
their officers, school districts and boards of election commissioners; all administrative units and corporate outgrowths of
the above and as may be created by executive order of the governor.
UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Counties, municipalities, townships, special districts, and units, designated as units
of local government by law, which exercise limited governmental powers or powers in respect to limited governmental
subjects, but does not include school districts. (Ord. 2009-45)
11-5-2: SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT, AND GOVERNMENTAL
VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
Smoking in public places, places of employment, and governmental vehicles is strictly prohibited. No person shall smoke
in a public place or in any place of employment or within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of
employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state of Illinois or a political
subdivision of the state. An owner shall reasonably assure that smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and
workplaces unless specifically exempted by section 11-5-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-45)
11-5-3: POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
A. "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public
place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other
person in control of that place.
B. Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every
entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
C. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator,
manager, or other person having control of the area. (Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-4: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN STUDENT DORMITORIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including,
but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in
whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution
of higher education. (Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-5: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other
person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place or
place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited, provided that such
employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in
subsections 11-5-3A and B of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-6: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 330/923
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the following areas:
A. Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or healthcare facility or any
other home based business open to the public.
B. Retail tobacco stores, as defined in section 11-5-1 of this chapter, in operation prior to January 1, 2008, being the
effective date of this chapter. The retail tobacco store shall annually file with the department by January 31 an
affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of
loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and
related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date of this chapter
may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke
from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
C. Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care facilities that are occupied by one or more
persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing home.
D. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all
smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms
rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as
smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.
E. Enclosed laboratories that are excluded from the definition of "place of employment".
F. Common smoking rooms in long term care facilities operated under the authority of the Illinois department of veterans'
affairs that are accessible only to residents who are smokers and have requested in writing to have access to the
common smoking room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the long term
care facility. (Ord. 2009-45)
11-5-7: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
A. Pursuant to its home rule authority pursuant to article 7, section 6 of the constitution of Illinois and under 410 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 82/40, the city of Carbondale shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may assess fines
pursuant to section 11-5-8 of this chapter.
B. Any person may register a complaint with the city of Carbondale police department. In addition, any person may
register a complaint with the department of public health or a state certified local public health department for a
violation of the smoke free Illinois act under 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 82/1 et seq. (Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-8: VIOLATIONS:
A. A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates section 11-5-2 of this chapter shall be fined
pursuant to this section. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation.
B. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under section 11-5-2 of this chapter shall be fined in an
amount that is not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A
person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates section 11-5-2
of this chapter shall be fined: 1) not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, 2) not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year after the first violation, and 3) not less than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within one year after the first violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 331/923
C. Unless otherwise provided by subsection B of this section, any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity who violates a provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-9: INJUNCTIONS:
The city of Carbondale through its corporation counsel or any individual personally affected by repeated violations may
institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-10: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-11: ENTRANCES, EXITS, WINDOWS, AND VENTILATION INTAKES:
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and
ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure that
tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other means. (Ord. 2007-48)
11-5-12: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be effective January 1, 2008, after its passage and publication in pamphlet form. (Ord. 2007-48)
Title 12
LIBRARY
Chapter 1
GENERAL LIBRARY REGULATIONS
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have the meanings respectively set out opposite them:
BOARD: The Board of Directors of the Library.
LIBRARY: The public library of the City and shall include the reading room thereof. (C.C.C. 1956 Ch. 16. § 1)
12-1-2: USE:
The library shall be forever free to the use of the inhabitants of the City, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations
as the Library Board may adopt in order to render the use of such library and reading room of the greatest benefit to the
greatest number. The Board may exclude from the use of such library and reading room and any person who shall
wilfully violate such rules. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 5; 1998 Code)
12-1-3: DONATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 332/923
Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of the library shall have
the right to vest the title to the money or real estate so donated in the Board, to be held and controlled by such Board,
when accepted, according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise or bequest of such property. As to such property, the
Board shall be held and considered to be special trustee. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 7)
12-1-4: FINES FOR FAILURE TO RETURN BOOKS ON TIME:
Any person who shall fail to return any book taken by him from the library, at the time when, by the rules of the library,
the same should be returned, and who shall not promptly pay the fines provided for by the rules and regulations
governing the library as may be established by the Board of Directors, shall be subject to the penalty provided by Section
20-1-5 of this Code, in addition to payment of the library fine. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 9)
12-1-5: MUTILATING BOOKS:
No person shall wilfully or maliciously deface, destroy, mutilate or injure any book, pamphlet or paper belonging to the
public library. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 10)
12-1-6: CREATING DISTURBANCE:
No person shall, while in the rooms of the public library, create any disturbance or conduct himself in a manner
calculated to annoy or disturb others in such rooms. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 8)
Chapter 2
LIBRARY BOARD
12-2-1: APPOINTMENT; NUMBER OF DIRECTORS:
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, may appoint a board of nine (9) Directors for the public library and
reading room. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 1)
12-2-2: SOURCE; QUALIFICATIONS:
The Board shall be chosen from the citizens at large with reference to fitness for such office. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 1)
12-2-3: COUNCILMEMBERS ON BOARD:
Not more than one member of the City Council shall be at any one time a member of the Board. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 1)
12-2-4: TERMS OF OFFICE; REPLACEMENT OF RETIRING DIRECTORS:
The Mayor shall, before July 1 of each year, appoint three (3) Directors to take the place of the retiring Directors, who
shall hold office for three (3) years, and until their successors are appointed. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 2)
12-2-5: REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS:
The Mayor may, by and with the consent of the Council, remove any Director for misconduct or neglect of duty. (R.O.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 333/923
1929 Ch. X § 2)
12-2-6: VACANCIES:
Vacancies in the Board of Directors, occasioned by removals, resignation or otherwise, shall be reported to the City
Council and be filled in like manner as original appointments. (R.O. 1929Ch. X § 3)
12-2-7: COMPENSATION:
No Director shall receive compensation as such. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 3)
12-2-8: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Generally: The Board of Directors shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their own guidance
and for the government of the library and reading room as may be expedient. They shall have the exclusive control of
the expenditure of all monies collected to the credit of the Library Fund, and of the construction of any library building,
and of the supervision, care, and custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for that
purpose. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 4)
B. Staff Appointments: The Board shall have the power to appoint a suitable librarian and necessary assistants and fix
their compensation, and shall have the power to remove such appointee. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 4)
12-2-9: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
All monies received for the Library Fund shall be deposited in the Treasury of the City to the credit of the Library Fund.
(R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 4)
12-2-10: REPORT:
Within fifteen (15) days after the expiration of each fiscal year of the City, the Board of Directors shall make a report of
the condition of their trust on the last day of the fiscal year to the City Council. This report shall be made in writing and
shall be verified under oath by the secretary or some other responsible officer of the Board of Directors. It shall contain:
A. Monies Received: An itemized statement of the various sums of money received from the Library Fund and from other
sources.
B. Objects And Purposes: An itemized statement of the objects and purposes for which those sums of money have been
expended.
C. Books And Periodicals: A statement of the number of books and periodicals available for use, and the number and
character thereof circulated.
D. Real And Personal Property: A statement of the real and personal property acquired by devise, bequest, purchase,
gift or otherwise.
E. Extensions Of Library Service: A statement of the character of any extensions of library service which have been
undertaken.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 334/923
F. Financial Requirements: A statement of the financial requirements of the library for the ensuing fiscal year, and of the
rate of tax which, in the judgment of the Board of Directors, it will be necessary to levy for library purposes in the next
annual tax levy ordinance.
G. Other Statistics: Any other statistics, information and suggestion that may be of interest.
A report shall also be filed at the same time with the Illinois State Library. (R.O. 1929 Ch. X § 6)
Title 13
NUISANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL NUISANCE REGULATIONS
13-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended. All other terms stated in this chapter shall have the same definition as stated in specific chapters of the code.
CITY: The city of Carbondale, Illinois, and its employees and agents.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES: Any "substance" defined and included in the schedules of article II of the Illinois
controlled substances act and "cannabis" as defined in the cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/201
et seq., and 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq. (1994).
NUISANCE: To commit any offense which is in fact a nuisance or which is a nuisance according to common law, or
which is made such by any ordinance of the city or the statutes of the state of Illinois and shall include any act,
occupation or use of property or premises or equipment, or structure of any kind which:
A. Annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, comfort, or repose of others;
B. Offends public decency; or
C. Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage a lake or basin or any
public place, park, square, alley, highway, or street.
OWNER: Any owner, owners, agent, lessee, tenant, or occupant.
PERSON IN CONTROL: The owner of the premises, or if the property is rented, that person(s) who has rented or leased
the property from the owner or owner's agent.
PERSONALTY: Personal property. (Ord. 97-132)
13-1-2: GENERAL NUISANCES:
No owner, person, or person in control of premises shall do any act, omission, or create a condition or occurrence which
causes a general nuisance. Any act of any such owner, person, or person in control of premises whereby the
surrounding area may be adversely affected, either directly or indirectly, or a potentially hazardous situation is created by
the condition of the water, air, trees, or the congregation of birds is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful and
may be abated and enjoined. In addition to the standard procedure for abatement of nuisances, the city manager has the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 335/923
authority to take immediate action to abate and enjoin a general nuisance when such action is in the best interest of the
city. The following are hereby declared to be general nuisances:
A. Discharging Unwholesome Substance: The discharge onto the ground or into any spring, ditch, stream, pond, lake, or
well any substance which will corrupt or render unwholesome the water therein;
B. Stagnant And Offensive Water: Water which is stagnant, foul and offensive, and detrimental to the health and comfort
of persons residing in the neighborhood; provided, however, that in deciding whether or not to abate stagnant water,
consideration is given to the value of natural and manmade wetlands to the overall well being of the community;
C. Offensive Smells: Air which has an offensive or foul smell;
D. Trees Or Limbs Likely To Fall: Trees or limbs which are likely to fall or which constitute a hazard to the safety of
persons upon the property and/or residing in the neighborhood;
E. Congregation Of Birds: The congregation of large numbers of starlings or wild pigeons, the same being a
congregation of at least ten (10) or more such birds within an area of one thousand (1,000) square feet or less which
constitutes potential harm to the health and welfare of the public. (Ord. 97-132)
13-1-3: NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH, PEACE AND SAFETY, OR PROPERTY:
No person shall do any act, omission, or create any condition which causes a detrimental effect or harm to the health,
peace, and safety of the public or property of others. Any act of any person or group within the City whereby the health,
peace and safety, or property of any person may be endangered, injured, or impaired, or any disease may, directly or
indirectly, be caused by the act, or because of the act any property may be endangered, injured, or damaged, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and unlawful and may be abated or enjoined as hereinafter provided. The following are hereby
declared to be nuisances affecting:
A. Health: Any act, omission, condition, or occurrence which has a detrimental affect on public health, or which causes or
tends to cause harm to the overall health of the community, as contained in titles 3, "Animals", 10, "Solid Waste
Collection And Storage", 11, "Health And Safety", 16, "Water And Sewer System; Lake And Reservoir Regulations",
and 17, "Streets, Sidewalks And Other Public Property" of this Code as it may be amended from time to time.
B. Peace And Safety: Any act, omission, condition, or occurrence, which has a detrimental affect on public peace and
safety, or which causes or tends to cause harm to the overall peace and safety of the community, as contained in
titles 2, "Alcoholic Liquor", 4, "Building, Plumbing, Electrical And Housing Regulations", 8, "Fire Prevention And
Regulations", 14, "Offenses And Penalties", and 17, "Streets, Sidewalks And Other Public Property" of this Code, as
it may be amended from time to time.
C. Property: Any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or
which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which
such premises are located is declared to be a nuisance. This includes, but is not limited to, failure to maintain the
exterior of buildings and premises as described in title 4, "Building, Plumbing, Electrical And Housing Regulations", of
this Code and the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of litter, as described in title 10,
"Solid Waste Collection And Storage", of this Code, as it may be amended from time to time. No person owning,
leasing, occupying, in control of, or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon.
D. Use Of Drones Within Five Miles Of The Southern Illinois Airport: The County encourages the safe and responsible
use of unmanned aircraft and unmanned aircraft systems. This subsection is designed to empower innovation while
protecting and promoting the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens.
1. Definitions: For the purposes of this subsection, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall
have the meaning given herein. When not consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 336/923
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AIRSPACE RADIUS: Shall refer to the unincorporated areas of the County encompassed with the FAA established
five (5) mile "Class D" airspace.
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT AND UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS: Shall mean an aircraft operated without the
possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. This definition includes devices commonly
referred to as drones, remote controlled aircraft, and model aircraft.
2. Notice Of Intended Operation:
a. To ensure operations are accountable, no unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft systems weighing more than
two hundred fifty grams (250 g) shall take-off from, land upon, or be operated from any land within the
boundaries of the airspace radius of the Southern Illinois Airport without the operator first notifying the Southern
Illinois Airport of the intended operation of the device or system. The airport may require additional information
from the operator at the time of notification to the airport. Such notification shall, at a minimum, contain the
following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person or corporation filing the notice and the telephone
number at which the operator can be contacted during the operation;
(2) The take-off and landing location of the operation;
(3) The expected start and end time of the operation (if the operator intends to take-off and land multiple times in
the same location, one notice for multiple operations may suffice, so long as the duration of the combined
operations does not exceed 4 hours, after which a new notice must be filed);
(4) The purpose of the operation;
(5) A statement affirming that the operator has consulted relevant Federal, State and local laws and rules and
intends to abide by them;
(6) Such other information as the airport shall deem reasonably necessary to inform it whether the takeoff,
landing, or operation will endanger the health, safety, or welfare of persons located within the airspace radius,
and if such use is inconsistent with this subsection or any other law.
b. Once notice has been given, the operation may commence without any need for action or approval by the
airport, so long as such operation is consistent with this subsection and all other laws and rules that govern such
operation.
3. No Reckless Operation: No person or entity may operate an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system in a
reckless manner that may create the following:
a. A substantial risk of serious physical injury to another; or
b. A substantial risk of damage to the property of another; or
c. In violation of any other Federal, State or local law.
4. Investigation Of Violations And Penalties: A person or entity that operates an unmanned aircraft or unmanned
aircraft system without first filing notice with the airport in accordance with this subsection or for violating any other
provision of this subsection, may be:
a. Punished by a fine, not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); and
b. Subject to injunctive relief.
The Carbondale Police Department and the Southern Illinois Airport Authority shall have the authority to
investigate any alleged violations of this subsection.
5. Exception Regarding Public Use: This subsection does not apply to an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft
system that is operated by, or on behalf of, the County, or by any other public agency for government related
purposes in compliance with all Federal laws and regulations and operated in compliance with applicable policies.
(Ord. 2017-36)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 337/923
13-1-4: NUISANCES OFFENDING DECENCY:
No person whether an owner, agent, occupant and/or guest of any building, apartment, dwelling or place shall do any
act, omission, or create a condition or occurrence which causes a nuisance offending decency. Any such person or
group which maintains a house, building, or other place within the City whereby the decency of any person may be
impaired, or adversely affected, either directly or indirectly, is hereby deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance offending
decency. A nuisance offending decency is unlawful and may be abated and enjoined as hereinafter provided. The
following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting decency:
A. Gambling: All houses, buildings, or places where gambling devices, slot machines, punch boards, and other such
contrivances of similar character involving any elements of chance as a consideration or any type of gambling,
bookmaking, wagering, or betting is carried on, and all gambling equipment, except where such gambling is permitted
by applicable law, pursuant to titles 2, "Alcoholic Liquor", 5, "Business And Occupations", and 14, "Offenses And
Penalties", of this Code, as it may be amended from time to time;
B. Houses Of Ill Fame: All houses, buildings, or places kept for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution or
promiscuous sexual intercourse;
C. Liquor Manufacture; Sales: All buildings or places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered, or
given away in violation of law or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors
kept for sale, barter, or distribution in violation of law, and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars, and other property
kept at and used for maintaining such a place;
D. Controlled Substances: All buildings or places and movable fixtures and contents thereof, used for the purpose of
unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, giving away, or using controlled substances. (Ord. 97-132)
13-1-5: STORAGE OF PERSONALTY AS NUISANCE:
A. Generally: No owner, person, or person in control of premises shall do any act, omission, or create a condition or
occurrence which causes a nuisance by storing personalty. Any act of any such owner, person, person in control of
premises whereby the surrounding area may be adversely affected, either directly or indirectly, or a potentially
hazardous situation is created by the storing of personalty is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful and may
be abated and enjoined as hereinafter provided. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances by storing
personalty: (Ord. 97-132)
1. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other automobiles not in good and safe operating
condition for a period of thirty (30) days or more within the jurisdiction of the city unless storage is allowed and is in
compliance with the zoning ordinances (title 15, chapter 2 of this code) of the city; (Ord. 2013-21)
2. Unsheltered storage of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any
kind which is no longer usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of thirty (30) days or
more within the jurisdiction of the city unless such storage is allowed and is in compliance with the zoning
ordinances of the city.
B. Abatement Of Storage Of Personalty As Nuisance:
1. The owner(s), tenants, lessees, and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of the city upon which such
storage is made, and also the owner(s), and/or lessees of said personalty involved in such storage (all of whom are
hereinafter referred to collectively as "owners"), shall jointly and severally abate said nuisance by the prompt
removal of said personalty into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes.
2. Whenever said persons fail to abate said nuisance, then the city shall remove the said personalty to a location of
its selection, the expenses therefor to be billed to said owners, jointly and severally and subject to collection
pursuant to state and local laws.
3. When said personalty has been removed and placed in storage by the city, as provided for herein, said personalty
shall be sold by the city after the lapse of such time as is provided by law. If the proceeds of such sale are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 338/923
insufficient to pay the costs of abatement, said owners shall be liable to the city for the balance of the costs, jointly
and severally, to be recoverable in a suit at law. If the proceeds are in excess of costs, the balance shall be paid to
said owners, or deposited in the city treasury for their use. (Ord. 97-132)
13-1-6: CITY CODE VIOLATIONS AS NUISANCE:
The enumeration of specific nuisances in this chapter shall not be deemed to make lawful any other act or condition
declared to be a nuisance by any other city code or ordinance, state law, federal law, or court decision.
A. In the absence of language indicating a contrary intent, when the violation of any provisions of this code results in
injury or damage to persons or property on privately owned land or on publicly owned places, the act or omission
constituting the violation may be deemed to be a nuisance.
B. Any building, apartment, or place within the city at which acts or incidents occur resulting in injury or damage or in
which violations of this code occur may be declared to be nuisances and may be abated as hereinafter provided.
C. Any building, apartment, or place within the city at which three (3) or more separate acts or incidents occur within a
thirty (30) day period, which result in three (3) or more convictions of violations of city codes are hereby declared
nuisances and may be abated as hereinafter provided. Provided, further, that the convictions must be for violations of
the following ordinances of this code as it may hereafter be amended from time to time:
Title 2 Violations:
Section 2-4-1 License Required (Alcoholic Liquor)
Section 2-5-3 Responsibility For Violations
Section 2-5-6 Possession Or Consumption In Unlicensed Establishments
Section 2-5-7 Closing Entrances To Illegal Activities
Section 2-5-8 Gambling
Section 2-5-9 Entertainment
Section 2-5-10 Restrictions As To Persons Under Age Of Twenty One
Title 14 Violations:
Section 14-2-1 Assault And Battery
Section 14-2-4 Prostitution
Section 14-2-5 Public Indecency And Public Nudity
Section 14-4-2 Disorderly Conduct (excluding subsections B through G)
(Ord. 97-132)
13-1-7: REPORTING NUISANCES:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity who commits or who permits the creation or continuation
of a "nuisance", as above defined, which poses a potential emergency threat to the public health or to the environment
shall immediately report the incident to the City and shall provide any information requested by the City needed to
investigate or abate the potential emergency. (Ord. 97-132)
13-1-8: NUISANCE GATHERING/HOUSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 339/923
A. Definitions:
HOTEL/MOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be
a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient,
permanent or residential, in which six (6) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests.
NUISANCE GATHERING: A social gathering or party which is conducted within the City, at a dwelling unit or
hotel/motel, and by reason of the conduct of person(s) in attendance, results in the occurrence of any combination of
two (2) or more of the primary enumerated offenses in subsection B of this section or two (2) or more violations of this
Code.
NUISANCE HOUSE: A dwelling unit, meaning a single-family structure, attached or detached, a rooming house,
apartment, condominium, or townhouse within the City, or any parcel of real property with or without permanent
structure, where the conduct of the resident(s) or tenant(s) results in the occurrence of any combination of two (2) or
more of the primary enumerated offenses in subsection B of this section or two (2) or more violations of this Code or
two (2) or more violations regarding:
1. Any activity, behavior or conduct that constitutes a felony as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq.
2. Any activity, behavior or conduct that constitutes a misdemeanor as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961,
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., or any similar offense under this Code.
3. Any activity, behavior or conduct that constitutes a forcible felony as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., or a felony where serious bodily harm occurs may immediately be deemed a
chronic nuisance house regardless of whether there have been any prior unlawful activities that have occurred as
defined in this Code.
B. Primary Enumerated Offenses:
Title 2 violations:
Section 2-4-1
Sale of alcoholic liquor without required license
Section 2-5-5
Possession or consumption on public property or control premises
Title 4 violations:
Any violation of title 4 in which the violation threatens life, safety and health
Section 4-15-
1
Any violation of the adopted Property Maintenance Code in which the violation threatens life,
safety, and health
Title 8 violations:
Any violation of the adopted Fire Code in which the violation threatens life, safety, and health
Title 10
violations:
Section 10-1-
14
Burning; combustible materials
Section 10-2-
17
Litter on occupied private property
Section 10-2-
18
Owner and person in control to maintain premises free of litter
Title 14
violations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 340/923
Section 14-2-
1
Assault and battery
Section 14-2-
2
Fighting
Section 14-2-
3
Intimidation
Section 14-2-
4
Prostitution
Section 14-2-
5
Public indecency and public nudity
Section 14-2-
6
Public urination or defecation
Section 14-2-
7
Reckless conduct
Section 14-3-
4
Damage to property
Section 14-4-
2
Disorderly conduct
Section 14-4-
3
Gambling
Section 14-4-
4
Mob action
Section 14-4-
7
Use of sound devices and general noise restrictions
Section 14-4-
8
False alarms
Title 17
violations:
Section 17-1-
4
Obstructing the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
Section 17-3-
2
Abandonment of vehicles
Section 17-3-
3
Inoperable motor vehicles within City limits
Section 17-3-
4
Unlicensed vehicles in residential areas
Title 18
violations:
Section 18-
12-2
Parking prohibited in specific places
C. Declaration Of Nuisance: A nuisance gathering/house shall be deemed to constitute a public nuisance. No person,
who is an owner, occupant, tenant, or who otherwise has lawful possession or possessory control, individually or
jointly with others, of any premises shall knowingly, negligently or recklessly allow a social gathering or party on said
premises to become a "nuisance gathering" as defined in this section, nor shall they knowingly, negligently or
recklessly allow conduct on said premises in violation of the enumerated offenses, becoming a nuisance house.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 341/923
D. Order To Cease And Desist: A nuisance gathering shall cease upon the order of a police officer and all persons not
residing at the site of such nuisance gathering shall disperse immediately. No person shall knowingly or wilfully fail or
refuse to obey such order.
E. Penalty: Any person who fails to perform an act required by this section or who commits an act prohibited by this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first offense; not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense; not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
subsequent offense. (Ord. 2018-26)
13-1-9: CHRONIC NUISANCE HOUSE:
A. Declaration Of Chronic Nuisance House: It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or
negligently permit any dwelling unit, including rental and owner occupied units, and hotels/motels, within the City of
Carbondale to become, exist, or be used as a chronic nuisance house. Any unlawful activity, "nuisance gathering",
"nuisance house" as defined in section 13-1-8 of this chapter that is found to exist in, at, on or about such a dwelling
unit or hotel/motel shall be subject to fine and abatement in accordance with this section. (Ord. 2018-26)
B. Definitions:
CHRONIC NUISANCE HOUSE: A dwelling unit that experiences three (3) or more unlawful activities in, at, on, or
about the unit or has had water, electric or sewer service disconnected for thirty (30) days or more during a twelve
(12) month period (or 6 or more unlawful activities in, at, on, or about a hotel/motel) subject to the notice
requirements of this section. The twelve (12) month period shall reset anytime there is a leasing change resulting in
a complete change in tenants or landlord/property manager/ownership, so that violations shall not transfer from
previous occupant(s) to new occupant(s). The twelve (12) month period shall reset for a hotel/motel anytime there
is a change in ownership of the property. For the purpose of this section, unlawful activities shall not include any
incidents pertaining to domestic or sexual violence.
DWELLING UNIT: One room, or more than one connected rooms, designed as a separate independent
housekeeping establishment and containing cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities.
HOTEL/MOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to
be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether
transient, permanent, or residential, in which six (6) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of
such guests.
REAL PROPERTY: Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure or housing accommodations within the City
limits.
RESIDENTIAL INCIDENT: Any unlawful activity in, at, on or about a dwelling unit, which is documented by the
arrest or the issuance of a citation. For the purposes of this section, a written warning shall not be considered an
arrest or citation.
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY: Any of the following activities, behavior or conduct:
1. Any violation of those activities listed in section 13-1-8, "Nuisance Gathering/House", of this chapter.
2. Any activity, behavior or conduct that constitutes a felony as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq.
3. Any activity, behavior or conduct that constitutes a misdemeanor as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code of
1961, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., or any similar offense under this Code.
4. Any activity, behavior or conduct that constitutes a forcible felony as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., or a felony where serious bodily harm occurs may immediately be
deemed a chronic nuisance house regardless of whether there have been any prior unlawful activities that have
occurred as defined in this Code. (Ord. 2016-59; Ord. 2018-26)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 342/923
C. Procedure:
1. First Unlawful Activity:
a. Notification By Chief Of Police: Whenever the Chief of Police (or his designee) receives notice that a citation has
been issued or an arrest has been made for an unlawful activity in, at, on, or about a particular dwelling unit, the
Chief may notify the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) of the dwelling unit of the incident.
The notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The street or legal address of the dwelling unit.
(2) A copy of the citation or arrest report describing the incident and enumerating the offense(s) that occurred.
(3) The names of the occupants or others involved in the incident.
(4) The date and time (within 5 business days of issuance of a citation or arrest) and manner in which the notice
of the unlawful activity was given to the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) in person, by
telephone, e-mail or facsimile.
(5) A statement substantially as follows:
(A) The City of Carbondale Police Department has information that the property is in danger of becoming a
chronic nuisance house. In the event of occurrences of two (2) additional unlawful activities in, at, on, or
about that unit, the Chief may declare the unit a chronic nuisance house and refer the matter to the City
Attorney to be brought before an Administrative Hearing Officer for a hearing. Corrective action must be
taken to ensure that subsequent unlawful activity does not occur.
b. Response By Landlord/Property Manager (Or Owner, If Owner Occupied): A response form should be included
along with a statement requesting the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) to complete and
return the form to the Chief within seven (7) business days of the postmark on the Chief's written notice or the
date it was personally served. The response shall be by one of the following methods: personal service;
registered or certified mail, with return receipt requested; electronic mail; or facsimile. The response shall
indicate whether the offenders were occupants (tenants) and any actions the owner took in response to the
activity, such as:
(1) A letter of warning to the occupants.
(2) Any phone calls, electronic mail, or communications to the occupants.
(3) Any corrective action taken, such as a "no trespass" notice issued to nontenants.
(4) A meeting with the occupants and their responses.
(5) Copies of any agreements, resolutions, or pledges by occupants.
(6) Landlord's comments or questions on the incident.
(7) A noise curfew was instituted for the unit.
Any documentation provided to the city may be utilized in any later proceeding involving the property or the
affected units, tenants, or persons.
c. Chief's Follow Up To Landlord/Property Manager's (Or Owner's, If Owner Occupied) Response: If the
landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) responds to the notice referenced in subsection C1a of
this section:
(1) The chief (or his designee) shall deliver a follow up response letter to the landlord/property manager (or
owner, if owner occupied) regarding the chief's assessment of the landlord/property manager's (or owner's, if
owner occupied) response, including whether the response was adequate, inadequate, acceptable, and/or
unacceptable. If inadequate or unacceptable, the chief shall invite the landlord/property manager (or owner, if
owner occupied) to a follow up meeting within ten (10) business days of the chief's receipt of that response
letter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 343/923
(2) At the follow up meeting, the chief shall recommend that the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner
occupied) take reasonable corrective action so that a second or subsequent unlawful activity does not occur
in, at, on, or about the same dwelling unit within a one year period and discuss other possible means to correct
the problem.
(3) The chief shall explain that, in the event of the occurrence of a third unlawful activity in, at, on, or about the
dwelling unit within a one year period, the chief may declare the property a chronic nuisance house and refer
the matter to the city attorney to be brought before an administrative hearing officer for a hearing at which the
landlord may be subjected to penalties under this section.
(4) The results of the meeting shall be documented in writing, including any agreement reached with the
landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) regarding corrective action to be taken. The
landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) shall acknowledge his/her agreement in writing, and a
copy of the agreement shall be provided to the landlord/property manager/owner.
2. Second Unlawful Activity:
a. Notification By Chief Of Police: Whenever the chief of police (or his designee) receives notice that a citation has
been issued or an arrest has been made for a second unlawful activity in, at, on, or about a particular dwelling
unit within a one year period, the chief may notify the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) of
the dwelling unit that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance house. The notice shall contain
the following information:
(1) The street or legal address of the dwelling unit.
(2) A copy of the citation or arrest report describing the second incident and enumerating the offense(s) that
occurred.
(3) The names of the occupants or others involved in the incident.
(4) The date and time (within 5 business days of issuance of a citation or arrest) and manner in which the notice
of the second unlawful activity was given to the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) in
person, by telephone, e-mail or facsimile.
(5) A statement substantially as follows:
(A) The city of Carbondale police department has information that the property is in danger of becoming a
chronic nuisance house. In the event of a subsequent unlawful activity in, at, on, or about that unit, the chief
may declare the unit a chronic nuisance house and refer the matter to the city attorney to be brought before
an administrative hearing officer for a hearing. Corrective action must be taken to ensure that a subsequent
unlawful activity does not occur.
b. Determining Necessity Of Mandatory Meeting With Chief Of Police: In determining whether to send the second
notice, the chief shall consider the prior cooperation (or lack of cooperation) of the landlord/property manager (or
owner, if owner occupied) in responding to the chief's notification letter, agreeing upon corrective action, and
whether or not the agreed corrective action was taken. In the event that the chief finds that further discussions
with the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) may achieve corrective action, the chief may
convene a mandatory meeting to establish such a corrective action plan.
c. Mandatory Meeting With The Chief Of Police: At the mandatory meeting, the chief shall suggest various courses
of action for the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) to prevent further unlawful activities
from occurring. A corrective action plan shall be established, which may include the lawful eviction of a tenant or
the landlord/property manager's ability to bar persons from the property. In the event that the landlord/property
manager (or owner, if owner occupied) fails to attend the mandatory meeting, the second notice shall be sent,
and expiration of the time limits for sending such notice shall not bar such notice.
3. Third Unlawful Activity:
a. Notification By Chief Of Police: Whenever the chief of police (or his designee) receives notice that a citation has
been issued or an arrest has been made for a third or subsequent unlawful activity in, at, on, or about a particular
dwelling unit within a one year period, and determines, after consultation with and agreement from the city
manager, that the unit has become a chronic nuisance house, the chief shall notify the landlord/property
manager (or owner, if owner occupied) of the dwelling unit that the property has been declared a chronic
nuisance house. The notice shall contain the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 344/923
(1) The street or legal address of the dwelling unit.
(2) A copy of the citation or arrest report describing the third incident and enumerating the offense(s) that
occurred.
(3) The names of the occupants or others involved in the incident.
(4) The date and time (within 5 business days of issuance of a citation or arrest) and manner in which the notice
of the third unlawful activity was given to the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) in
person, by telephone, e-mail or facsimile.
(5) A statement substantially as follows:
(A) The chief of police, with consultation and agreement from the city manager, has determined the dwelling
unit to be a chronic nuisance house (with a concise description of the unlawful activities occurring during the
1 year period that led to the finding). The chief shall refer the matter to the city attorney to be brought before
an administrative hearing officer for a hearing, but, if the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner
occupied) notifies the chief immediately upon receipt of the notice and agrees to remedy the disorderly
conditions within ten (10) days, or to take other agreed and timely measures, the chief may, at his/her sole
discretion, postpone referring the matter to the city attorney.
b. Settlement Agreement: The chief, with consultation and agreement from the city manager, and landlord/property
manager (or owner, if owner occupied) may agree to resolve the matter short of a hearing by entering into a
settlement agreement to include the imposition of a fine and remediation plan for the dwelling unit, along with a
compliance date, and/or agreed upon penalties in the event of noncompliance by that date.
4. Notices By Chief; Other City Departments:
a. The chief (or his designee) shall maintain two-way communication with other city departments having the
potential to interact with occupants or owners of a dwelling unit engaged as a nuisance gathering/house,
including, but not limited to, fire department, building and neighborhood services, code enforcement and the city
attorney's office. Violations of the nuisance gathering/house ordinance cited by any city department with the
capacity to issue citations shall count toward the total violations.
5. Notices By Chief; Effect Of Failure To Give Notice:
a. Notices that are required to be given by the chief to the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied)
shall be given as follows:
(1) The chief shall use reasonable efforts to notify the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) of
the issuance of a citation or arrest for unlawful activity in person, or by telephone, e-mail or facsimile within five
(5) business days of the issuance of a citation or arrest.
b. The chief shall also give written notice, pursuant to this section, by regular mail or by personal service within ten
(10) business days of the issuance of a citation or arrest for unlawful activity.
c. Written notice declaring a chronic nuisance house pursuant to this section shall require notice by certified or
registered mail, receipt requested.
d. Notice shall be effective five (5) days after mailing or on the date delivered, if by personal service.
e. Notice shall be given to the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied) as follows:
(1) To the landlord/property manager (or owner, if owner occupied).
(2) To the person to whom the last tax bill on the property was sent in the event that subsection C5a of this
section does not apply.
f. An expiration of the time limits for sending said notices shall not bar such notice or enforcement of this section or
any other section of this code.
6. Burden Of Proof; Notice:
a. In an action seeking the abatement of a chronic nuisance house, the city shall have the initial burden of proof in
showing by a preponderance of the evidence that the dwelling unit is a chronic nuisance house.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 345/923
b. For purposes of showing that the dwelling unit is a chronic nuisance house and that unlawful activities have
occurred in, at, on, or about the unit, the testimony of police officers to recount witness statements shall be
admissible. Police reports, court records, and prosecution records are admissible and relevant, and may be used
to prove that the unit is a chronic nuisance house. The city shall not be obligated to prove each underlying
violation as a component of its case in chief in the chronic nuisance house case.
7. Landlord Use Of Forcible Entry And Detainer Actions:
a. If a landlord/property manager has initiated a forcible entry and detainer action in the circuit court of Jackson
County to evict the tenant(s) of a dwelling unit that is subject to notices under this section, the city shall initially
agree to enter and continue the administrative hearing in regard to its declaration as a chronic nuisance house,
pending the result of such court action. In deciding whether or not to further continue the matter based upon the
eviction proceeding, the city shall consider, among other things, whether eviction is the only remedy for
preventing future unlawful activities, and whether the action is being timely prosecuted and diligently pursued by
the landlord/property manager.
(1) Landlords/property managers must submit to the city, prior to the administrative hearing, a copy of the forcible
entry and detainer lawsuit that was filed, and provide regularly updated copies of pleadings after each hearing
or court status date.
(2) The landlord/property manager shall notify the chief of police (or his designee) regarding the progress of the
court proceeding within seven (7) business days of its resolution, including, but not limited to, orders to stay
judgments, evict, grant possession or abandonment, and dismissal of the case.
D. Penalties For Maintaining A Chronic Nuisance House: If the administrative hearing officer finds that the
landlord/property manager (or the owner of an owner occupied structure) has permitted a chronic nuisance house,
the landlord/property manager (or owner) is subject to the following penalties:
1. Penalty: The landlord/property manager (or owner) who commits an act prohibited by this section shall be subject
to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first offense; not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the second offense; not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each subsequent offense.
2. Liable For Costs: In addition to the penalties set above, a landlord/property manager or owner shall be liable for
administrative costs associated with the hearing pursuant to this section, or court costs that may be assessed in an
action for ordinance violation in the circuit court.
3. City May Seek Relief: In the event that a landlord/property manager or owner fails to remit the fines associated
with the ruling of an administrative hearing officer or judge, or fails to comply with the terms of an agreed
settlement, the city may seek such relief as may be provided for within this code or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2016-59)
13-1-10: ENFORCEMENT OF CODE:
A. Action Brought By City Or Individuals: Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the city in any manner
authorized by law, and in addition, any person who by reason of another's violation of any provision of this chapter,
suffers special damage to himself different from that suffered by other property owners throughout the city generally,
may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation in any manner authorized by law.
B. State Abatement Procedure Adopted: The city council hereby incorporates and adopts by reference the proceedings
for abatement as provided by the laws of this state for the abatement of public nuisances.
C. Abatement By City: The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to abate any nuisance, enjoin the use of
buildings, apartments, or places as public nuisances, and to utilize any and all of the proceedings adopted in this
chapter. (Ord. 2016-59)
13-1-11: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 346/923
A. Established: Any person who allows said nuisance to exist or fails to abate said nuisance is in violation of this chapter
and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
B. New Offense: If any such person shall continue a nuisance after being fined for the same, a new cause of action shall
immediately accrue against such person, subjecting the offender to a like penalty as aforesaid.
C. Additional Remedies Available: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from seeking civil remedies in addition to
the aforementioned penalties in order to abate or prevent a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 97-132; Ord. 2016-59)
Title 14
OFFENSES AND PENALTIES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-1-1: GENERAL PURPOSES:
The provisions of this Title shall be construed in accordance with the general purposes hereof, to:
A. Forbid and prevent the commission of offenses;
B. Define adequately the act which constitutes each offense; and
C. Prescribe penalties for offenses. (Ord. 97-118)
14-1-2: CIVIL REMEDIES PERCEIVED:
This Title does not bar, suspend, or otherwise affect any right or liability to damages, penalty or forfeiture, or other
remedy authorized by law to be recovered or enforced in a civil action, for any conduct which this code makes
punishable, and the civil injury is not merged into the offense. (Ord. 97-118)
14-1-3: JURISDICTION:
A person is subject to prosecution under this Title for any offense he commits within the corporate limits of the City, or for
any offense committed upon property owned or controlled by the City outside the corporate limits. (Ord. 97-118)
14-1-4: ATTEMPT:
A person commits an attempt when, with intent to commit a specific offense, he does any act which constitutes a
substantial step toward the commission of that offense. (Ord. 97-118)
14-1-5: PARTIES TO AN OFFENSE:
Each person who commits, attempts, or conspires, or aids and abets in the commission of any act declared to be an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 347/923
offense, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons, or as a principal, agent, or accessory, shall
be guiltyof such offense, and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or wilfully induces, causes, coerces, permits
or directs another to violate any provision of this Code is guilty of such offense. (Ord. 97-118)
14-1-6: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided by this Title, any person who violates a provision of this Title shall be subject to a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more that seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 97-118; 1998 Code)
Chapter 2
OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST THE PERSON
14-2-1: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
A. It is unlawful for a person to commit any assault or battery upon another.
B. A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in
reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
C. A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification, and by any means: 1) causes
bodily harm to an individual, or 2) makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. (Ord.
97-118)
14-2-2: FIGHTING1:
It is unlawful for two (2) or more persons to engage in any fight. Fighting may include, but is not limited to, shoving,
wrestling, pushing, hitting, grabbing, and/or hair pulling or any combination thereof, by both or all the individuals involved.
Nothing in this provision shall apply to persons engaged in amateur or professional fights licensed by the state. (Ord.
2005-09)
14-2-3: INTIMIDATION:
A person commits the offense of intimidation when, with intent to cause another to perform or to omit the performance of
any act, he communicates to another a threat to perform without lawful authority any of the following acts:
A. Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or on property; or
B. Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
C. Commit any criminal offense; or
D. Accuse any person of an offense; or
E. Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 348/923
F. Take action as a public official against anyone or anything, or withhold official action, or cause such action or
withholding; or
G. Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other collective action. (Ord. 97-118)
14-2-4: PROSTITUTION:
Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of "sexual penetration" as defined in the criminal code of
Illinois for money, or any touching or fondling of sex organs of one person by another person, for money or anything of
value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification, commits an offense of prostitution. (Ord. 97-118)
14-2-5: PUBLIC INDECENCY AND PUBLIC NUDITY:
A. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public place
commits the offense of public indecency:
1. An act of "sexual penetration" or "sexual conduct" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-12 (criminal
offenses); or
2. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
B. Any person who appears on any street, avenue, highway, road, boardwalk, beach, beach front or waterway located in
the city or appears in any public place, store, or business in said city, in a state of nudity commits the offense of public
nudity. A person shall be deemed to be in a state of nudity when his clothing or absence of clothing completely
exposes to public view a person's anus, genitals, pubic area or female breasts.
C. "Public place" for purposes of this section means any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be
viewed by others. (Ord. 97-118)
14-2-6: PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
URINATION OR DEFECATION: Any act which constitutes the initiation, action or completion of urinating or
defecating, including, but not limited to, exposing the genital area.
B. Violation: A person commits the offense of public urination/defecation when he performs any act of urination or
defecation in a public place. (Ord. 97-118)
14-2-7: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A person who causes bodily harm or endangers the bodily safety of an individual by any means commits the offense of
reckless conduct if he performs recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endangers safety, whether they are
otherwise lawful or unlawful. (Ord. 97-118)
Chapter 3
OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 349/923
14-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CONCEAL: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise
is not visible through ordinary observation.
FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee,
officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator.
MINOR: A person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, is unemancipated and resides with his parents or legal
guardian.
OBTAIN: In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of interest or possession, whether to the offender or to another.
OBTAINS CONTROL: As used in this Chapter, the phrase, "obtains or exerts control" over property, includes but is not
limited to the taking, carrying away, or the sale, conveyance, or transfer of title to, or interest in, or possession of
property.
OWNER: A person, other than the offender, who has possession of or any other interest in the property involved, even
though such interest or possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert control
over the property.
PEACE OFFICER: Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain
public order or to make arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offense.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual.
PREMISES: Premises of a retail mercantile establishment includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile
establishment, any common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant, or on behalf
of a merchant, for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
PROPERTY: Anything of value. Property includes real estate, money, commercial instruments, admission or
transportation tickets, written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value, labor, or
services, or otherwise of value to the owner; things growing on, affixed to, or found on land, or part of or affixed to any
building; electricity, gas and water; telecommunications services; birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily are kept in a
state of confinement; food and drink; samples, cultures, microorganisms, specimens, records, recordings, documents,
blueprints, drawings, maps, and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, computer programs or data,
prototypes or models thereof, or any other articles, materials, devices, substances and whole or partial copies,
descriptions, photographs, prototypes, or models thereof which constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a secret
scientific, technical, merchandising, production or management information, design, process, procedure, formula,
invention, or improvement.
RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to
the public.
SHOPPING CART: Those push carts of the type which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other
retail mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and,
incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
STOLEN PROPERTY: Property over which control has been obtained by theft.
UNDER-RING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the
merchandise.
VALUE: The value of property consisting of any commercial instrument or any written instrument representing or
embodying rights, concerning anything of value, labor, or services or otherwise of value to the owner shall be:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 350/923
A. The "market value" of such instrument if such instrument is negotiable and has a market value; and
B. The "actual value" of such instrument if such instrument is not negotiable or is otherwise without a market value.
For the purpose ofestablishing such "actual value", the interest of any owner or owners entitled to part or all of the
property represented by such instrument, by reason of such instrument, may be shown, even if another "owner"
may be named in the complaint, information or indictment. (Ord. 97-118)
14-3-2: THEFT:
A person commits the offense of theft when he knowingly:
A. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
B. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
C. Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
D. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstance as would
reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen; and
1. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
2. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit; or
3. Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive
the owner permanently of such use or benefit. (Ord. 97-118)
14-3-3: RETAIL THEFT:
A. Retail Theft Defined: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred any merchandise
displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise, or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value, or any other markings which aid in
determining value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a retail merchandise
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the
full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the
container in or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the
merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the
merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
6. Represents to the merchant that he, or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is
false, and conveys or attempts to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange
for money, merchandise, credit or other property of the merchant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 351/923
B. Rebuttable Presumption: There is a rebuttable presumption of an intent to commit retail theft if any person does the
following:
1. Conceals upon his person or among his own belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and
2. Removes merchandise beyond the last known point of check-out for receiving payment for that merchandise in
that retail mercantile establishment.
C. Detention:
1. Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such
person, on or off the premises of a retail merchandise establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable
length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
a. To request identification;
b. To verify such identification;
c. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise and, to
make reasonable investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;
d. To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace
officer;
e. In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the
welfare of that minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
2. A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if
such detention is pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person. A detention as permitted in this Chapter does
not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint nor shall it render the merchant liable to the person so detained.
D. Theft Of Labor, Services, Or Use Of Property:
1. A person commits the offense of theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another
which are available only for hire by means of threat or deception, or knowing that such use is without the consent
of the person providing the property, labor, or services.
2. A person commits the offense of theft when after renting or leasing a motor vehicle, obtaining a motor vehicle or
leasing any other type of personal property under an agreement in writing which provides for the return of the
vehicle or other personal property to a particular place at a particular time, and is thereafter served or sent a written
demand mailed to the last known address, mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to return such vehicle
or other personal property within three (3) days from the mailing of the written demand, and who, without good
cause, wilfully fails to return the vehicle or any other personal property to any place of business of the lessor within
such period. (Ord. 97-118)
14-3-4: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A person commits the offense of damage to property when he wilfully breaks, defaces, destroys or otherwise injures any
property of the City or any other person. (Ord. 97-118)
14-3-5: CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE OFFENSES:
A. Definition: As used in this Section, "cable television service" means any and all services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or closed circuit coaxial cable communications systems.
B. Theft Of Service: No person shall knowingly obtain or use cable television service without the authorization or
compensation paid to the operator of such service. The existence of any connection, wire, conductor or other device
whatsoever which affects the use of cable television service by any person without such use being specifically
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 352/923
authorized by, or compensation paid to the operator of the cable television service may be considered as evidence of
intent to violate this Section.
C. Assist In Theft By Another: No person shall, with the intent to defraud a cable television operator, assist or instruct any
other person in obtaining any cable television service.
D. Furnish Equipment Used In Theft Of Service: No person shall, with intent to defraud a cable television operator, sell or
rent, or offer to sell or rent any instrument, apparatus, equipment or device, or any plans, specifications or
instructions for making or assembling any instrument, apparatus, equipment or device to any person with knowledge
that the person to whom the item is sold or offered intends to use it to make unauthorized use of cable television
service. (Ord. 97-118)
14-3-6: TRESPASS TO LAND AND VEHICLES:
A. Land:
1. A person commits the offense of trespass to land if he enters upon the land of a building or any part thereof of any
other, after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains
upon the land or in a building of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart.
2. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of this subsection if he has been
notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof.
B. Vehicle: Whoever knowingly and without authority enters any part of or operates any vehicle commits the offense of
trespass to a vehicle. (Ord. 97-118)
14-3-7: GRAFFITI:
A. Definition: "Graffiti" shall mean any words, letters, pictures, symbols, graphics or other drawings placed on any
building or other premises by someone other than the owner or owner's agent, using spray paint, chalk or any other
substance which does not include information relating to the location and/or address of the building and/or signage
permitted pursuant to Title 15 of this Code.
B. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage, deface, conceal or impair the use of any real
estate or personal property in which another has a property interest, without the consent of the other person, firm or
corporation or an agent thereof.
C. Duty Of Person In Control Of Property:
1. It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling a house or other building or premises, including vacant lots
visible from any public place or private premises, located within the City to maintain such premises free from
graffiti.
2. It shall be a violation of this Section for any persons owning, controlling or in possession of a premises to abandon,
neglect or disregard the condition or appearance of the premises so as to permit accumulation of graffiti thereon.
3. If written notice is given of the above described condition, the owner or person in control of the premises has seven
(7) days to remove said graffiti. Upon failure of the person owning or controlling property to remove said graffiti, the
City may take the necessary action to remove said graffiti and the person owning, or controlling said property shall
be responsible for the expense incurred for removal. (Ord. 97-118)
14-3-8: VANDALISM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 353/923
A. Definitions:
PERSON: The City, or any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, government unit,
government agency or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty.
VANDALISM: The wilful or malicious damaging or defacing, within the corporate limits of the city, of another
person's real or personal property, without the other person's consent.
B. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of "vandalism", as defined under this Section. (Ord. 97-
118)
Chapter 4
OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
14-4-1: CURFEW; PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the terms specified have the following meanings ascribed to them:
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private
agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR: A person who is under seventeen (17) years of age who is not an emancipated minor pursuant to the laws of
the state of Illinois.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, shops, or any other establishment.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss of impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
B. Curfew Hours Set: It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of seventeen (17) to be present at or upon any
public place at the following times:
1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Saturday;
2. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Sunday; and
3. Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following
day.
C. Defense To Section: It is a defense to a violation of this section that the minor was:
1. Accompanied by the minor's parent or legal guardian or a person approved by the parent or legal guardian who is
at least eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Participating in, going to, or returning from any of the following events or activities:
a. Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 354/923
b. A recreational or school activity supervised by adults;
c. A religious activity or event;
d. An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or
substantial damage;
e. An activity involving the exercise of the minor's rights protected under the first amendment to the United States
constitution or article 1, sections 3, 4, and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois, or both;
f. An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other
care under the supervision of one or more adults;
g. An errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without detour or stop.
h. An activity on the property owned by the minor's parent or guardian.
D. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to knowingly permit a minor in
his or her custody or control to violate this section, without legal justification.
E. Parental Liability: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal
guardian is liable for actual damages for the wilful or malicious acts of such minor which causes injury to a person or
property.
F. Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, no defense in subsection C of this section is present.
G. Penalties: A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense is punishable by a fine of not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2004-21)
14-4-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
B. Transmits in any manner to the city fire department a false alarm of fire knowing at the time of such transmission that
there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such fire exists; or
C. Does an act in violent or tumultuous manner toward another, which places another person in fear of safety of his life,
limb, health or property; or
D. Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is
concealed in such place that an explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that
there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place; or
E. Transmits in any manner to a peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has
been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such
an offense has been committed; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 355/923
F. Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the
property through any window or other opening in it; or
G. With the intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues. (Ord. 97-118)
14-4-3: GAMBLING OFFENSES:
A. Enumerated: A person commits the offense of gambling when he or she:
1. Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, unless excepted in subsection B of this section;
2. Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political nomination, appointment or election; (Ord.
2005-54)
3. Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or
distributes any gambling device, with the exception of video gaming terminals as allowed under section 5-6-2 of
this code; (Ord. 2012-34)
4. Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or
are, recorded or registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the course of a
bet or wager;
5. Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election;
6. Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
7. Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket,
slip, record, document or other similar device;
8. Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
similar device, except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and conducted in
accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
9. Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and
raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
10. Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an internet site that permits a person to play a game of chance or
skill for money or other thing of value by means of the internet or to make a wager upon the result of any game,
contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of the internet.
B. Exceptions: Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted of gambling:
1. Offers of prizes, awards or compensation to the actual contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of
skill, speed, strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
2. Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of the state of Illinois;
3. The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in accordance with the bingo license and tax act;
4. Lotteries when conducted by the state of Illinois in accordance with the Illinois lottery law;
5. Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor intended to be used in the operation or promotion of
any unlawful gambling activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this subsection, an antique slot machine is one
manufactured twenty five (25) years ago or earlier;
6. Raffles when conducted in accordance with the raffles act;
7. Charitable games when conducted in accordance with the charitable games act;
8. Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under the Illinois pull tabs and jar games act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 356/923
C. Circumstantial Evidence: In prosecutions under this section, circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and
weight as in any criminal prosecution.
D. Keeping Gambling Place: A "gambling place" is any real estate, vehicle, boat or any other property whatsoever used
for the purpose of gambling. Any person who knowingly permits any premises or property owned or occupied by him
or her or under his or her control to be used as a gambling place commits the offense of keeping a gambling place.
When any premises is determined by the circuit court to be a gambling place:
1. The premises are a public nuisance and may be proceeded against as such;
2. All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the city authorizing the serving of food or liquor on those premises
shall be void; and no license, permit, or certificate so canceled shall be reissued for those premises for a period of
sixty (60) days thereafter; nor shall any person convicted of keeping a gambling place be reissued a license for one
year from their conviction and, after a second conviction of keeping a gambling place, that person shall not be
reissued a license; and
3. The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a violation of this subsection shall be held liable for,
and may be sold to pay any unsatisfied debt of judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied fine that may
be levied under this section. (Ord. 2005-54)
14-4-4: MOB ACTION:
A mob action consists of any of the following:
A. The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2) or more persons acting together and without
authority of law; or
B. The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
C. The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or
property of anyone supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law or for the purpose of exercising correctional
powers or regulative powers over any person by violence; or
D. Any participant in a mob action who does not withdraw on being commanded to do so by any peace officer shall be in
violation of this section. (Ord. 97-118)
14-4-5: UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS:
A. Offenses: A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he knowingly:
1. Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag,
metal knuckles, throwing star, or any knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that
opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, or a
ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic
material or compressed gas; or
2. Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against another a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife,
stiletto, broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or
instrument of like character; or
3. Carries or possesses any firearm, stun gun, or taser or other deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell
intoxicating beverages, or at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body or
any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a place where a showing, demonstration, or
lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted; or knife, except when on his own land or in his
own abode or fixed place of business. (Ord. 2005-62)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 357/923
4. Carries or possesses in a vehicle or on or about his person any pistol, revolver, stun gun, or taser or firearm or
ballistic knife, except when on his own land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, except as authorized by
the Illinois firearm concealed carry act, 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 66/1 et seq. This subsection shall not apply
to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the following conditions:
a. Are broken down in a nonfunctioning state; or
b. Are not immediately accessible; or
c. Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping box, or other container by a person who
has been issued a valid firearm owner's identification card. (Ord. 2014-46)
5. Discharges any pistol, revolver, shotgun, rifle, BB gun, or other firearm, except when legally justified for the
defense of a person, dwelling, or property.
B. Exceptions: Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the possession and use of weapons by the following:
1. Peace officers or any person summoned by any such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace
while he is actually engaged in assisting such officer.
2. Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other institutions for the detention of
persons accused or convicted of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while commuting
directly between their homes and place of employment.
3. Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United States or the Illinois national guard or the reserve
officers training corps while in the performance of their official duty.
4. Special agents employed by the railroad or a public utility to perform police functions or guards of armored car
companies while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting directly
between their homes and places of employment and watchmen while actually engaged in the performance of the
duties of their employment.
5. Persons licensed as private security contractors, private detectives, private alarm contractors or employed by an
agency certified by the department of registration and education of their duties include the carrying of a weapon
under the possession of the private detective, private alarm, and private security act of 1983, while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting between their homes and places of
employment, provided that such commuting is accomplished within one hour from departure from home or place of
employment.
6. Agents and investigators of the Illinois legislative investigating commission authorized by the commission to carry
the weapons specified in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1(a)(3) and 5/24-1(a)(4) while on duty in the course of
any investigation for the commission.
7. Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading with special permission of the governor.
8. Peace officers while in the performance of their duties.
9. Members of any club or organization for the purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established target
ranges, whether public or private, patrons of such ranges while such members or patrons are using their firearms
on those target ranges.
10. Any person who is sixteen (16) years of age and who is engaged in a paintball game at an established paintball
field which is approved by the city council and which is supervised by the owner of such field or his agent. (Ord.
2005-62)
14-4-6: USE OF FALSE IDENTIFICATION:
A. Definitions: Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms used in this section are defined as
follows:
FALSE IDENTIFICATION CARD: An identification card which contains materially false information concerning the
person to whom it was issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 358/923
FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARD: An identification card which purports to have been but was not issued by a public
official in the performance of official duties of the officer; or an identification card upon which material information has
been altered or defaced.
IDENTIFICATION CARD: Any card or document which contains material information concerning a person or which
purports to contain material information concerning a person which may be used to identify the person to whom it
was issued.
B. Violation:
1. No person shall alter or deface an identification card. No person shall knowingly obtain an identification card which
contains false information. No person shall carry on or about his person a false or forged identification card, except
a public official in the performance of an authorized act.
2. No person shall use an identification card for the purpose of deceiving another or for the purpose of
misrepresenting the user's age, identity, address, or other material information. No person shall transfer an
identification card for the purpose of deceiving another or for the purpose of misrepresenting any other person's
age, identity, address or other material information.
3. No person shall carry on or about his person the identification card of another with the intent to use such card to
deceive another or to misrepresent that person's age, identity, address or other material information. It shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to use the card of another for prohibited purposes if a person under twenty one (21)
years of age is found carrying the card of another upon the premises of a liquor establishment or in possession of
alcohol. (Ord. 97-118)
14-4-7: USE OF SOUND DEVICES AND GENERAL NOISE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply unless a contrary meaning is clear from
the context:
BOUNDARY LINE: That line where the property meets any public right of way for streets, sidewalks or alleys, or that
line formed by objects or structures which are positioned so that a reasonable person would believe that the objects
or structures mark the boundary of the property.
DAYTIME HOURS: Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. local time.
DECIBELS: Is the weighted sound level measured by the sound pressure level decibels as measured on a sound
level meter using the "A" weighting network. The level so read is designed dB(A) or dBA.
DEVICE: Any device used to create noise or music, such as a musical instrument, tuner, phonograph record,
magnetic tape, compact disc, or any electrically synthesized sound or human voice.
MOTOR VEHICLE: For purposes of this section, "motor vehicle" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes act 5.
MOTORCYCLE: For purposes of this section, "motorcycle" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes act 5.
MULTIPLE UNIT DWELLINGS: Any parcel of land containing more than four (4) dwelling units.
NIGHTTIME HOURS: Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. local time.
YELLING OR SHOUTING: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on public streets, so as to annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any
person in the vicinity.
B. Sound Device Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a sound device which produces loud
and raucous sounds, as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 359/923
1. Noise From Any Property: At a distance greater than fifty feet (50') during the nighttime hours or greater than one
hundred feet (100') during the daytime hours from any boundary line of the property upon which the sound device
is located, except the persons or devices located in subsection E of this section.
2. Noise Upon Property Containing Multiple Unit Dwellings And Mobile Home Parks: At a distance greater than
twenty five feet (25') during nighttime hours or greater than fifty feet (50') during daytime hours from any sound
device upon property containing multiple unit dwellings or within a mobile home park.
3. Noise From Motor Vehicle Or Motorcycle: From a motor vehicle or motorcycle located within the public right of way
that produces sounds from a sound device at a distance greater than fifty feet (50') from the motor vehicle or
motorcycle at any time.
C. General Noise Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to create or cause to be created, any noise,
including yelling or shouting, which shall be presumed to be excessive, loud and disturbing if any of the following
apply:
1. Noise From Any Property: At a distance greater than fifty feet (50') during the nighttime hours or greater than one
hundred feet (100') during the daytime hours from any boundary line of the property upon which the device is
located, except the persons or devices located in subsection E of this section.
D. Presumptions: Any noise emanating from the subject property shall be presumed to be excessive, loud and disturbing
if any of the following apply:
1. The noise is clearly audible for a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the property line from which the
noise emanates; or
2. The noise occurs between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and can be heard
more than fifty feet (50') beyond the property line from which the noise emanates; or
3. The noise is clearly audible by a passenger of a motor vehicle, other than a vehicle from which the noise may
come, on a public street or thoroughfare with the doors and windows of the vehicle closed; or
4. In the event noise measuring devices or equipment are available, or become available, to measure the noise as
against the ambient background noise. Measurements of noise and ambient background noise shall be made at
the property line unless other persons using the same property are complaining about the noise in which case the
measurement shall be from the source of the noise. The use of measuring devices may be used as a supplement
to other evidence or as evidence of a violation but is not required for the establishment of a violation. This section
is not intended to be exclusive of any other section or provision of this chapter and use of a measuring device or
equipment, when used, may be supplemental and does not preclude establishing a violation of other sections or
through other evidence. Any and all data compiled shall be maintained for the purposes of determining ambient
sound levels to assist in future use of determining proper level of decibels.
E. Exceptions: The following persons and devices are exempt from the restrictions contained in this section:
1. Emergency Personnel: Police, fire, ambulance and other emergency personnel when acting in their official
capacity.
2. Units Of Government: Sounds produced under the supervision of units of government.
3. Warning Devices: Sounds produced by warning and antitheft devices.
4. Carillons: Sounds produced by carillons.
5. Community Events: The term "community events" shall include, but is not limited to, such things as parades,
festivals, drum corps shows, sports events and Fourth of July celebrations, which are sanctioned or sponsored in
whole or in part by local governments, schools, or charitable or service organizations. (Ord. 2015-18)
6. Beer Gardens: Persons using or operating such devices as part of a beer garden permitted under section 2-4-10 of
this Code from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon Friday to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. Sunday, during the hours of operation
as established in section 2-5-4 of this Code. (Ord. 2017-33)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 360/923
7. Emergency Operations: Emergency short term operations which are necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens, such as emergency utility and street repair, fallen tree removal or emergency fuel shall be
exempt, provided that reasonable steps shall be taken by those in charge of such operations to minimize noise
emanating from the same.
8. Powered Equipment: Powered equipment, such as air conditioners, lawn mowers, small lawn and garden tools,
riding tractors, snow removal equipment, and power tools which are necessary for the maintenance of property, is
kept in good repair and maintenance as to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. However, the use of radios or
other sound/entertainment devices on such equipment shall not be exempted if listened to at a level otherwise
violating the terms of this section.
9. Powered Tools: Powered tools or equipment used in the maintenance and repair of automobiles, when used at a
location zoned for motor vehicle repairs, or used at a residential location for the personal maintenance of the
occupant's motor vehicle; however, no such equipment may be used during nighttime hours in a residentially zoned
neighborhood.
10. Agricultural Noise: Specifically excluded from the provisions of this section is noise generated by agricultural
equipment on land zoned and/or used for agricultural purposes.
11. Motor Vehicles: Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation on the operating of duly registered motor
vehicles as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, which are not in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/12-602.
12. Work Performed By A Public Body/Service Workers: Any work performed by or on behalf of a public body,
including that which is performed by subcontractors, shall be exempted. Such activities may include, but are not
limited to, routine maintenance work, road and bridge construction, and emergency repairs. Private garbage
services shall comply with the time restriction of subsection 10-1-3A of this Code.
13. Motorcycles: Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation on the operation of duly registered motorcycles as
defined in the Illinois motor vehicle code, which are not in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-602.
14. Construction Sites: Construction noise that occurs between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. shall be exempted. However, if in the opinion of the city of Carbondale, equipment or activities
employed in the performance of construction exceeds the allowable decibel levels within this code, the city of
Carbondale may require noise mitigation methods be implemented and used at the construction site to mitigate
noises which exceed the requirements herein.
F. Notice To Property Owner: The owner of the property shall be notified of any noise violations by any landlord
notification program that is developed from this date and forward.
G. Penalty: It shall be unlawful to violate any of the terms and provisions of this section. Any person found to have
violated this section shall be fined a minimum one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, shall be fined a
minimum two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second offense which occurs within a twelve (12) month period,
and shall be fined a minimum five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third and subsequent offenses which occur within a
twelve (12) month period. If a subsequent offense occurs more than twelve (12) months after a prior offense, it shall
be treated as a first offense.
H. Warnings: After the violator has either been warned or cited under this section by a member of the Carbondale police
department, each contact with a member of the Carbondale police department shall be considered a distinct and
separate violation. (Ord. 2015-18)
14-4-8: FALSE ALARMS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM: A device or assembly of equipment or devices designed or arranged to signal the presence or
existence of hazard requiring urgent attention of police or fire department personnel. These systems include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 361/923
1. Intrusion alarms, robbery alarms, fire alarms and any other alarm which requires an emergency response by
the police or fire department;
2. Those systems terminating at a dedicated piece of equipment within a public safety agency;
3. Automatic devices which transmit voice reproductions or messages over telephone lines; and
4. Systems which notify certain alarm stations who in turn notify a public safety agency.
ALARM USER: Any person who owns, possesses, controls, or otherwise exercises dominion over a premises or
property, or who regularly supervises the operation of any business thereon, on or in regard to which premises or
property an alarm system is maintained, except for alarm systems within or on vehicles. If an alarm system in or on
a vehicle is connected, either by wire, signal or other means with an alarm system in or on other property, the
person using such vehicle alarm system is an alarm user. A person owns or controls property if he is the grantee
under a deed, purchaser under a contract or a tenant.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system resulting in a signal or call being received by the Carbondale
police department when there is no threat to life, safety, or property requiring their urgent attention in, on, or at the
property in regard to which the signal or call was sent. A false alarm includes activation of an alarm system caused
by human error; a mechanical or system malfunction which results from neglect or failure to maintain; or an
intentional activation when no threat is present.
FALSE FIRE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system resulting in a signal or call being received by the fire
department when there is no threat to life, safety, or property requiring their urgent attention in, on, or at the
property in regard to which the signal or call was sent. A false fire alarm includes activation of an alarm system
caused by human error; a mechanical or system malfunction which results from neglect or failure to maintain; or an
intentional activation when no threat is present.
PERSON: A natural person or a firm, organization, association, partnership or corporation.
B. Responsibility For False Alarm: The alarm user shall be responsible for all false alarms sent because of the activation
of an alarm system in, or in regard to his property, or because of the action or statement of any of his employees or
agents, if such action or statement is likely to result in the sending of an alarm, except when the agent or employee
making the statement, taking the action or sending the alarm does so with the specific intention of sending a false
alarm or causing one to be sent, or does so without caring whether the alarm is false. (Ord. 2016-56)
C. Fee Assessed For False Alarms:
1. Police Department Only Response To False Alarms: The sixth false alarm occurring within the calendar year and
every false alarm thereafter from or in regard to the same premises or property shall result in the alarm user being
assessed a service fee. The service fee for a false alarm shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The service fee
may be waived by the Chief of the Police Department in cases where the false alarm is not reasonably attributable
to the alarm user or the alarm user's equipment.
2. Fire Department Response To False Alarms: The Chief of the Fire Department shall after a third false fire alarm
send a warning to the user that a fee will be assessed for the fifth and any subsequent false fire alarms occurring
within the calendar year and every false fire alarm thereafter from or in regard to the same premises or property
shall result in the alarm user being assessed a service fee. The service fee for a false alarm shall be five hundred
dollars ($500.00). The service fee may be waived by the Chief of the Fire Department in cases where the false fire
alarm is not reasonably attributable to the alarm user or the alarm user's equipment, or upon proof that after the
third alarm warning the user had made reasonable arrangements to have the equipment repaired and said
equipment was repaired within thirty (30) days of the warning. (Ord. 2017-41)
D. False Alarm Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to send or give a false alarm.
E. Penalty: Any person who knowingly sends or causes to be sent, a false alarm shall be punished by a fine of not less
than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2016-56)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 362/923
14-4-9: FIREWORKS AND PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction, chemical composition, and
labeling regulations of the U.S. consumer products safety commission, as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507,
and classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States department of transportation under 49 CFR
172.101. "Consumer fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers
known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms";
sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five onehundredths
(0.25) grain or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic cups that contain
less than twenty hundredths (0.20) grain of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all
times.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY OR CONSUMER DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of
consumer of fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined in the pyrotechnic distributor and
operator licensing act1.
LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR: An individual who is responsible for the safety, setup, and discharge of the
pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to the pyrotechnic distributor licensing act2.
1.3G FIREWORKS: Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and classified as fireworks UN0333,
UN0334, or UN0335 by the United States department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company, consortium, joint venture or commercial
entity.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display fireworks or flame effects to produce
visual or audible effects of an exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing act3.
B. Possession, Sale Or Explosion Of Fireworks: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode consumer or display fireworks within the city.
C. Exception: Pyrotechnic displays of display fireworks in the city shall be permitted upon compliance with the following
conditions:
1. Persons shall file an application for a pyrotechnic display permit at least ten (10) business days in advance of the
date of the pyrotechnic display.
2. The application for a pyrotechnic display permit shall contain identifying information for the person sponsoring the
display, the exact location of the display, the exact date and time of the display, and identifying information for the
individual who is the licensed lead pyrotechnic operator supervising the display.
3. The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance from an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state of Illinois evidencing a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in liability coverage.
4. The application shall also be accompanied by a current and valid copy of the lead pyrotechnic operator's license.
5. The applicant shall also submit a written approval letter or permit issued by the chief of the fire department
providing fire protection coverage to the area of the display, or his or her designee, in accordance with state law.
6. After the permit has been granted, the possession, use and display of display fireworks shall be lawful for that
purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
7. The applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 363/923
8. Provided that the application requirements have been met by the applicant and the fire chief has investigated and
issued a letter of approval or permit, a pyrotechnic fireworks display permit shall be issued by the city manager.
D. Adoption By Reference: The rules and regulations, as may from time to time be amended, for the administration of the
fireworks use act4 and the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing act5, by the state fire marshal, including, but
not limited to, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1123 guidelines for outdoor displays, NFPA 1126
guidelines for proximate audience displays and the international fire code are hereby adopted by reference.
E. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2007-18)
14-4-10: PANHANDLING:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING: Panhandling that includes one or more of the following actions:
1. Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent;
2. Intentionally blocking the path of travel of the person being solicited;
3. Intentionally blocking the entrance to any vehicle or building;
4. Continuing to solicit or request a donation from a person after that person has refused an earlier request;
5. Following or remaining alongside a person who, after being solicited, walks away from the person panhandling;
6. Making any statement, gesture, or other communication that would cause a reasonable person to feel threatened,
fearful, or compelled; or
7. Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a donation.
PANHANDLING: Any request for or solicitation of an immediate donation of money. A request or solicitation to
purchase an item for an amount far exceeding its value in circumstances where a reasonable person would
understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, constitutes panhandling. Panhandling shall not include
the act of passively standing, sitting, or engaging in a musical performance or other street performance with a sign
or other indication that donations are being sought, without any verbal request for a donation other than in
response to an inquiry by another person. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any sound devices
currently prohibited by section 14-4-7 of this chapter. Charitable, civic or not for profit organizations, as defined in
section 5-10-1 of this code, are exempt from this definition. (Ord. 2005-69)
B. Unlawful Panhandling:
1. No person shall engage in aggressive panhandling.
2. It is unlawful to panhandle in a group of two (2) or more persons.
3. No person shall engage in panhandling when either the panhandler or the person being solicited is located:
a. At a bus stop, train station or taxi stand;
b. In any public transportation vehicle;
c. In a restroom;
d. In a vehicle that is parked or stopped on any public street or alley;
e. Within twenty feet (20') of an automatic teller machine or entrance to a bank, or other financial institution, or
check cashing business;
f. In a line waiting to be admitted to a commercial or government establishment;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 364/923
g. On private property or residential property, if the owner, tenant or occupant has asked the person not to
panhandle on the property or has posted a sign prohibiting soliciting. (Ord. 2012-58)
h. On any property zoned BPR, primary business; SB, secondary business; BPL, planned business; PA,
professional administrative office; PAR, professional administrative office, residential; and BWA, wholesale and
automotive, and the city clerk shall maintain a map showing these specific parcels. (Ord. 2012-58; Ord. 2013-20)
i. On any publicly owned property. (Ord. 2012-58)
14-4-11: TRUANCY:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a person or student who is: 1) a natural or adoptive parent; 2) a legal
guardian; 3) a person who stands in loco parentis; or 4) a person to whom legal custody has been granted by court
order.
STUDENT: Any person subject to compulsory school attendance requirements of the Illinois school code.
TRUANT: A student who is absent from attendance for a school day or any part thereof without valid cause.
VALID CAUSE: Illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, situations
beyond the student's control as determined by the student's principal or the principal's designee or such other
circumstances that cause reasonable concern to the parent for the student's safety or health.
B. Truancy Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any student within the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale to be
absent from attendance at school during all, or part of, a school day during a time when school is in session without
valid cause.
C. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent to knowingly or negligently permit or cause a student to be
truant. A parent shall be considered to have knowingly or negligently permitted a student to be truant if the parent has
actual knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the student has absented himself or herself from attendance
during all, or part of, a school day during a time when school is in session, and the parent fails to act to ensure that
the student attends the school and classes in which he or she is enrolled.
D. Penalties: Persons who violate this section are guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which
a violation is committed, continued, or permitted. For parents and students ten (10) years of age and older, each
offense is punishable by a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00). For students under the age of ten (10) years old, the parent is subject to a fine of not less than seventy
five dollars ($75.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
E. Enforcement: Any duly appointed and authorized administrator for Carbondale Community High School, and any
Carbondale police officer shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this section. (Ord. 2006-59)
Chapter 5
OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS
14-5-1: FALSE IMPERSONATION OF CITY OFFICIAL:
No person shall falsely represent himself to be an employee, agent, or officer of the City. (Ord. 97-118)
14-5-2: OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 365/923
A person obstructs justice when, with intent to prevent the apprehension or obstruct the prosecution or defense of any
person, he knowingly commits any of the following acts:
A. Destroys, alters, conceals, or disguises physical evidence, plants false evidence, furnishes false information; or
B. Induces a witness having knowledge material to the subject at issue to leave the State or conceal himself; or
C. Possessing knowledge material to the subject at issue, he leaves the State or conceals himself. (Ord. 97-118)
14-5-3: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER:
A person commits the offenses of resisting or obstructing a peace officer when he knowingly resists or obstructs the
performance by one known to the person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his official capacity. (Ord. 97-
118)
14-5-4: ALTERED OR FORGED CITY PERMITS AND LICENSES PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions:
ALTERED PERMIT OR LICENSE: Any permit or license which has been materially altered to contain information
contrary to that contained on the license or permit at the time of its issuance.
FORGED PERMIT OR LICENSE: A license or permit which purports to be but was not issued by a City official in
the performance of official duties of the official.
B. Violations:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly alter a permit or license issued by a City official in the performance
of their official duties. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly create or transfer a forged permit or license.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly display or use an altered or forged permit or license issued by a
City official in the performance of their official duties. (Ord. 97-118)
Chapter 6
THEFT OF LIBRARY MATERIALS
14-6-1: THEFT OF LIBRARY MATERIALS:
A. Definitions: As used in this Section the following definitions shall apply:
LIBRARY CARD: A card or plate issued by a library facility for purposes of identifying the person to whom the
library card was issued as authorized to borrow library material, subject to all limitations and conditions imposed on
such borrowing by the library facility issuing such card.
LIBRARY FACILITY: Includes any public library or museum, or any library or museum of an educational, historical
or eleemosynary institution, organization or society.
LIBRARY MATERIAL: Includes any book, plate, picture, photograph, engraving, painting, sculpture, statue, artifact,
drawing, map, newspaper, pamphlet, broadside, magazine, manuscript, document, letter, microfilm, sound recording,
audio-visual material, magnetic or other tape, electronic data processing record or other documentary, written or
printed material regardless of physical form or characteristics, or any part thereof, belonging to, or on loan to, or
otherwise in the custody of a library facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 366/923
PREMISES OF A LIBRARY FACILITY: The interior of a building, structure or other enclosure in which a library
facility is located and in which the library facility keeps library material.
B. Library Theft: A person commits the offense of library theft when he:
1. Knowingly and intentionally removes any library material from the premises of a library facility without authority to
do so; or
2. Knowingly and intentionally conceals any library material upon his person or among his belongings, while still in
the premises of a library facility and in such a manner that the library material is not visible through ordinary
observation although there may be some notice of its presence, and removes such library material beyond the last
point in the premises of that library facility at which library material may be borrowed in accordance with
procedures established by that library facility for the borrowing of library material; or
3. With the intent to deceive, borrows or attempts to borrow anylibrary material from a library facility by: a) use of a
library card issued to another without the other's consent, or b) use of a library card knowing that it is revoked,
cancelled or expired, or c) use of a library card knowing that it is falsely made, counterfeit or materially altered; or
4. Borrows from a library facility library material which has an aggregate value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more
pursuant to an agreement with or procedure established by the library facility for the return of such library material,
and usually without good cause, fails to return the library material so borrowed in accordance with such agreement
or procedure, and further wilfully, without good cause, fails to return such library material within thirty (30) days
after receiving written notice by certified mail from the library facility demanding the return of such library material.
C. Mutilation Or Vandalism Of Library Materials: A person commits mutilation or vandalism of library materials when he
knowingly tears, marks on, maliciously renders imperfect or otherwise damages or destroys library materials.
D. Posting Of Warning: Each library facility shall post a copy of this Section at a location adjacent to each entrance to the
premises of the library facility and at each point in the premises of the library facility at which the borrowing of library
materials occurs.
E. Penalties: Any violation of the above provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine in the amount of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and any person convicted of said
violation shall be ordered to reimburse the library for actual replacement costs of the materials not returned. (Ord. 97-
118)
Chapter 7
OFFENSES INVOLVING DRUGS
14-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish or other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant
Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by
extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis;
but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of
such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the
resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seeds of such plant. Cannabis shall also include any
substance defined as cannabis in section 3 of the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3 et
seq., and as hereafter amended.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any substance as defined in article II of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 367/923
Compiled Statutes 570/201 et seq.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession of cannabis, with or without
consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are intended to be used unlawfully
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of this title, the
cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 500/ et seq., or the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 570/ et seq. It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing cannabis or a controlled substance;
B. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is
cannabis or a controlled substance;
C. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of cannabis or controlled substances;
D. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private
persons;
E. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish,
or hashish oil into the human body including, where applicable, the following items:
1. Water pipes;
2. Carburetion tubes and devices;
3. Smoking and carburetion masks;
4. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
5. Carburetor pipes;
6. Electric pipes;
7. Air driven pipes;
8. Chillums;
9. Bongs;
10. Ice pipes or chillers;
F. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 368/923
KNOWLEDGE: Knows, acts knowingly or with knowledge:
A. The nature or attendant circumstances of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when
he/she is consciously aware that his/her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances exist. Knowledge of
a material fact includes awareness of the substantial probability that such fact exists.
B. The result of his/her conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that
such result is likely to be caused by his/her conduct.
C. Knowledge may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
MANUFACTURE: The production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion or processing of cannabis, either
directly or indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis,
and includes any packaging or repackaging of cannabis or labeling of its container, except that this term does not include
the preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of cannabis as an incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical
analysis and not for sale.
NITROUS OXIDE (N2O): A colorless flammable gas used as an anesthetic and in aerosols.
NITROUS OXIDE CARTRIDGE: Any cartridge containing less than twenty (20) ounces of compressed nitrous oxide
(N2O).
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other entity.
POSSESSION: Possession may be either actual or constructive.
A. Actual possession means exercising physical dominion.
B. Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent and capacity to maintain control and dominion
over the cannabis or drug paraphernalia.
PRODUCE OR PRODUCTION: Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting. (Ord. 2004-15)
14-7-2: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED:
A. Violation: No person shall possess ten grams (10 g) or less of any substance containing cannabis.
B. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law shall be punished by a minimum fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
C. Administrative Fee: In addition, any person who violates any provision of this section and is convicted, pleads guilty,
receives court supervision or probation by a court of law shall be ordered to pay an administrative fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) to be paid to the law enforcement agency for testing of the substance(s) collected.
D. Forfeiture: Any items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to section 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/12, may
be forfeited in the same manner as described therein for a violation of this section.
E. Exception: Any person who manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or is in possession of any controlled substance for
research purposes pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/11, as hereafter amended, shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2004-15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 369/923
14-7-3: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
A. Violation: No person shall knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it for the purpose of
unlawfully ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in
preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use within the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale. In
determining intent for purposes of this section, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the
cannabis or controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled substance on
the drug paraphernalia.
B. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law shall be punished by a minimum fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
C. Forfeiture: "Drug paraphernalia" as defined herein, seized by police officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a
notice to appear for a violation of this section, shall be forfeited to the city upon a plea of guilty, a finding of guilt
and/or a disposition of court supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the individual utilizing any
administrative remedy allowed by the city without further order of the court. Any other items which may be seized or
forfeited pursuant to section 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/5, may be forfeited in the same manner as described
therein for a violation of this section.
D. Exemptions: This section does not apply to:
1. Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled
substance as an incident to lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
2. Items historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other
lawful substance unless such item has the presence of cannabis or a controlled substance. Items exempt under
this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette
rolling papers.
3. Items listed in the definition of "drug paraphernalia" in section 14-7-1 of this chapter if said items are used solely for
decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for
any illicit purposes prohibited by this chapter.
4. A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the hypodermic syringes and
needles act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/0.01 et seq. (Ord. 2004-15)
14-7-4: SALE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
A. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial
consideration any item of drug paraphernalia within the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
B. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law shall be punished by a minimum fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each item of
drug paraphernalia.
C. Forfeiture: "Drug paraphernalia" as defined herein, seized by police officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a
notice to appear for a violation of this section, shall be forfeited to the city upon a plea of guilty, a finding of guilt
and/or a disposition of court supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the individual utilizing any
administrative remedy allowed by the city without further order of the court. Any other items which may be seized or
forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/5, may be forfeited in the same manner as described therein
for a violation of this section. (Ord. 2004-15)
14-7-5: NITROUS OXIDE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 370/923
A. Unlawful Sale Or Distribution Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, copartnership or
association to possess any container or cartridge which contains nitrous oxide (N2O) for the purpose of selling,
offering for sale, distributing or giving away N2O; except that the foregoing provision shall not apply to wholesalers,
jobbers, and manufacturers who use nitrous oxide (N2O) in the normal course of their business to manufacture other
lawful items.
B. Unlawful Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale, or otherwise introduce into his respiratory system, nitrous
oxide except under the direct care and supervision of a licensed physician or dentist. (Ord. 2004-15)
14-7-6: POSSESSION OF METHYLENEDIOXYPYROVALERONE (MDPV):
A. Violation: No person shall possess, sell, or distribute a substance containing methylenedioxypyrovalerone, MDPV.
B. Penalty: Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty by a court of law shall be punished by a minimum fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2011-28)
Title 15
PLANNING, ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
15.1.1: SHORT TITLE:
This title may be referred to as the CARBONDALE ZONING ORDINANCE, or, in appropriate context, as "this title". (Ord.
2013-20)
15.1.2: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted under the authority of the home rule provisions of the Illinois constitution (Ill. const. art. VII, sect. 6)
and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-11-1 through 5/11-15.3. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.3: PURPOSE:
The provisions and requirements of this title are adopted to the end that adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and
other dangers may be secured, that the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the jurisdiction of this title may be
conserved, that congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided, that the hazards to persons and damage to
property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters may be lessened or avoided, and that the
public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare may otherwise be promoted. The provisions and requirements of this
title shall be considered to be minimum requirements. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.4: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION:
It is not the intent of this title to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants,
agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this title
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this title shall govern. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 371/923
15.1.5: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to the minimum requirements, shall be
liberally constructed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power granted
by the Illinois Compiled Statutes or article VII, section 6(a) of the constitution. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.6: JURISDICTION:
The provisions of this title shall apply to all real property located within the corporate limits of Carbondale, Illinois, and
within one and one-half (11/2) miles thereof as shown on the official zoning map. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.7: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in this title shall affect all land, every structure, and every use of land or structure within the
jurisdiction, and shall apply as follows. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.7.1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No land shall be altered, cleared, graded, or otherwise improved and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved
onto, structurally altered, or used or occupied except in compliance with the regulations of this title for the district in
which it is located unless a development permit has been issued. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.7.2: INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations in this title shall be enforced and interpreted according to the following rules:
A. Minimum Requirements: Regulations set forth by this title shall be minimum regulations. If the requirements set forth
in this title are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted uses, regulations, or ordinances, the
more restrictive or higher standard shall govern.
B. Liberally Construed: This title shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes in the interest of public
health, safety, welfare and convenience.
C. Restrictive Covenants: Unless restrictions established by covenants with the land are prohibited by or contrary to the
provisions of this title, nothing contained within this title shall be construed to render such covenants inoperative. The
city and its officials do not have the right or responsibility for administering or enforcing covenants. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.8: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
A. Whenever the requirements of these zoning regulations are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes higher standards as
determined by the director shall govern.
B. Whenever the requirements of these zoning regulations are preempted by federal or state mandate, the federal or
state rule will control.
C. These regulations are independent of private deed restrictions and other covenants and shall apply whether or not
they are more restrictive than such restrictions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 372/923
D. The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of these zoning
regulations shall not relieve the recipient of such permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of complying
with all other applicable requirements of any other city, county, state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the
structures or land uses for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.1.9: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
See section 15.6.12 of this title for rules of construction and interpretation. (Ord. 2013-20)
Chapter 2
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
15.2.1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The districts appearing on the official zoning map referred to in section 15.2.2 of this chapter shall be considered districts
for the purposes of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.2: ZONING MAP:
15.2.2.1: GENERAL:
A. The city, and all land subject to the jurisdiction of this title, is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the
official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this section.
B. The official zoning map as adopted or as hereafter amended, shall be located in the office of the planning services
division. Also, a copy shall be located in the city clerk's office. It is the final authority as to the current zoning status of
land and water areas, buildings, and other structures within the jurisdiction of this title. The map shall be identified by
the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and shall bear the seal of the city under the following words:
This is to certify that this is the official Zoning Map, referred to in the Carbondale Revised Code, Title 15, Section
15.2.2.1 adopted on the day of , 20 .
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.2.2: AMENDMENT OR REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
A. Amendments to the official zoning map shall be made by ordinance adopted by the city council after due notice and
public hearing pursuant to the procedures of section 15.6.7 of this title. The amendments thereto shall be listed in the
order adopted in a separate register maintained in the office of the planning services division, and each amendment
shall be identified as follows:
By official action of the City Council, the following amendments have been made to the official Zoning Map on the
date indicated.
B. The foregoing entries shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city.
Amendments to the official zoning map shall be recorded thereon by the planning services division and so noted on
the amending ordinance prior to final recording of said ordinance by the city clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 373/923
C. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the
nature or number of changes or additions, the city council may adopt a new official zoning map which shall
supersede any prior zoning map. The new map may correct errors or omissions in prior maps, but no such correction
shall have the effect of amending the original zoning map or any subsequent amendments thereof. The new official
zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal under the
following words:
This is to certify that this official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the official Zoning Map adopted on the day
of , 20 , as part of the Revised Code of the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to amend or change the official zoning map except in conformity with the
procedures set forth in this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.2.3: ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
If there have been changes in the official map in any calendar year, the city council shall cause preparation and
publication of the official zoning map reflecting the zoning district boundaries as of December 31 of the preceding year.
Copies of the official zoning map shall be printed prior to March 31, of the succeeding year and shall bear the following
words:
This is a copy of the official Zoning Map reflecting zoning district boundaries as of December 31, 20 . The official
Zoning Map indicating current zoning district boundaries is located in the office of the Planning Services Division.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.2.4: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
A. Rules: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following
rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to
follow such centerlines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits.
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
5. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of bodies of water shall be construed to follow shorelines, and in the
event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extension of features indicated in this subsection A and sections 15.2.3.3
through 15.2.3.5 of this chapter shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning
map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
7. Except as provided in subsection A9 of this section, where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A1
through A6 of this section, the zoning board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
8. Except where flood fringe boundary lines are involved, or where floodway district boundary lines are involved,
where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership on the effective date hereof, the zoning
board of appeals may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed one hundred
feet (100') beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
9. Where a flood fringe district boundary line or where a floodway district boundary line divides a property, the
provisions of the respective district(s) (sections 15.2.6 and 15.2.7 of this chapter) shall apply only to that portion or
portions of the property in the respective flood fringe or floodway districts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 374/923
10. Flood fringe and floodway district boundary lines on the official zoning map are necessarily generalized because
of the official zoning map scale and limited topographical information available. Exact boundary lines shall be
determined as provided in sections 15.2.6 and 15.2.7 of this chapter. When the floodway district boundaries shown
on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) along with the flood insurance study, Carbondale, Illinois, dated May 2,
2008; and adopted by section 15.2.7.1 of this chapter; the FIRM boundaries shall prevail. Whenever a floodway
district boundary conflict is discovered, the planning services division shall correct the official zoning maps to
correspond with the floodway boundary shown on the FIRM map. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.3: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
15.2.3.1: GENERAL:
Regulations applicable within each district shall be applied uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. In
particular:
A. No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. All uses not expressly permitted as a permitted use,
an accessory use, or a special use in accordance with the guidelines established in section 15.3.1.1 of this title are
prohibited.
B. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
1. To exceed the height or bulk;
2. To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
3. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein permitted; or in
any other manner contrary to the provisions of this title.
C. No part of a yard, other open space, off street parking, or loading space required in connection with any building for
the purpose of complying with this title shall voluntarily be included as part of a yard, open space, off street parking,
or loading space similarly required for any other building or any other lot.
D. No yard or lot existing on the effective date hereof shall be voluntarily reduced in dimension or area below the
minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the
minimum requirements established by this title.
E. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall retain its prior zoning classification until otherwise
classified. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.3.2: AIRPORT HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In addition to those zoning districts established in the schedule of district regulations, the airport height control district, as
regulated by the Southern Illinois Airport Authority and as delineated on the official zoning map, is hereby adopted by
reference. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.3.3: EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The height limitations contained in the district regulations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks,
silos, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended
for human occupancy. (Ord. 2013-31)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 375/923
15.2.3.4: STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS:
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an all weather
private street, which in turn intersects with a public street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe
and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off street parking. An all weather private street shall be
constructed to the same standards as a public street. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.3.5: STRUCTURES PROHIBITED WITHIN FIFTY FEET OF DESIGNATED STREAMS:
No structures shall be permitted within fifty feet (50') of designated streams under the jurisdiction of this title. The fifty foot
(50') setback shall be measured from the top of the stream bank as determined by the administrative official.
A. Designated Streams: The following, for the purposes of this title, shall be considered as designated streams:
1. Big Muddy River.
2. Crab Orchard Creek.
3. Drury Creek.
4. Glade Branch Creek.
5. Indian Creek.
6. Little Crab Orchard Creek.
7. Mud Creek.
8. Piles Fork Creek.
9. Plum Creek.
10. Sycamore Creek. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.3.6: PERMITTED PROJECTIONS INTO MINIMUM YARDS:
A. Projections from a building or structure which are not designed for occupancy either above, below or within the
projection may extend up to two feet six inches (2'6") into minimum yards with the following exceptions:
1. Said projections may extend up to four feet (4') into minimum front and rear yards on the south side of a building or
structure.
2. In zoning districts where side yards are required, said projections may extend up to four feet (4') into minimum side
yards on the south side of a building or structure only when a minimum of five feet six inches (5'6") remains
between the farthest extremity of side projection(s) and the property line.
B. No structural supports of said projections may originate in any required minimum yards. Provided, however, that no
part of an active solar collector device shall project into any minimum yard. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.4: INTERIM ZONING:
15.2.4.1: AUTHORIZATION AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
A. The city council may adopt one or more interim zoning ordinances prohibiting any changes in uses and/or structures
which may be in conflict with the uses and/or structures currently permitted in or with the requirements established for
the applicable zoning districts and regulations of this title or which may be in conflict with a contemplated zoning
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 376/923
proposal which the city council, planning services division, or planning commission is considering or studying or
intends to study within a reasonable time.
B. The city council may enact an interim zoning ordinance without following the procedure otherwise required in this title
preliminary to the adoption of a zoning ordinance or zoning ordinance amendment provided the procedures required
by this section are followed. Any interim zoning ordinance shall be enacted only after a public hearing conducted by
the city council. The decision to conduct a public hearing shall be made by majority vote of those council members
present. At least a two-thirds (2/3) vote of those council members present, and in any event no less than four (4)
votes, shall be required for adoption of any interim zoning ordinance.
C. In adopting an interim zoning ordinance, the city council shall act to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The
purpose of any interim zoning ordinances shall be to temporarily preserve the status quo in any area within the city's
zoning jurisdiction which is or may soon be undergoing substantial change in character or use or is under
consideration for a substantial zoning change while the appropriate studies are being conducted and zoning
amendments are being considered pursuant to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.4.2: DURATION OF INTERIM ZONING:
Any interim zoning ordinance adopted shall be of no further force and effect after the specific date established in such
interim zoning ordinance, said date being not more than twelve (12) months from the date of adoption of that interim
zoning ordinance; provided, however, that after a public hearing conducted by the city council, the city council may by
ordinance adopted by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required,
extend the interim zoning ordinance for six (6) months. Such extension shall be enacted prior to the expiration of the
interim zoning ordinance. No more than one extension may be adopted. No interim zoning ordinance shall be enacted
for a piece of land within six (6) months of the expiration or repeal of a previous interim zoning ordinance applicable to
the same piece of land. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.4.3: NOTICE:
A. Notice of hearings held pursuant to this section shall be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing in one or more newspapers of general circulation. The notice shall describe
the nature of the interim zoning proposal and the area proposed to be included in the ordinance and shall indicate the
time and place of the hearing.
B. Furthermore, prior to the city council conducting a public hearing to consider an interim zoning proposal, the city shall,
no more than thirty (30) days or less than ten (10) days before the hearing, provide written notice to the apparent
recipients of tax bills for all property subject to the interim zoning proposal. The determination of property tax bill
recipient will be made from property tax information secured by the city from the county at least annually. Personal
delivery or placement of the notice in the United States mail with sufficient first class postage affixed and addressed
to the appropriate entity determined by the above procedure shall satisfy this written notice requirement. Written
notice to the property tax bill recipients need not be given before a hearing to extend an interim zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.4.4: FINDINGS OF FACT:
At the conclusion of the public hearing to consider an interim zoning ordinance, the city council shall by motion state
specific findings of fact. The findings of fact shall form the basis for adopting or rejecting the proposed interim zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.4.5: INTERIM ZONING ORDINANCE TO PREVAIL:
Whenever an interim zoning ordinance is adopted which contains provisions which are different from or in conflict with
those existing in this title, the provisions of the interim zoning ordinance shall prevail until such time as the interim zoning
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 377/923
ordinance is repealed or expires pursuant to the provisions in section 15.2.4.2 of this chapter, whichever occurs first.
However, if an existing use is damaged or destroyed while the interim zoning ordinance affecting the piece of land is in
effect, then as long as the interim zoning ordinance remains in effect, the damaged or destroyed use may be replaced to
the extent that it existed prior to being damaged or destroyed, but only insofar as such replacement complies with the
provisions of this title as they pertained to that piece of land immediately prior to adoption of the interim zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.5: P PRESERVATION DISTRICT:
15.2.5.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to recognize that movements and shifts in population and changes in residential, commercial
and industrial land use and customs threaten with deterioration and disappearance the property and improvements of
the city which are sources of its tradition and stability. In the interest of the public's health, safety and general welfare and
to advance sound urban planning, it is necessary that those properties and improvements having special historical,
architectural, community or aesthetic significance be preserved, enhanced and continued in or restored to use. The
preservation district is an overlay district and shall impose appropriate regulations on designated property, in addition to
the requirements contained in the basic underlying zoning district. The purposes of the preservation district are the
following:
A. To survey, identify, designate, preserve, enhance, and perpetuate those properties and improvements which reflect
the historical, cultural, political, economic, artistic, social, ethnic or other heritage of nation, state or community; or
which have a special community or aesthetic interest or value to the city or which may be representative of an
architectural or engineering type inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, craftsmanship, method of
construction, or use of indigenous materials;
B. To preserve and protect the character and vitality of traditional neighborhoods from the adverse effects of
inappropriate development that could detract or have a blighting effect on the quality of life in these areas;
C. To preserve the existing housing stock to conserve and improve the city's tax base and to promote economic
development through restoration, rehabilitation and maintenance;
D. To foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past and to promote education of the general
public concerning preservation;
E. To protect and enhance the attractiveness of the city to homeowners, homebuyers, tourists, visitors, businesses and
shoppers, and thereby support and stimulate business, commerce and industry and provide an economic benefit to
the city;
F. To foster and encourage preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of structures, areas and neighborhoods, and
thereby prevent future urban blight and in some cases reverse current urban deterioration;
G. To encourage the continued private ownership and use of designated properties and improvements to the maximum
extent consistent with the above objectives. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.5.2: DESIGNATION PROCEDURES:
A. Nominations And Regulation Of Demolition During Nomination Review:
1. Nominations:
a. Nominations for landmarks, historic districts, and neighborhood preservation districts shall be made to the
preservation commission on a form prepared by it and may be submitted by any person. The city council and/or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 378/923
preservation commission can direct the executive secretary by motion to file an application in its behalf. At a
minimum all applications shall contain the following:
(1) A petition in support of the nomination signed by the owners of record of twenty five percent (25%) of the
parcels of land located within the boundaries of the proposed designation.
(2) A map delineating the proposed boundaries and a legal description of all property within the boundaries.
(3) A written statement setting forth the reason(s) the property, structure or area is eligible for nomination. The
statement shall indicate and substantiate which of the criteria in subsection B of this section are met by the
nomination.
2. Regulation Of Demolitions During Nomination Review: Upon receipt by the executive secretary of a properly
completed nomination, no building or structure nominated and under consideration to be a landmark or part of a
historic district pursuant to subsections A through D of this section shall be demolished without compliance with the
following provisions:
a. Written notice of the proposed demolition shall be given to the preservation commission through the executive
secretary, and the applicant for the demolition permit shall be notified in writing of the need and procedure for
preservation commission review.
b. The preservation commission shall consider the proposed demolition. If the commission has no objection to the
demolition the commission chairperson shall promptly notify the building and neighborhood services division. In
the event the commission objects or takes no action within sixty (60) days from the date the demolition
application was accepted by the building and neighborhood services division, then the building and
neighborhood services division shall proceed to issue a demolition permit at the end of the sixty (60) day period if
all other applicable city code requirements are met.
c. Provided, however, that when circumstances exists that pose an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the public, the city council may authorize by motion the demolition of property without following the steps in
subsections A2a and A2b of this section. Prior to the city council taking action, it shall be provided with a written
report from an Illinois licensed structural engineer or architect or the city's building inspector. The report shall
describe the condition of the structure and identify factors which may constitute an imminent threat to the health,
safety or welfare of the public. When possible, notice of such potential council action shall be sent to the
preservation commission members.
B. Preliminary Review:
1. Upon receipt of a properly completed nomination, the nomination and hardship review committee shall make a
preliminary determination within forty five (45) days as to whether the nominated property, structure or area meets
one or more of the following criteria for designation:
a. Its character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the community,
county, state or country;
b. Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state or national event;
c. Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of the community,
county, state or country;
d. Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural and/or landscape style valuable for the study
of a period, type, method of construction or use of indigenous materials;
e. Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect or landscape architect whose individual work
has influenced the development of the community, county, state or country;
f. Its overall embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials or craftsmanship which renders it
architecturally significant;
g. Its overall embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or architecturally innovative;
h. Its unique location or singular physical characteristic that makes it an established or familiar visual feature;
i. Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure or group of such structures,
including, but not limited to, farmhouses, gas stations or other commercial structures, with a high level of integrity
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 379/923
or architectural significance; and/or
j. Its recognition as a Carbondale neighborhood, commercial area, or public activity center characterized by solid
housing or commercial buildings (which are not necessarily significant or homogeneous in architectural design),
and whose properties and structures are threatened by deterioration, demolition, or disharmonious alteration.
2. Any structure, property, or area that meets one or more of the above criteria shall also have sufficient integrity of
location, design, materials, and workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or restoration. If a nomination is
found to meet the above criteria, it shall proceed to the preliminary conference phase with the nomination and
hardship review committee. If a nomination does not meet the above criteria, the committee shall deny the
application and notify the applicant within seven (7) days of the preliminary determination of the reason(s) for the
denial.
C. Preliminary Conference: Within seven (7) days following a preliminary determination that a nomination meets one or
more of the criteria in subsection B of this section, the nomination and hardship review committee shall notify the
applicant and establish a meeting time between the applicant, and representatives of the property owners within the
proposed boundaries, and draft proposed design standards for the designation. The first meeting shall be held within
thirty (30) days of the preliminary determination and additional meetings may be required. The design standards shall
be based on the design guidelines contained in subsection 15.2.5.3A of this chapter and will provide a guide for
evaluating applications for certificates of appropriateness within the designated district. The design standards may be
more specific for the proposed designation depending on the character of the properties, structures or areas within
the boundaries of the proposed designation.
D. Regulation During Consideration Period:
1. From the date that a petition in support of the nomination and the specific design standards signed by the owners
of record of more than twenty five percent (25%) of the parcels of land in a proposed designation area is filed with
the executive secretary until the city council acts on the nomination, the provisions of section 15.2.5.4, "Regulation
Of Alteration, Construction And Demolition", of this chapter, shall apply as if the property were designated as
requested. Provided, however, that the interim regulations shall in no case apply to property within public right of
way, or if the applicant withdraws the nomination, or for a period of more than one hundred seventy five (175) days
after the petition bearing the required signatures of the owners of record of more than twenty five percent (25%) of
the parcels in the designation area is filed.
2. The city council may authorize by formal resolution the alteration, construction, or demolition of property within a
proposed designation area when circumstances exist that pose an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the public. Prior to the city council taking action, it shall be provided with a written report from an Illinois licensed
structural engineer or architect or the city's building inspector. The report shall describe the condition of the
structure and identify factors which may constitute an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
When possible, notice of such potential council action shall be sent to the preservation commission members.
Whenever possible, measures shall be taken to preserve the architecturally or historically significant features
associated with the property.
E. Public Hearing:
1. Within thirty (30) days of the executive secretary validating the petition in support of the nomination and proposed
design standards a public hearing shall be scheduled before the preservation commission. Notice shall be given of
the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the date of the hearing by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers in
general circulation in the city of Carbondale. The notice shall state the location and legal description of the
proposed designation, and a statement summarizing how the proposed designation meets the criteria set forth in
subsection B of this section.
2. The executive secretary shall cause a notice to be posted on the subject property according to the procedures
specified in section 15.6.7.1 of this title; provided, however, that the notice shall also specify the type of designation
being proposed and information as to how to obtain a copy of the proposed design standards for the nomination.
3. The executive secretary shall serve written notice on the applicant and the owners, as appear from authentic tax
records of such county, of all property within the boundaries of the proposed designation and within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the proposed designation. The procedures specified in subsection 15.6.7.1C of this title, for
notifying adjoining property owners shall be followed; provided, however, that the notice shall also specify the type
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 380/923
of designation being proposed including a copy of the proposed design standards for the nomination and a
statement summarizing how the proposed designation meets the criteria set forth in subsection B of this section.
4. The executive secretary shall serve written notice by regular mail or by personal delivery on the members of the
planning commission at least ten (10) days prior to the preservation commission hearing. Said notice shall contain
the same information required above to be provided to property owners.
5. At the hearing the preservation commission shall take testimony from the applicants, the owner(s) and any other
interested parties. In addition, the preservation commission shall consider all written comments received by the
preservation commission prior to the hearing. The preservation commission may present expert testimony or
present its own evidence on the proposed designation. The hearing shall be closed upon completion of all
testimony. A record of the proceedings shall be made and retained as a public record. The preservation
commission shall review and evaluate all of the available information according to the criteria for designation
contained in subsection B of this section. The preservation commission shall make findings of fact on the criteria
for designation, the boundaries of the proposed designation and the design standards for the proposed
designation.
6. If a petition in opposition to the designation is received prior to the closing of the hearing, signed by the owners of
the majority of the parcels in the designation, a sixty five (65) day continuance may be passed by the commission
to review the petition and discuss objections. The commission shall take action on the nomination during the
continuance period and make a recommendation to the city council.
7. Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing the preservation commission shall make a recommendation on the
nomination, unless a petition in opposition is received as stated above. The recommendation shall be submitted to
the city council after opportunity is provided for planning commission review as specified below. The
recommendation shall include:
a. A statement as to the nomination's compliance with the criteria for designation.
b. The property to be included in the boundaries of the proposed designation. The commission may not expand the
boundaries beyond the property described in the application; however, the commission may recommend that
property be deleted from the boundaries.
c. The design standards for the proposed designation. The commission may modify the design standards from
those proposed at the preliminary conference.
F. Planning Commission Review: If the design standards proposed for the designation would impact general zoning
regulations applicable to the district, then the designation shall be reviewed by the planning commission. The
development services director, or designee, shall make this ruling. A copy of the minutes of the preservation
commission's public hearing and its recommendation and nomination shall be forwarded to the planning commission
for its review and comment. Within thirty (30) days of the preservation commission's recommendation action, the
planning commission shall commence its review of the proposed nomination at a regular planning commission
meeting. Within forty five (45) days, the planning commission shall make a recommendation or comment on the
nomination to the city council.
G. City Council Action:
1. Within thirty (30) days after receiving at a city council meeting the recommendation of the preservation commission
and the recommendation or comment of the planning commission, if applicable, the city council shall take formal
action on the nomination. The city council shall either deny the nomination by resolution or approve the nomination,
including the design standards by ordinance. The council may modify the boundaries and design standards for a
nomination; however, the boundaries may not include property not included in the application.
2. The executive secretary shall notify by regular mail the applicants and the owner(s) of record of the property in the
original application of the city council's action. If a nomination is approved it shall be noted on the official zoning
maps on file in the city clerk's office.
H. Amending Or Rescinding Designations:
1. Amending A Designated District's Design Standards:
a. The procedures contained in this subsection shall be followed except that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 381/923
(1) The written statement referred to in subsection A1a(3) of this section shall set forth the reasons for the
proposed amendments to the design standards rather than the reasons for eligibility.
(2) The preliminary review referred to in subsection B of this section shall be omitted and the application shall be
reviewed in a preliminary conference within forty five (45) days of the receipt of a properly completed
nomination as set forth in subsection C of this section; provided however, that the conference shall draft
revised design standards for the designated district.
(3) The preservation commission's recommendation referred to in subsection E of this section shall be limited to
the proposed amendments to the design standards.
(4) Subsection D, "Regulation During Consideration Period", of this section, shall not apply and the existing
design standards for the designated district shall remain in effect.
2. Amending A Designated District's Boundaries By The Addition Of Property, Structures Or Area: The procedures
contained in this subsection shall be followed except that:
a. The written statement referred to in subsection A1a(3) of this section shall also substantiate that the criteria for
designation for the proposed addition is similar to and compatible with the criteria for designation that were found
to be present for the designated district.
b. The preliminary review outlined in subsection B of this section shall also include a determination by the
committee that the criteria for designation is similar to and compatible with the criteria for designation found to be
present for the designated district to which the nomination is applying to be added.
c. The preliminary conference outlined in subsection C of this section shall be omitted and the design standards for
the proposed addition shall be identical to the design standards for the designated district to which the
nomination is applying to be added throughout the designation procedures. (Ord. 2013-20)
d. The preservation commission's recommendation referred to in subsection E7a of this section shall include a
statement as to the nomination's similarity to and compatibility with the criteria for designation found to be
present for the designated district to which it is applying to be added. However, subsection E7c of this section
shall be omitted because the design standards for the proposed addition shall be identical to the design
standards for the designated district to which the nomination is applying to be added.
3. Amending A Designated District's Boundaries By The Deletion Of Property, Structures Or Areas, Or By Rescinding
A Designated District: The procedures contained in this subsection shall be followed except that:
a. The written statement referred to in subsection A1a(3) of this section shall set forth the reasons the property,
structure or area should be deleted from a designated district or the designated district should be rescinded.
b. The preliminary review outlined in subsection B of this section shall either find that the application does not meet
any of the criteria for designation, in which case the committee shall send the application to the commission for
final review; or the committee shall find that the nomination does meet the criteria for designation and should
therefore be denied.
c. The preservation commission's recommendation referred to in subsection E7a of this section shall include a
statement as to the nomination's lack of compliance with the criteria for designation, rather than its compliance.
Subsection E7b of this section shall refer to the boundaries to be deleted rather than the boundaries to be
included in the designation. Subsection E7c of this section shall be omitted.
d. Subsection D, "Regulation During Consideration Period", of this section, shall not apply. The existing design
standards shall remain in effect. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.5.3: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Guidelines: The design standards for the regulation of alteration, construction and demolition in a designated district
shall be based upon the standards and recommendations contained in the secretary of the interior's standards for
rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, and the architectural preservation guidelines,
Carbondale, Illinois, existing on the date this section is adopted and as hereafter amended.
B. Specific Standards For Each District:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 382/923
1. The specific design standards for a district shall be based upon any or all of the guidelines contained in subsection
A of this section, and any other guidelines deemed appropriate by the city council.
2. Specific design standards shall be established in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 15.2.5.2 of
this chapter. The design standards for each district shall be included as an exhibit to the ordinance approving the
district. The design standards for each designated district shall be kept on file by the city clerk and by the executive
secretary of the preservation commission. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.5.4: REGULATION OF ALTERATION, CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION:
A. Certificate Of Appropriateness:
1. Any alteration, construction or demolition work on property within a designated district that is subject to the design
standards for the district in which it is located, shall be issued a certificate of appropriateness by the preservation
commission prior to the work commencing. No zoning certificate or building permit shall be issued for property
within a designated district until the certificate of appropriateness has been issued to the applicant, who shall be
the property owner or owner's agent, or until the executive secretary determines that the proposed work is not
subject to the applicable design standards. A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of issuance. The executive secretary shall regularly submit to the commission a list of all zoning
certificates and building permits that have been issued for property within each designated district for which an
application for a certificate of appropriateness was not required. The executive secretary shall be responsible for
notifying property owners within designated districts of the need to submit an application for a certificate of
appropriateness for work subject to applicable design standards, but for which a zoning certificate and/or building
permit is not required.
2. When a demolition permit application is filed with the building and neighborhood services division, the inspector
supervisor or his designee shall consult with city records and the executive secretary to determine if the building to
be demolished has been: a) designated by the city council as being a landmark district, in a historic district, or in a
neighborhood preservation district pursuant to section 15.2.5.2 of this chapter, b) nominated for designation as
such a district and subject to provisions of subsection 15.2.5.2B of this chapter, or c) listed by the city council on an
inventory of potential places to be considered for designation as a landmark district or part of a historic district.
Should the building be found to fit one of these instances, the executive secretary shall notify the certificate of
appropriateness committee of the need to review the application and a sixty (60) day stay of demolition shall go
into effect.
3. When circumstances exist that pose an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the city
council may authorize by formal resolution the alteration, construction or demolition of property within a designated
district without a certificate of appropriateness. Prior to the city council taking action, it shall be provided with a
written report from an Illinois licensed structural engineer or architect or the city's building inspector. The report
shall describe the condition of the structure and identify factors which may constitute an imminent threat to the
health, safety or welfare of the public. When possible, notice of such potential council action shall be sent to the
preservation commission members. Whenever possible, measures shall be taken to preserve the architecturally
and historically significant features associated with the property.
B. Application For Certificate Of Appropriateness: A certificate of appropriateness is required for any modification of a
designated structure or for any construction in a designated historic district. See section 15.6.11 of this title. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.6: FF FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT:
15.2.6.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
The purpose of this district is to avoid hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from flooding and to comply
with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program found at 44 CFR parts 59-78 (hereinafter referred
to as NFIP rules and regulations) and which are hereby adopted by reference and filed in the office of the city clerk. The
flood fringe district is an overlay district, identified on the official zoning map as flood fringe, the requirements of which
district are in addition to requirements contained in the basic underlying district. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 383/923
15.2.6.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES, STRUCTURES, AND SPECIAL USES:
All uses and structures permitted in the underlying zoning district or granted as special uses in the underlying zoning
district are likewise allowed except that all structures, fill, and uses shall be subject to floodplain development permit
requirements for FF flood fringe district, outlined in sections 15.2.6.3, 15.2.6.4 and 15.2.6.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.2.6.3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to the start of construction for any new construction, substantial improvement or development, including structures,
fill, obstructions, storage or other use a floodplain development permit (FDP) shall be secured from the city. This permit
is issued in addition to all other permits required by the city. This permit shall not be issued if the provisions of this
section are not satisfied or if a permit required by Illinois or federal law has been denied. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.6.4: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
See section 15.6.6 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.6.5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
For issuance of an FDP in the flood fringe, all new construction and substantial improvement, development or other use
shall conform to the following standards:
A. Fill: Any proposed fill to be deposited in the flood fringe shall be in conjunction with permitted and special uses and
shall be protected against erosion.
B. Structures: In order to minimize flood damage the following standards shall apply:
1. Wherever possible, structures shall be constructed with the long axis parallel to the direction of flood flow;
2. As practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures;
3. Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
4. Residential structures shall be constructed on fill, piers, posts, or pilings so that the lowest floor surfaces including
basements or cellars together with mechanical and utility equipment shall be at or above one foot (1') above the
base flood elevation and be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
5. Nonresidential structures shall be constructed on fill, piers, posts, or pilings so that the lowest floor surfaces
including basements or cellars together with mechanical and utility equipment are elevated or floodproofed to at
least one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
C. Subdivisions: See chapter 8 of this title.
D. Manufactured Homes:
1. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on an individually owned lot or in a manufactured
home park or subdivision shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home including basement or cellar shall be at least one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of section 4-
1-10 of this code and the Illinois mobile home tie down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870. If a manufactured home is elevated on pilings, the piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more
than ten feet (10') apart and reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet (6') above ground level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 384/923
2. In the event it is not possible for the city to determine the base flood elevation in an area designated as zone A on
the flood insurance rate map, Carbondale, Illinois, dated May 2, 2008, the manufactured home shall be installed
using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated on a permanent foundation and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
E. Mechanical And Utility Equipment: All new construction and substantial improvement to mechanical and utility
equipment including electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, utility meters and other
service facilities including water supply and wastewater disposal systems shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least
one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. All new and
replacement on site waste disposal systems shall be located to prevent impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
F. Storage Of Materials Or Equipment: Material or equipment may be stored in the flood fringe if firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning, or if stored one foot
(1') or more above the base flood elevation.
G. Fully Enclosed Areas Below Lowest Floor: Fully enclosed areas, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement, that are below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by an Illinois registered professional
engineer or an Illinois registered architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
H. Public Utilities: Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, and water systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. New or replacement public sanitary sewer systems and water
supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
I. Travel Trailers: All travel trailers (recreational vehicles) placed on property within the flood fringe shall be elevated with
the lowest floor at or above the base flood elevation and be subject to elevation and anchoring requirements of
"manufactured homes"; or be on site for less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed
and road ready. To be considered fully road ready, the trailer must be on wheels or a jacking system, be attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions.
J. Variance Procedure: Upon application and after fifteen (15) days' notice of a public hearing, the city council may grant
a floodplain variance subject to compliance with the provisions of section 60.6 of the NFIP rules and regulations as
amended and such other conditions as the city council deems necessary to comply with the intent of this district. The
issuance of variances shall be for floodplain management purposes only.
K. Watercourse Standards: The development services director shall notify adjacent communities and the Illinois
department of natural resources, office of water resources and the federal insurance administration prior to dry
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. The flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse shall be maintained.
L. Reports And Records:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 385/923
1. The development services director shall provide the city council, the Illinois department of natural resources, office
of water resources, and the federal insurance administration with an annual report on forms as provided to the city
by the federal insurance administration.
2. The planning services division shall maintain the records of lowest floor elevations, floodproofing certifications, and
all variance documents required by the federal insurance administration.
M. Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger
floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This section does not imply that
development either inside or outside the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This section does not create
liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from proper reliance
on this section or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
N. Identification Required: It is a requirement of the NFIP that regulatory floodway is identified. Within any floodway
identified on the flood insurance rate map, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated,
the following standards shall apply:
1. No development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development will
cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. These developments are
outlined by the IDNR/OWR statewide permit 2-13.
2. The floodway for the floodplains of Crab Orchard Creek, Glade Creek, Little Crab Orchard Creek, Piles Fork
Creek, and Carbondale Reservoir shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map as prepared
by FEMA. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of Carbondale shall be according to the best data
available from federal, state, or other sources. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.7: FW FLOODWAY DISTRICT:
15.2.7.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is intended to protect against hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from flooding, and to
comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program found at 44 CFR parts 59-78 which are
hereby adopted by reference, and filed in the office of the city clerk. The floodway district is an overlay district intended to
preserve that area of the floodplain identified on the official zoning map as floodway, to convey and store the base (100-
year) flood and to protect such area from encroachment. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.7.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES, STRUCTURES, AND SPECIAL USES:
All uses and structures permitted in the underlying zoning district or granted as special uses in the underlying zoning
district are likewise allowed except that all structures, fill, and uses shall be subject to floodplain development permit
requirements for FW floodway district outlined in sections 15.6.6.3 and 15.6.6.4 of this title and section 15.2.7.5 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.7.3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to the start of construction for any new construction, substantial improvement or development, including structures,
fill, obstructions, storage or other use a floodplain development permit (FDP) shall be secured from the city. This permit
is issued in addition to all other permits required by the city. This permit shall not be issued if the provisions of this
section are not satisfied or if a permit required by Illinois or federal law has been denied. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.7.4: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
See section 15.6.6 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 386/923
15.2.7.5: STANDARDS:
For issuance of an FDP in the floodway all new construction, substantial improvement, development or other use shall
conform to the following standards:
A. Fill: No fill may be placed in the floodway.
B. Structures:
1. No structures shall be constructed within the floodway, with the following exceptions:
a. Open air pavilions for recreational purposes.
b. Recreational playground equipment.
2. Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.
3. No pavement and/or impervious surface on private property are allowed within the floodway with the exception of
recreational trails.
C. Subdivisions: See chapter 8 of this title.
D. Mechanical And Utility Equipment: All substantial improvement to mechanical and utility equipment including
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, utility meters and other service facilities including
water supply and wastewater disposal systems shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above the
base flood elevation and constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. All new and replacement on site waste
disposal systems shall be located to prevent impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
E. Public Utilities: Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, and water systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. Replacement public sanitary sewer systems and water supply
systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
F. Travel Trailers: All travel trailers (recreational vehicles) placed on property within the floodway shall be elevated with
the lowest floor at or above the base flood elevation and be subject to elevation and anchoring requirements of
"manufactured homes"; or be on site for less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed
and road ready. To be considered fully road ready, the trailer must be on wheels or a jacking system, be attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions.
G. Variance Procedure: Upon application and after fifteen (15) days' notice of a public hearing, the city council may grant
a floodplain variance subject to compliance with the provisions of section 60.6 of the NFIP rules and regulations, as
amended, and such other conditions as the city council deems necessary to comply with the intent of this district. The
issuance of variances shall be for floodplain management purposes only.
H. Watercourse Standards: The development services director shall notify adjacent communities and the Illinois
department of natural resources, office of water resources and the federal insurance administration prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse. The flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse shall be maintained.
I. Reports And Records:
1. The development services director shall provide the city council, the Illinois department of natural resources, office
of water resources, and the federal insurance administration with an annual report on forms as provided by the
federal insurance administration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 387/923
2. The planning services division shall maintain the records of lowest floor elevations, floodproofing certifications,
permit applications, and all variance documents required by the federal insurance administration.
J. Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger
floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This section does not imply that
development either inside or outside the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This section does not create
liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from proper reliance
on this section or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
K. Identification Required: It is a requirement of the NFIP that regulatory floodway is identified. Within any floodway
identified on the flood insurance rate map, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated,
the following standards shall apply:
1. No development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development will
cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. These developments are
outlined by the IDNR/OWR statewide permit 2-13.
2. The floodway for the floodplains of Crab Orchard Creek, Glade Creek, Little Crab Orchard Creek, Piles Fork
Creek, and Carbondale Reservoir shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map as prepared
by FEMA. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of Carbondale shall be according to the best data
available from federal, state, or other sources. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8: F FORESTRY DISTRICT:
15.2.8.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established primarily as a conservation measure to preserve for existing and future generations a part of
the ecological balance between man and his natural environment. Through the maintenance of large areas of land
devoted to woodlands, much benefit can be derived by many people in the form of diminished air and water pollution and
soil erosion; cover for wildlife and flora; and the preservation of related natural resources located therein. These
designated areas may be located along the rivers and streams, the hills, or level areas within the jurisdiction of this title.
Once established, no forestry district shall be diminished in size for any purpose except public health, safety or
recreation in which case the city council shall take extreme care in permitting a special use. Such land designated as a
forestry district will be publicly owned or owned by a nonprofit land conservancy. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the F column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this
chapter shall be allowed in the forestry district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel. See section
15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the F column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 388/923
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.5: SPECIAL USE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
None. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.6: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Not applicable. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.7: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
Not applicable. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.8: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
Not applicable. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.8.9: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Not applicable. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9: AG GENERAL AGRICULTURE DISTRICT:
15.2.9.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to provide land for purposes devoted primarily to the production of agricultural products such as
field crops, livestock, fowl and other conventional agricultural pursuits. Other limited compatible uses are also permitted.
This district is also created to assist in the conservation of the natural resources within the jurisdiction of this title by
encouraging practices which will conserve soil, soil resources, water, water resources, and prevent soil erosion and
floodwater damages. Utilities other than electricity and telecommunications should be provided by the land user thereby
discouraging the uneconomical extension of public water supply and sewage disposal facilities. Uses not related to
agriculture are discouraged. When the public interest will be served and only when a contribution will be made to orderly
growth, portions of this district may be rezoned for alternative uses. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the AG column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the general agriculture district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel, including,
but not limited to:
Artificial lakes.
Home occupation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 389/923
Living quarters for a person employed on the premises and his/her family on parcels ten (10) acres or more.
Market facilities for sale of farm produced goods.
Open storage incidental to a permitted principal use for commercial purposes other than agricultural production is
allowed in this district, subject to the standards of section 15.4.5 of this title.
B. Junkyards are strictly prohibited.
C. See section 15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the AG column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Five (5) acres for permitted uses. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
One hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Eighty feet (80') along federal or state highways; sixty feet (60') along other public roads. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Ten percent (10%) of lot width on each side, but shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') and need not be more than thirty
feet (30'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.10: SPECIAL YARD REQUIREMENTS:
No structures or enclosed pens in which livestock, fowl, and animals are kept shall be closer than two hundred feet
(200') from any residential or commercial structure on an adjacent property, except chicken coops containing six (6) or
fewer chickens in conformity with title 3 of this code. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 390/923
15.2.9.11: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Not applicable. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.12: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.13: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
For the principal residential structure, one family plus one person not related to the family. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.9.14: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
No more than one principal residential structure is permitted on any single lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10: RR RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
15.2.10.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to provide areas for large lot single-unit residential purposes wherein utilities other than
electricity may be provided by the land user. Any land designated for this use shall have a minimum of ten (10)
contiguous acres including any public right of way for each RR district so established. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.2: MINIMUM DISTRICT SIZE:
Ten (10) contiguous acres. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.3: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the RR column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the rural residential district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel, including,
but not limited to:
Artificial lakes.
Livestock for personal use.
Noncommercial greenhouses.
B. See section 15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.5: SPECIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 391/923
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the RR column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.6: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
One acre. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.7: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
No more than one principal residential structure is permitted on any single lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.8: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
One hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.9: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.10: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.11: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Ten percent (10%) of lot width on each side, but shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') and need not be more than thirty
feet (30'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.12: SPECIAL YARD REQUIREMENTS:
No structures or enclosed pens in which livestock, fowl and animals are kept shall be closer than two hundred feet (200')
from any residential or commercial structure on an adjacent property, except chicken coops containing six (6) or fewer
chickens in conformity with title 3 of this code. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.13: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.10.14: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY; SINGLE-UNIT DWELLINGS:
One family plus one person not related to the family. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 392/923
15.2.10.15: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title or in the special use performance standards. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11: R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
15.2.11.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to provide areas for single-unit residential purposes, and to provide maximum protection from
the encroachment of other types of uses which are not appropriate to low density residential areas. Other reasons for the
establishment of these districts are: to maintain a quiet atmosphere within the districts; to discourage incompatible uses
within the district. Care has been taken and shall be taken in the delineation and expansion of these districts to assure
that adequate public water is available and that individual sewage disposal systems will not be required. Four (4) such
districts are established with varying lot sizes and densities (R-1-15, R-1-12, R-1-8, R-1-5). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.2: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
No more than one principal structure shall be located on any single lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.3: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the R-1 column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the R-1 low density residential district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel. See section
15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.5: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the R-1 column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.6: PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE LOCATION:
In no case shall the principal entrance to a dwelling exit into a side yard, as shown in the following illustration:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 393/923
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.7: AVERAGE LOT AREA:
The average lot area for each district is detailed in the table below subject to the following provisions:
A. No lot shall be ten percent (10%) less than the average minimum.
B. At least seventy five percent (75%) of the lots shall be of the average size.
C. The average lot size shall be designed to meet all other minimum code requirements for lots within this district.
D. The average lot size shall be applied to all lots within an individual subdivision developed after the adoption of this title
and shall not be applied retroactively.
AVERAGE LOT AREA
District
Average Lot Area
(Square Feet)
R-1-15 15,000
R-1-12 12,000
R-1-8 8,000
R-1-5 5,000
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.8: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
District
Minimum Lot Width
(Feet)
R-1-15 85
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 394/923
R-1-12 75
R-1-8 65
R-1-5 50
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.9: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
The minimum front yard depth is detailed in the table below. Subdivisions developed before 1974 will be allowed to
calculate an average front yard depth based on the following guidelines:
A. Only those subdivisions developed before 1974 will be allowed to calculate an average front yard depth.
B. The average front yard depth shall be calculated based upon the front yard setback for all homes located within the
block. For the purpose of this section, the block shall be identified as all homes with frontage on the same street that
are located between the two (2) nearest public/private streets.
MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH
District Minimum Front Yard Depth
R-1-15 30 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
R-1-12 30 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
R-1-8 25 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
R-1-5 25 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.10: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 395/923
MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH
District
Minimum Rear Yard
(Feet)
R-1-15 15
R-1-12 15
R-1-8 15
R-1-5 15
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.11: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH FOR ALL R-1 DISTRICTS:
Ten percent (10%) of lot width on each side, but shall not be less than five feet (5') and need not be more than fifteen
feet (15'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.12: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA
District
Minimum Floor Area (Square
Feet, Exclusive Of Garage)
R-1-15 1,200
R-1-12 1,200
R-1-8 1,000
R-1-5 800
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.13: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.14: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY; SINGLE-UNIT DWELLING:
One family plus one person not related to the family. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.11.15: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title or in the special use performance standards. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12: R-1-D LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, TWO-UNIT DWELLINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 396/923
15.2.12.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to provide areas for single- and two-unit residential purposes. Persons and families residing in
this district are entitled to protection from the encroachment of other types of uses not compatible with low to medium
density residential areas. In relation to R-1 (low density residential) districts, the R-1-D district is intended to provide for
high traffic flow; maintain a relatively quiet atmosphere; provide adequate open space; and discourage incompatible
uses while serving as a buffer between single-unit residential districts and medium to high density residential districts.
Adequate public water and municipal sanitary sewer service is required. Four (4) such districts are established with
varying lot sizes and densities (R-1-15D, R-1-12D, R-1-8D, R-1-5D). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.2: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
No more than one principal structure shall be located on a single lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.3: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the R-1-D column on the use table in section 15.2.28
of this chapter shall be allowed in the R-1-D low density residential district, two-unit dwellings district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel. See section
15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.5: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the R-1-D column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.6: PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE LOCATION:
In no case shall the principal entrance to a dwelling exit into a side yard. For an illustration of the permitted locations for
a principal entrance, please refer to section 15.2.11.6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.7: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Uses
Minimum Lot Area By District
(Square Feet)
R-1-5D R-1-8D R-1-12D R-1-15D
Single-unit dwelling 5,000 8,000 12,000 15,000
Condominiums, townhouses on separate lots 2,500 4,000 6,000 7,500
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 397/923
Two-unit dwelling (per building) 5,000 8,000 12,000 15,000
Two-unit dwelling (per unit) 2,500 4,000 6,000 7,500
Nonresidential uses 5,000 8,000 12,000 15,000
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.8: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH BY DISTRICT AND USE
Districts 1 DU Townhouse Duplex
R-1-15D 85' 70' 140'
R-1-12D 75' 60' 120'
R-1-8D 65' 50' 100'
R-1-5D 50' 40' 80'
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.9: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH
District Minimum Front Yard Depth
R-1-15D 30 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
R-1-12D 30 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
R-1-8D 25 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
R-1-5D 25 feet or 20 percent of lot depth, whichever is less
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.10: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
Fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.11: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Ten percent (10%) of lot width on each side but shall not be less than eight feet (8') and need not be more than fifteen
feet (15') with the exception of townhouses which may be constructed up to side lot lines where they abut another
townhouse. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.12: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 398/923
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR EACH UNIT,
EXCLUSIVE OF GARAGE
District
Standard
(Square Feet)
R-1-15D 1,200
R-1-12D 1,200
R-1-8D 800
R-1-5D 800
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.13: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.14: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
A. Maximum occupancy for single-unit dwellings including townhouses, two-unit dwellings, condominiums (residential)
with two (2) or fewer units: One family plus one person per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.12.15: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13: R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
15.2.13.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
A. This district is established to provide areas for single-, two-, three- and four-unit residential purposes. Persons and
families residing in this district are entitled to protection from the encroachment of other types of uses which are not
appropriate to medium density residential areas.
B. In relation to R-1 (low density residential) districts, the R-2 district is intended to provide for higher traffic flow; maintain
a relatively quiet atmosphere; discourage incompatible uses; provide less, but adequate open space. Care has been
taken and shall be taken in the delineation and expansion of this district to assure that adequate public water is
available and that individual sewage disposal systems will not be required. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.2: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
No more than one principal structure shall be located on a single lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.3: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 399/923
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the R-2 column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the R-2 medium density residential district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel. See section
15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.5: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the R-2 column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.6: PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE LOCATION:
In no case shall the principal entrance to a dwelling exit into a side yard, as shown in the illustration located in section
15.2.11.6 of this chapter. In buildings containing more than two (2) units, this provision shall only apply to the first two (2)
units. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.7: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
Land Use
Lot Area
(Square Feet)
Single-unit dwellings 5,000
Townhouses on separate lots 2,500
Two-, three- and four-unit dwellings 3,300 per dwelling unit
Nonresidential 7,000
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.8: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
Fifty feet (50'); except townhouses on separate lots, twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.9: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Twenty five feet (25') or twenty percent (20%) of lot depth, whichever is less. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.10: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 400/923
Fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.11: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Ten percent (10%) of lot width on each side but shall not be less than eight feet (8') and need not be more than fifteen
feet (15') with the exception of townhouses which may be constructed up to side lot lines where they abut another
townhouse. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.12: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
Six hundred (600) square feet per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.13: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.14: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
One family per dwelling unit plus one person; or two (2) persons for the first three hundred (300) square feet of floor area
plus one person for each additional two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.13.15: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14: R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
15.2.14.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to allow more intensive residential development including multi-unit structures, and also to provide
for adequate off street parking and open space. It will permit a larger variety of uses which are not incompatible with the
aims of this district, which shall be predominantly residential in character. Adequate public water and sewer are to be
available to meet the needs of this high density residential area and shall be available in any additional area proposed
for this district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.2: MAXIMUM INTENSITY/DENSITY:
A. Residential Uses: The maximum residential density allowed for a site in the R-3 zoning district is eighteen (18)
dwelling units per acre with a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.400.
B. Minimum Open Space: An R-3 development shall include recreational space of two hundred (200) square feet for
each dwelling unit in the proposed project. Recreation space shall maintain a minimum width of twenty feet (20') in
order to be considered recreation space. Required recreation space shall be deed restricted to maintain its character
as open space which shall not be paved or covered in any way except as allowed by this section. Play equipment for
children with pervious, safe, ground cover may be allowed in the open space and shall not be considered cover. Up
to twenty percent (20%) of the required recreation space for a project may be covered by tennis courts, swimming
pools or other hard surfaces designed for recreational use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 401/923
C. Limitations: The stated density limitation is an absolute maximum that can be achieved only through careful design.
Providing required off street parking, required buffers and required recreation space will limit the effective density on
many sites. The varied height standard of section 15.2.14.11 of this chapter may also limit the effective achievable
density on some sites. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.3: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
No restrictions. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.4: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the R-3 column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the R-3 high density residential district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.5: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel.
B. No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, HVAC equipment or similar uses shall be
located within twenty five feet (25') of any public street, public sidewalk, or property zoned R-1 or R-2. See section
15.4.5 of this title for additional standards for open storage.
C. See section 15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.6: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the R-3 column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.7: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
A. Residential uses: Five thousand (5,000) square feet minimum except townhouses on separate lots two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet minimum.
B. Nonresidential uses: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.8: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
A. Residential uses: None.
B. Nonresidential uses: Fifty feet (50') if on a separate lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.9: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 402/923
No structures shall be constructed within ten feet (10') of any property line of a project, with the exception of townhouses
which may be constructed up to side lot lines where they abut another townhouse. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.10: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
A. Multiple-unit dwellings, per dwelling unit exclusive of garages: Three hundred (300) square feet.
B. Rooming houses, fraternities, sororities, or dormitories: Three hundred (300) square feet plus two hundred (200)
square feet per bed in accordance with design capacity.
C. Single-unit, two-unit, three-unit and four-unit dwellings: Six hundred (600) square feet per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.2.14.11: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
One hundred twenty five feet (125') but no building shall exceed a height of thirty feet (30') plus one additional foot for
each two feet (2') of horizontal separation between the building and the nearest portion of any R-1 zoning district. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.14.12: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
One family per dwelling unit plus one person; or two (2) persons for the first three hundred (300) square feet of floor area
plus one person for each additional two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.14.13: OTHER DESIGN STANDARDS:
See section 15.4.7.1 of this title for additional design standards that apply to certain buildings in this district. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.2.14.14: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Off street parking and loading shall conform to section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15: PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT:
15.2.15.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to permit such flexibility and provide performance criteria which can result in planned
residential developments which produce:
A. A greater choice in the type of environment and living units available to the public;
B. Open space and recreation areas;
C. A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural topography and geological features and
prevents soil erosion;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 403/923
D. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical development;
E. An efficient use of land resulting in more efficient use of utilities and streets;
F. An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding development;
G. A more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of other sections of this title.
The planned unit development section is designed to provide for small and large scale developments incorporating a
single type or a variety of residential and related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development
may consist of individual lots or it may group buildings on combinations of lots or tracts of land. Open space for
common use must be a major element of the plan. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Residential uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the PUD column on the use table in section 15.2.28
of this chapter shall be allowed in the PUD planned unit development district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same parcel. See section
15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures.
B. Commercial and institutional uses in conjunction with a residential development as shown with a "P" in the PUD
column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter shall be allowed in the PUD planned unit development
district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the PUD column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
A. For land within the corporate limits a minimum tract of one acre for the entire development.
B. For land outside the corporate limits a minimum tract of four (4) acres for the entire development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
One hundred fifty feet (150') for the entire development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 404/923
Twenty feet (20') for entire development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
Twenty feet (20') for entire development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Twenty feet (20') for entire development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.10: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
One family per dwelling unit plus one person; or two (2) persons for the first three hundred (300) square feet of floor area
plus one person for each additional two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.11: OTHER DESIGN STANDARDS:
See section 15.4.7.1 of this title for additional design standards that apply to certain buildings in this district. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.2.15.12: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
As required by section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.13: MAXIMUM INTENSITY/DENSITY:
A. Residential Uses: The maximum residential density allowed for a site in any PUD zoning district is twenty five (25)
dwelling units per acre with a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 0.600.
B. Commercial Uses: Permitted commercial uses may be substituted for residential uses at a rate of two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet of commercial space for each fifty (50) dwelling units subject to section 15.2.15.15 of this
chapter.
C. Minimum Recreation Space:
1. A PUD development shall include recreational space of two hundred (200) square feet for each of the first fifty (50)
dwelling units and one hundred (100) square feet of recreational space for each unit thereafter in the proposed
project. Recreation space shall maintain a minimum width of fifty feet (50') in order to be considered recreation
space. Required recreation space shall be deed restricted to maintain its character as open space which shall not
be paved or covered in any way except as allowed by this section. Play equipment for children with pervious, safe,
ground cover may be allowed in the open space and shall not be considered cover. Up to twenty percent (20%) of
the required recreation space for a project may be covered by tennis courts, swimming pools or other hard
surfaces designed for recreational use.
2. In a PUD development requiring a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of recreation space, the least
dimension shall not be less than one hundred feet (100').
D. Limitations: The stated density limitation is an absolute maximum that can be achieved only through careful design.
Providing required off street parking, required buffers and required open space will limit the effective density on many
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 405/923
sites. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.14: PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING:
A. Zoning Review: Preliminary plan required in order to establish the planned unit development zone and land use
pattern.
1. A planned unit development zone may be permitted by the city council only after a public hearing by the planning
commission. The developer shall present plans, reports and related information in sufficient detail to enable the
planning commission to evaluate the proposed planned unit development in accordance with this section. Such
plans shall be in accordance with this section. Such plans shall be of a general nature showing the schematic
design of the planned unit development and contain the following:
a. Legal description of property to be zoned.
b. Location, number, and type of structures proposed for various sections of the development.
c. Locations of internal streets with right of way widths indicated and their relationship to existing neighborhood
streets and thoroughfare plan.
d. Location and area of semipublic recreation areas.
e. General utility layout and location of any public utility sites (i.e., power substations, water, sanitary sewer, and
storm sewer lines, etc.).
f. Location and size of any commercial areas.
g. Map showing relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan with particular emphasis on
relationship to adjoining uses.
h. Tabulation of total land areas and percentages devoted to each use.
i. Intensity/density numbers required for such a development.
j. Proposed parking lot locations and capacities.
k. Proposed staging of development (if any).
2. A date for a public hearing shall not be set until all of the above required information has been presented to the
administrative official. Upon receipt of the preliminary plans, the administrative official shall schedule a public
hearing before the planning commission.
3. In reviewing the planned unit development zoning, the commission shall determine if:
a. There is reasonable justification for the planned unit development zoning at the proposed location.
b. The planned unit development zoning and the assigned density will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor diminish and impair property
values within the neighborhood.
c. The establishment of the planned unit development zoning will not impede the normal and orderly development
and improvement of surrounding property.
d. The proposed planned unit development zoning will permit and encourage an environment of sustained
desirability and stability, and that it will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
e. The district will conform to the policies and goals of the comprehensive plan for the city and will be consistent
with the intention of this title.
f. Community facilities, including schools, parks, sewer and water systems are adequate to provide properly for the
proposed development.
4. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on the appropriateness of the proposed
planned unit development. The commission shall give special consideration to the density of the existing,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 406/923
surrounding land uses and the density suggested by the comprehensive plan for the area.
5. After the hearing, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council for denial or approval
of the planned unit development zoning. The city council shall deny or approve the planned unit development
zoning and establish a maximum FAR.
B. Design Review: Final plan required for design review and approval of the planned unit development.
1. The applicant shall submit final plans for design approval within the eighteen (18) months after the planned unit
development zoning approval. If more than eighteen (18) months elapse after zoning approval and final plans have
not been submitted to the administrative official, the planning services division shall notify the city council. An
extension in this time limit may be granted by the city council if good cause can be shown by the applicant. If such
time extension is not granted, the planning services division shall begin proceedings to have the land rezoned to its
previous zoning district designation.
2. Upon receipt of the final plans, the administrative official shall process the plans in the manner prescribed in the
site plan procedure as delineated in section 15.6.10 of this title. The administrative official shall notify all property
owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the proposed development by regular mail that a final PUD plan has
been submitted and is available for public review in the planning office. This notice shall be sent no later than
fifteen (15) days prior to city council review.
3. Upon DAC review, the administrative official shall only indicate tentative approval of the site plan and final plans.
Upon granting tentative approval, the administrative official shall schedule a meeting before the city council for the
design review of the planned unit development. These plans shall establish the design standards for the planned
unit development.
4. In addition to the information required by sections 15.6.10.3 and 15.6.10.4 of this title, the final development plan
shall include:
a. Delineation of development staging; each development stage must have final plan approval.
b. Any variation from schematic plan approved at the time of zoning review.
c. Tabulation of total land areas and percentages thereof designated for various uses.
d. Covenants (proposed and existing).
5. In reviewing the planned unit development design plan, the city council shall determine if:
a. The elements of the plan are arranged and designed to reflect the principles and objectives of the intent of this
title.
b. The design of the planned unit development will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general
welfare.
The city council shall approve or deny said final development plan within forty five (45) days after receipt of said
plans from the administrative official. If the city council grants final development plan approval, the city
administration may then grant final site plan approval to the development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.15: PERFORMANCE STANDARD:
A. Commercial areas may be in a separate structure or incorporated with a residential structure. The following
requirements shall be met before any commercial uses may be incorporated:
1. A planned unit development containing fifty (50) dwelling units shall be allowed two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of commercial space. For each additional dwelling unit, fifty (50) square feet of commercial space will
be allowed, provided that no commercial structure shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet. No commercial
space within a particular phase of development shall be occupied until one hundred percent (100%) of the dwelling
units within that phase are complete.
2. The structure, if separate, shall be of an architectural design compatible with that of the dwelling units.
3. One parking space for every four hundred (400) square feet of commercial floor area shall be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 407/923
4. Signs shall be limited to an identification sign at each access point to the commercial building. (See section
15.4.10.7 of this title.)
B. The method for providing water and sewage service must be reviewed by the development assistance committee
before the city council approves the final plans.
C. All utilities must be underground.
D. Satisfactory arrangements shall be made for improving, operating, and maintaining common facilities including
streets, drives, parking areas, open spaces, and recreation areas before the city council approves the final plans.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.15.16: RECORDING OF FINAL PLANS AND EFFECT THEREOF:
A. Plans Recorded And Kept On File: After approval by the city council, the final development plans shall be recorded
with the city clerk and also kept on file in the office of the administrative official.
B. Minor Changes: All final plans recorded hereunder shall be binding upon the applicants therefor, their successors and
assigns; shall limit and control issuance and validity of all zoning permits; and shall restrict and limit the construction,
location, use and operation of all land and structures included within such plans to all conditions and limitations set
forth in such plans; provided however, that upon application to and approval by the planning services division minor
changes may be permitted if such minor changes will not cause any of the following to occur:
1. A change in the character of the development.
2. An increase in the floor area.
3. An increase in the intensity of use.
4. A reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings.
5. An increase of the problems of circulation, safety and utilities.
6. Any detrimental effects on adjacent property.
7. A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property lines.
8. An increase in ground coverage by structures.
9. A reduction in the ratio of off street parking and loading space to gross floor area in the structures.
10. A change in the subject, size, lighting, or orientation of originally approved signs.
C. Building Permit: After city council approval of the final plans, the applicant shall have eighteen (18) months to obtain a
building permit and start construction. If more than eighteen (18) months' time elapses after final plan approval and
construction has not begun, the planning services division shall notify the city council. An extension of this time limit
may be granted by the city council if good cause can be shown by the applicant. If such time extension is not granted,
the planning services division shall begin proceedings to have the land rezoned to its previous zoning district
designation.
D. Alterations Or Additions To Recorded Final Plans: Any alteration or additions to recorded final plans other than as
provided in subsection B of this section of this section shall require approval in the same manner as final plans as
provided in this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16: RMH PLANNED MOBILE HOME DISTRICT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 408/923
15.2.16.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to provide areas in which mobile home parks may be situated for residential dwelling purposes. It
is the intent that this district be a desirable permanent area providing adequate open space, and essentially the same
considerations be given to residents as are given to residents of R-1 and R-2 districts. The property should not be within
an area used nor planned for industrial development, nor should the occupants of the proposed parks be, in any way,
adversely affected by nearby existing or planned industrial uses. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the RMH column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the planned mobile home district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures and on the same parcel, including,
but not limited to:
A. One single-unit dwelling of conventional construction per mobile home park for occupancy by the manager of the park
and his family.
B. Storage buildings.
C. See section 15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the RMH column on the use table in section 15.2.28 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control uses. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.2.16.5: MINIMUM AREA FOR MOBILE HOME PARK:
One acre. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.6: MINIMUM WIDTH FOR MOBILE HOME PARK:
Two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH FOR ENTIRE MOBILE HOME PARK:
Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 409/923
15.2.16.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH FOR ENTIRE MOBILE HOME PARK:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH FOR ENTIRE MOBILE HOME PARK:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.10: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.11: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
One family per dwelling unit plus one person; or two (2) persons for the first three hundred (300) square feet of floor
area, plus one person for each additional two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.12: MOBILE HOME PARK PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Site Requirements:
1. All mobile homes shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all internal private roads.
2. The minimum distance required for the separation of a mobile home from any other mobile home or other building
shall be fifteen feet (15').
3. An RMH development shall include landscaped open space of two hundred (200) square feet for each dwelling
unit in the proposed project. Landscaped buffers required under section 15.4.1.6 of this title may be counted
toward half the required open space, but at least half the required open space shall be designed for use by
residents of the project as active or passive recreation space separate from the buffers. Required open space shall
be deed restricted to maintain its character as open space which shall not be paved or covered in any way except
as allowed by this section. Play equipment for children with pervious, safe ground cover may be allowed in the
open space and shall not be considered cover. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the required open space for a project
may be covered by tennis courts, swimming pools or other hard surfaces designed for recreational use. All other
required open space shall be landscaped in accordance with section 15.4.1.3 of this title. All utilities such as sewer,
water, electricity, gas, oil, telephone, and cable television, shall be placed underground.
4. A six foot (6') ornamental wall, chainlink fence with slats, or other ornamental fence, dense evergreen hedges (to
have attained a height of 6 feet in not more than 3 years) or a combination of the above shall be constructed along
property lines contiguous to areas of existing conventional residential construction and subject to the provision of
architectural review by the planning services division.
5. A landscaping plan of the proposed park, including at least one tree per mobile home lot of at least one and onehalf
inch (11/2") diameter measured three feet (3') aboveground, shall be submitted for approval by the
administrative official. No more than thirty percent (30%) of the landscaped area may be maintained in ornamental
rock or gravel.
B. Access And Street Requirements:
1. All mobile home lots must be served from internal private streets within the mobile home park and there shall be no
direct access from a mobile home lot to a public street or alley.
2. The minimum number of required parking spaces shall conform with section 15.4.8 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 410/923
3. All interior private streets shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in width which may include parking areas.
However, a minimum of ten feet (10') for a one-way street or twenty feet (20') for a two-way street shall be reserved
for traffic lanes and shall not contain any parking. All streets and parking areas shall be paved with hot mix asphalt,
concrete, or the equivalent thereof surfacing which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and
weather conditions.
4. No internal private street access to public streets shall be located closer than one hundred twenty five feet (125') to
any public street intersection.
5. All interior cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum outside turning radius of thirty eight feet (38').
6. All interior private street corners shall have a minimum fifteen foot (15') radius.
7. All streets shall be lighted in accordance with the standards of the city and the state for mobile home parks.
8. Stop signs shall be placed at all intersections involving public streets and yield signs placed appropriately on
internal private streets.
C. Additional Facilities:
1. Each mobile home park shall provide screened areas for refuse disposal of an adequate size for the number of
units served, and shall provide for the collection of such refuse on a regularly scheduled basis. The location of such
trash collection points shall not be more than two hundred feet (200') from any mobile home measured along an all
weather surface.
2. Each mobile home park shall be responsible to ensure that storage area is provided containing a minimum of two
hundred (200) cubic feet of space capable of being locked for each rental mobile home. Such facilities shall be
provided on each individual lot or in centralized locations not more than one hundred feet (100') from each lot
served. Such storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will not detract from the appearance of the
development and shall be constructed of a suitable weatherproof material. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.16.13: PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING RMH ZONING:
A. The procedure for granting RMH zoning approval shall follow the procedures established in subsections 15.2.15.14A,
B, and 15.2.15.16D, and section 15.2.15.15 of this chapter.
B. Prior to the beginning of construction, a set of final plans shall be provided to the planning services division for review
to determine compliance with the performance standards of section 15.2.16.12 of this chapter. No construction shall
begin until the planning services division certifies the plan's compliance. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17: NB NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT:
15.2.17.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to encourage the adaptive reuse of nonresidential buildings constructed in residentially zoned
neighborhoods. The application of this district should increase the quality of life within neighborhoods by allowing
nonresidential buildings to be used in a manner that has a positive impact rather than serve as a blighting force.
Proposed uses should cater to the surrounding neighborhoods but may also need to have a broad community appeal in
order to be economically viable. There should be a focus on providing pedestrian friendly options that encourage walking
and biking, and eliminates the need for large parking areas. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.2: ELIGIBLE PROPERTIES:
Those properties that contain a structure originally constructed for nonresidential purposes and any related parking that
are located in a residentially zoned district, may apply for a rezoning to neighborhood business. Adjoining properties not
associated with the nonresidential structure/parking area may be included in the NB district only upon approval by a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 411/923
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required. (Ord. 2014-
48)
15.2.17.3: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the NB column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the neighborhood business district. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.5: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the NB column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control uses.
C. When reviewing a request for a special use, the planning commission should consider the additional criteria outlined
in subsection 15.6.8.2C of this title. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.6: DISTRICT SIZE:
The size of the district shall be controlled by the area of the property upon which the existing nonresidential structure and
any existing parking is located. The NB district shall only extend beyond the limits of the property upon which the existing
structure/parking area is located, with approval by a favorable vote of those council members present, but at least four
(4) votes are required. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.7: MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum setback requirements (front, side, and rear) shall be considered to be the approved footprint of the
nonresidential structure at the time the rezoning request is adopted by the city council. The approved footprint may
include modifications to the existing structure. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Due to the intent of the neighborhood business district there are no minimum parking requirements, although
consideration should be given to the amount of anticipated neighborhood walk-in traffic, bicycle facilities, available on
street parking, the proposed use of the building(s), and peak time parking demands. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.9: OPEN STORAGE:
Open storage incidental to the principal use is allowed in this district, subject to the standards of section 15.4.5 of this
title. (Ord. 2014-48)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 412/923
15.2.17.10: PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONING:
A. Zoning Review: A development plan is required in order to establish the neighborhood business district.
1. A neighborhood business district may be permitted by the city council only after a public hearing by the planning
commission. The developer shall present plans in sufficient detail to enable the planning commission to evaluate
the proposed neighborhood business in accordance with this section. Such plans shall be of a general nature
showing the schematic design of the neighborhood business and contain the following:
a. Legal description of property to be zoned.
b. Location, number, and type of existing/proposed structures.
c. The distance from all existing/proposed structures to the property line(s).
d. Location and size of any signs.
e. Tabulation of total land areas and percentages devoted to each use.
f. Existing/proposed parking area locations and capacities.
g. Existing/proposed bicycle facilities.
h. Any proposed open storage.
i. Any proposed modifications to the exterior of the building.
2. A date for a public hearing shall not be set until all of the above required information has been presented to the
administrative official. Upon receipt of the preliminary plans, the administrative official shall schedule a public
hearing before the planning commission.
3. In reviewing the neighborhood business district, the commission shall determine if:
a. The property meets all eligibility requirements as detailed in this section.
b. There is reasonable justification for the neighborhood business district at the proposed location.
c. The neighborhood business district will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the
immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood.
d. The establishment of the neighborhood business district will not impede the normal and orderly development
and improvement of surrounding property.
e. The proposed neighborhood business district will permit and encourage an environment of sustained desirability
and stability, and that it will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
f. The district will conform to the policies and goals of the comprehensive plan for the city and will be consistent
with the intention of this title.
4. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council for denial or approval of the
neighborhood business zoning. The commission shall give special consideration to the density of the existing,
surrounding land uses and the density suggested by the comprehensive plan for the area. The city council shall
deny or approve the neighborhood business zoning. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.17.11: PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING A MODIFICATION TO AN EXISTING NEIGHBORHOOD
BUSINESS ZONE:
A. Modification Review:
1. Modifications may be allowed within a previously adopted neighborhood business district upon city council review
and action. The following modifications may be made to a previously adopted neighborhood business zone:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 413/923
a. An expansion of the building footprint.
(1) An expansion of the building footprint shall be subject to review by the planning commission in accordance
with the procedures outlined in section 15.6.7.1 of this title.
b. An increase in the size or amount of accessory structures.
c. An increase in the amount of parking stalls.
d. An increase in the size, location, or amount of signs.
e. A modification to the exterior of the building.
2. The developer shall present plans in sufficient detail to enable the city council to evaluate the proposed
modifications to the neighborhood business district in accordance with this section. Such plans shall be of a
general nature showing the schematic design of the proposed modifications to the neighborhood business and
contain the following:
a. Location and type of proposed modification.
b. The distance from all proposed additions/structures to the property line(s).
c. Proposed additional parking stall locations with dimensions.
3. Upon receipt of the modified plans, the administrative official shall notify all property owners within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the neighborhood business district by regular mail that a modification to the district has been
submitted and is available for public review in the planning office. A notification shall also be given utilizing the
neighborhood notification program outlined in section 15.6.13 of this title. Both notices shall be sent no later than
fifteen (15) days prior to city council review of the modified plans.
4. In reviewing the modification to the neighborhood business district, the city council shall determine if:
a. The proposed modifications are arranged and designed to reflect the principles and objectives of the
neighborhood business district.
b. The proposed modifications will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the
surrounding neighborhood.
5. The city council shall approve or deny the proposed modification within forty five (45) days after receipt of said
modification from the administrative official. If the city council grants approval of the modification, the administrative
official may then issue permits authorizing the modification. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.18: PAR PROFESSIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
15.2.18.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This residential district is created to provide appropriately located areas for harmonious intermediate uses to serve as
buffers between residential districts and nonresidential districts; to create a suitable environment for professional and
administrative office buildings compatible with surrounding residential uses; specially designed for such purposes and
located on sites large enough to provide room for landscaping, open spaces, and off street parking facilities; to minimize
traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities. It is intended that this district preserve the residential
appearance and character of a neighborhood. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.18.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the PAR column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the PAR professional administrative office, residential district. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.18.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 414/923
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and structures and on the same parcel.
(Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.18.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the PAR column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Six thousand (6,000) square feet. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
Fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Twenty five feet (25') or twenty percent (20%) of lot depth, whichever is less. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
Fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Ten percent (10%) of lot width on each side but shall not be less than eight feet (8') and need not be more than fifteen
feet (15'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.10: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.11: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title, and located no closer to a public street than any principal building on the lot. In
the case of corner lots or through lots, parking can be located no closer to the public street with the highest average daily
traffic count than any principal building is located to that street. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.18.12: NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PERMITTED:
No more than one principal structure shall be located on any single lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 415/923
15.2.19: PA PROFESSIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE DISTRICT:
15.2.19.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to reserve appropriately located areas for harmonious intermediate uses to serve as buffers
between residential districts and nonresidential districts; to create a suitable environment for professional and
administrative office buildings, specially designed for such purposes and located on sites large enough to provide room
for landscaping, open spaces, and off street parking facilities; to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading
of utilities. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the PA column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the PA professional administrative office district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to a permitted principal use and structure and on the same parcel.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the PA column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Six thousand (6,000) square feet. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
Fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Ten feet (10'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH AND SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Where use abuts a residential district and is not separated from the district by a street or alley, side and rear yard
requirements shall conform to those of the abutting residential zone. Otherwise, none required for structures up through
three (3) stories, and two feet (2') required at grade for each story over three (3) stories. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 416/923
15.2.19.9: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
One hundred twenty five feet (125'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.19.10: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20: SB SECONDARY BUSINESS DISTRICT:
15.2.20.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to provide areas for certain commercial, service, and public uses adjacent to or near major
thoroughfares. The permitted uses in this district are of a type which more typically serves consumers on special
purpose trips and are therefore not as dependent on being associated with other uses. It is intended that all uses,
including accessory uses, in this district provide an appropriate amount of off street parking and loading facilities. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.20.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the SB column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the SB secondary business district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures. See section 15.3.4.1 of this title
for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the SB column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
Seventy feet (70'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 417/923
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
None required; however, this provision shall not be construed to eliminate any required off street loading. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
None required on interior lots; however, this provision shall not be construed to eliminate any required off street loading.
Twenty feet (20') for corner lots on second street frontage. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.10: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.11: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.20.12: OPEN STORAGE:
Open storage incidental to the principal use is allowed in this district, subject to the standards of section 15.4.5 of this
title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21: BPL PLANNED BUSINESS DISTRICT:
15.2.21.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to provide for planned shopping centers. It is intended to promote the grouping of commercial
uses and provide areas large enough to establish harmonious relationships between structures, people, and the
automobile with the use of well planned parking and access, pedestrian walkways, courtyards, malls, and open spaces.
Strip type development is discouraged. Developments which exist at the time this title was adopted may be included in a
BPL district because they are similar in use and character to the permitted uses of this district and this statement of
intent. Also, certain areas, which lend themselves appropriately to this statement of intent but which, on the effective
date hereof are not occupied by commercial uses, but have strong pressures to be used as such, have been classified
BPL. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the BPL column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the BPL planned business district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Only those accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 418/923
B. No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, HVAC equipment or similar uses shall be
located within twenty five feet (25') of any public street, public sidewalk, or property zoned R-1 or R-2. See section
15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the BPL column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
One hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.21.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
A. Ten feet (10') for stand alone developments.
B. Lots as part of a contiguous development may have zero lot line construction when adjoining another building. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.21.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
A. Ten feet (10') for stand alone developments.
B. Lots as part of a contiguous development may have zero lot line construction when adjoining another building. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.21.10: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Parking: Spaces and design standards as required in section 15.4.8 of this title.
B. Loading: Loading spaces as required in section 15.4.8 of this title. Off street loading facilities shall be provided as
distinctly separated from parking lots and designed so as there will be a minimum or no conflict with parking lots.
(Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 419/923
15.2.21.11: PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING THE BPL DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION:
A. Zoning Review: Preliminary plan required in order to establish the BPL planned business district zoning designation.
1. Planned business zoning requires a public hearing before the planning commission. The developer shall present
plans, reports and related information in sufficient detail to enable the planning commission to evaluate the
proposed planned business district in accordance with this section. Such plans shall be of a general nature
showing the schematic design of the planned business district and contain the following:
a. Legal description of property to be zoned.
b. Location of the district boundaries.
c. Location, number, and type of structures proposed for various areas in the development.
d. Location of internal streets with right of way widths indicated and their relationship to existing neighborhood
streets and the thoroughfare plan.
e. Location of proposed curb cuts.
f. Location of proposed parking area.
g. Location and size of public utilities and power substations.
h. Map showing relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan with particular emphasis on
relationship to adjoining zones.
A date for a public hearing shall not be set until all of the above required information has been presented to the
administrative official. Upon receipt of the preliminary plans, the administrative official shall schedule a public
hearing before the planning commission.
2. In reviewing the planned business zoning, the commission shall determine if:
a. There is reasonable justification for a planned business district at the proposed location.
b. The planned business district will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate
vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
c. The establishment of the planned business district will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of surrounding property.
d. The proposed planned business district will permit and encourage an environment of sustained desirability and
stability, and that it will be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
e. The district will conform to the policies and goals of the city's comprehensive plan and will be consistent with the
intent of this title.
After the hearing, the planning commission within fifteen (15) days shall make a recommendation to the city
council for denial or approval of the planned business zoning. The city council shall deny or approve the planned
business zoning.
B. Final Plan Design Review And Approval: Final plan required for design review and approval of the planned business
development.
1. The applicant shall submit final plans for design approval within eighteen (18) months after planned business
zoning approval. If more than eighteen (18) months elapse after zoning approval and final plans have not been
submitted to the administrative official, the planning services division shall notify the city council. An extension to
the eighteen (18) month time limit may be granted by the city council if good cause is shown by the applicant. If
such extension is not granted the planning services division shall begin proceedings to have the land rezoned to its
previous zoning district designation.
2. Upon receipt of the final plans, the administrative official shall process the plans in the manner prescribed in the
site plan procedure as delineated in section 15.6.10 of this title; provided, however, that the administrative official
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 420/923
shall only indicate tentative approval of the site plan and final plans. Upon granting tentative approval, the
administrative official shall schedule a meeting before the city council for the design review of the planned business
development. These plans shall establish the design and performance standards for the planned business
development.
3. In addition to the information required by section 15.6.10.3 and chapter 4 of this title, the final development plan
shall include:
a. The nature of any unique design characteristics.
b. Relationship of vehicular traffic system in regards to pedestrian traffic flow systems.
c. Delineation of development staging; each development stage must have final plan approval.
d. Location of all structures within the planned business development.
e. All landscaping (species, location and initial size).
f. Any variations from schematic plan approved at the time of zoning review.
g. Location and specification of pedestrian walkways.
h. Nature of sign system.
i. Location and nature of any drive-in facilities.
4. In reviewing the planned business development design plan the city council shall determine if:
a. The elements of the plan are arranged and designed to reflect the principles and objectives of the intent of this
section.
b. The design of the planned business development will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general
welfare.
The city council shall approve or deny said development plans within forty five (45) days after receipt of said
plans from the administrative official. After the city council grants final development plan approval, the city
administration may then grant final site plan approval to the development.
5. After approval by the city council, the final development plan shall be recorded by the city clerk and kept on file in
the office of the administrative official.
6. All final plans recorded hereunder shall be binding upon the applicants therefor, their successors and assigns, shall
limit and control issuance and validity of all zoning permits and shall restrict and limit the construction, location, use
and operation of all land and structures included within such plans to all conditions and limitations set forth in such
plans; provided, however, that upon application to and approval by the planning services division minor changes
may be permitted if such minor changes will not cause any of the following to occur:
a. A change in the character of the development.
b. An increase in the ratio of the gross floor area in structures to the lot area.
c. An increase in the intensity of use.
d. A reduction in the originally approved separations between buildings.
e. An increase of the problems of circulation, safety and utilities.
f. Any detrimental effects on adjacent property.
g. A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property lines.
h. An increase in ground coverage by structures.
i. A reduction in the ratio of off street parking and loading space to gross floor area in the structures.
j. A change in the subject, size, lighting, or orientation of originally approved signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 421/923
7. After city council's approval of the final development plans, the applicant shall have eighteen (18) months to obtain
a building permit and start construction. If more than eighteen (18) months' time elapses after final plan approval
and construction has not begun, the planning services division shall notify the city council. However, an extension
to this time limit may be granted by the city council if good cause can be shown by the applicant. If such extension
is not granted, the planning services division shall begin proceedings to have the land rezoned to its previous
zoning district designation.
8. Any alterations or additions to recorded final plans, other than as subject to the conditions provided in subsection
B6 of this section, shall require approval in the same manner as final plans as provided in this title.
C. Procedures For Additions Or Alterations: Procedures for additions or alterations to commercial developments which
may exist on the effective date hereof and are included in a BPL district.
1. If such developments were previously approved, the plans and agreements so approved shall be considered final
plans meeting the requirements of this title and such developments shall conform to said previously approved
plans. Any alterations or additions to said plans shall require approval in the same manner as final plans as
provided in this title.
2. If no previously approved plan exists for such existing developments on the effective date hereof, a final plan shall
be approved as provided in this title before any alterations or additions to the development may be made. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.22: BWA WHOLESALE AND AUTOMOTIVE DISTRICT:
15.2.22.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to provide areas for wholesale trade and retail trade uses which may require outdoor storage
of merchandise. Many service uses are also permitted. This district provides a suitable transition from other commercial
districts to industrial districts. It is intended that all uses, including accessory uses, in this district provide appropriate
amounts of off street parking and loading facilities. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the BWA column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the BWA wholesale and automotive district. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.2.22.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures. See section 15.3.4.1 of this title
for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the BWA column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 422/923
Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
Seventy feet (70'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
None. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
None required; however, this provision shall not be construed to eliminate any required off street loading areas. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.22.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
None required; however, this provision shall not be construed to eliminate any required off street loading areas. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.2.22.10: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.11: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.22.12: OPEN STORAGE:
All open storage shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height. Where a use
abuts a residential district and is not separated from said residential district by a public street, open storage shall be
screened from view by a planting screen of at least six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.23: BPR PRIMARY BUSINESS DISTRICT:
15.2.23.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is the location of the most valuable land in the community, and, in its establishment, the aims are to protect
the community created values by encouraging uses serving, primarily, pedestrian oriented traffic; encouraging and
preserving the traditional streetscape; discouraging uses requiring large areas of land in proportion to pedestrian traffic
generated; and encouraging intensive use of the land. Uses permitted in this district include establishments dealing
predominantly in retail trade, public and private offices, and personal and business services. It is intended that off street
parking needs in this district be met with public or commercially operated parking lots instead of by the individual
establishments in order that the land be more efficiently used and traffic be more easily controlled. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.23.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 423/923
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the BPR column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the BPR primary business district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.23.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Only those accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures, including, but not
limited to:
A. Offices in conjunction with and subsidiary to principal use.
B. Sale of gasoline and oil at retail only in conjunction with and subsidiary to a commercial parking garage.
C. Warehousing and enclosed storage in conjunction with and subsidiary to a principal use; but not including drive-in
facilities.
D. Accessory structures are not permitted in this district.
E. No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, HVAC equipment or similar uses shall be
located within twenty five feet (25') of any public street, public sidewalk, or property zoned R-1 or R-2. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.23.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the BPR column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control.
C. Any drive-in or drive-through facility accessory to a permitted use shall be considered a special use and subject to the
provisions of subsection 15.3.3.1K of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.23.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
None. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.23.6: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
None required, however, at least seventy percent (70%) of the front of the building shall be constructed to a point not to
exceed five feet (5') from the front lot line. The remainder of the front yard shall be limited to courtyard and/or pedestrian
common areas including, but not limited to: benches, bike racks, outdoor cafes, decorative planters, public art, etc.
Adequate site distance shall be provided at all points of ingress and egress. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.23.7: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
None; however, this provision shall not be construed to eliminate any required off street loading. (Ord. 2017-17)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 424/923
15.2.23.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
None; however, this provision shall not be construed to eliminate any required off street loading. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.23.9: OTHER DESIGN STANDARDS:
See section 15.4.7.2 of this title for additional design standards that apply to buildings in this district. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.23.10: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING:
In the BPR district, no permitted principal use shall be required to provide off street parking. Such parking may be
provided at the option of the owner. Parking is limited to the side and rear of the structure. If parking is adjacent to a
public right of way, a ten foot (10') natural buffer shall be provided. One tree shall be planted within this natural buffer
every fifteen feet (15'). The additional trees shall be in addition to any trees required based on the number of parking
spaces. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.23.11: MINIMUM OFF STREET LOADING:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.23.12: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
One family per dwelling unit plus one person; or two (2) persons for the first three hundred (300) square feet of floor area
plus one person for each additional two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.24: LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
15.2.24.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to provide space for certain types of industrial and/or manufacturing and/or warehousing or
storage operations which are compatible with adjoining districts. Such uses generally require open storage of materials,
goods, or equipment before, during, or after the manufacturing process, but are of a low noise or nuisance level. Land
designated for this district should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the community, as well as rail and
air, if required, so as not to disrupt normal traffic flow. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.24.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the LI column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the LI light industrial district. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.24.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Only those accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures, including, but not
limited to:
Offices.
Waste treatment facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 425/923
Wholesale trade of products produced on the premises.
See section 15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.2.24.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the LI column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
None. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
One hundred twenty feet (120'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.10: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.11: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.24.12: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use hereafter established in the LI light industrial district shall conform to the following performance standards. Prior
to an issuance of a building permit for new construction within this district or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
use for any use in this district, evidence that the proposed use, as planned or built will conform to these performance
standards, shall be presented to the administrative official.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 426/923
A. Smoke: No light industrial use may emit more than ten (10) smoke units per hour per stack or smoke in excess of
Ringelmann no. 2. However, once during any twenty four (24) hour period, for soot blowing, process purging, and fire
cleaning, each stack may emit an additional ten (10) smoke units, and during that time it may emit smoke up to and
including Ringelmann no. 3.
Note: The term "Ringelmann number" means the number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that most nearly
matches the light obscuring capacity of smoke. The Ringelmann chart is described in the U.S. bureau of mines
information circular 8333, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating smoke density.
Smoke below the density of Ringelmann no. 1 shall be considered as no smoke or Ringelmann no. 0; and "smoke
unit" means the number obtained when the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers is multiplied by the time of
emission in minutes. For the purposes of this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a
minute during the period of observation. Each reading shall then be multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is
observed. The products so computed shall then be added to give the total number of smoke units observed during
the entire observation period.
B. Odor: No light industrial use may release an odor that is either noxious or unreasonably disturbing.
C. Toxic Materials: For a light industrial use, the emission of toxic and noxious materials may not produce any
concentration at a residence or business district boundary line exceeding three percent (3%) of the threshold limit
values for toxic materials in industry as set forth in "threshold limit values" for the current year, as adopted at the
annual meeting of the American Conference Of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
D. Glare And Heat: No light industrial use may cause heat at the lot line so intense as to be a public nuisance or hazard.
No such use may cause illumination at or beyond any residence district boundary in excess of one-tenth (1/10) footcandle.
Note: The term "foot-candle" means a unit of illumination equal to the illumination at all points that are one foot (1')
from a uniform point source of one candlepower.
E. Particulate Matter: The term "particulate matter" means divided liquid or solid material that is discharged and carried
along in the air.
1. The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot may not exceed a net
figure of one pound per hour per acre for a light industrial use, of which no more than ten percent (10%) by weight
may be particles larger than forty four (44) microns (325 mesh). The net rate of emission shall be computed by:
a. Determining the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of emission within the boundaries of
the lot and dividing this figure by the number of acres of lot area, thus obtaining the gross hourly emission rate
per acre for each source;
b. Deducting from that gross rate the appropriate correction factors for height of emission and stack velocity as
respectively specified in subsections E2 and E3 of this section, thus obtaining the net hourly emission rate per
acre from each source; and
c. Adding the individual rates of emission so computed to obtain the total net hourly emission rate per hour from all
sources within the boundaries of the lot.
2. The allowance for height of emission is as follows (interpolate for intermediate values):
MAXIMUM HEIGHT FOR PARTICULATE MATTER EMISSION
Maximum Height, Above Grade
(Feet)
Correction For Light Industrial Use
(Pounds Per Hour Per Acre)
50 0.01
100 0.06
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 427/923
150 0.10
200 0.16
300 0.30
400 0.50
500 and above 0.50
3. The allowance for velocity of emission is as follows (interpolate for intermediate values):
ALLOWANCE FOR VELOCITY OF PARTICULATE MATTER EMISSION
Exit Velocity Up
(Feet Per Second)
Correction For Light Industrial Use
(Pounds Per Hour Per Acre)
0 0
20 0.03
40 0.09
60 0.16
80 0.24
100 and above 0.5
4. Dust and other kinds of air pollution that are borne by wind from such sources within lot boundaries as storage
areas, yards, and roads shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, or other
means.
F. Vibration:
1. No light industrial use may cause, at the lot line, continuous earthborn vibrations higher than the limits set forth in
column I of the following table. Nor may it cause, at any residence district boundary, continuous earthborn
vibrations higher than the limits set forth in column II of the following table.
MAXIMUM VIBRATION
Frequency
(Cycle Per Second) I II
More Than
But Not
More Than Displacement Displacement
0 10 0.0008 0.0004
10 20 0.0005 0.0002
20 30 0.0002 0.0001
30 40 0.0002 0.0001
40 50 0.0001 0.0001
50 0.0001 0.0001
Note: The term "displacement" means the maximum amount of motion in any direction as determined by any three6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 428/923
component (simultaneous) measuring system approved by the administrative official; and "three-component measuring
system" means instrumentation that can measure earthborn vibrations in a horizontal as well as a vertical plan.
2. Discrete pulses that do not exceed one hundred (100) impulses per minute may not produce higher than twice the
displacement specified in the table.
G. Noise: The noise standards established in title 4, chapter 6 of this code shall be the noise standards for light industrial
purposes.
H. Fire Hazards: Solid substances ranging from free or active burning to intense burning may be stored, used, or
manufactured only within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout
by an automatic fire extinguishing system. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids or materials
which produce flammable vapors or gases shall be permitted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state
fire marshal. A certificate of compliance, issued by the state fire marshal's office, stating that the plan and
specifications for a light or general industrial use comply with the rules and regulations of the state fire marshal shall
accompany the application for a zoning certificate.
I. Detonation Materials: No activity involving the storage or use of materials that decompose by detonation may be
carried on except in accordance with the rules issued by the state fire marshal. No activity involving the
manufacturing of materials that decompose by detonation may be carried on in this district. Materials that decompose
by detonation include primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; high
explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid; propellants and their components, such as nitrocellulose,
black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder,
potassium chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic
compounds, such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric
acid, perchlorates, chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and
nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
J. Exceptions: These performance standards do not apply to:
1. Site preparation or construction maintenance, repair, alteration or improvement of buildings, structures, equipment,
or other improvements on or within the lot line;
2. Conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire, explosion, accident, failure or breakdown;
3. Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the protection of life, limb, or property.
K. Open Storage: Open storage of materials shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner. Open storage shall not exceed
fifteen feet (15') in height. All the open storage areas shall be screened from public view by a fence of at least six feet
(6') in height. All open storage areas shall be paved with a dust free surface. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25: GI GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
15.2.25.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is established to provide areas for industrial and/or manufacturing and/or warehouse or storage operations
which may require buildings and/or open area for fabricating, processing, repairing, dismantling or disposal of
equipment, raw materials, manufactured products or wastes. Land designated for this district should be located in
relation to the thoroughfare network of the community, as well as rail and air if required, so as to not disrupt normal traffic
flow. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the GI column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the GI general industrial district. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 429/923
15.2.25.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Only those accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures, including, but not
limited to:
Offices.
Waste treatment facilities.
Wholesale trade of products produced on the premises.
See section 15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the GI column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
None. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.6: MINIMUM LOT WIDTH:
One hundred twenty feet (120'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.7: MINIMUM FRONT YARD DEPTH:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.8: MINIMUM REAR YARD DEPTH:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.9: MINIMUM SIDE YARD WIDTH:
Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.10: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
None. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.11: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 430/923
As required in section 15.4.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.25.12: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use thereafter established in the GI general industrial district shall conform to the following performance standards.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction within this district or the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy use for any use in this district, evidence that the proposed use, as planned or built will conform to these
performance standards, shall be presented to the administrative official. The performance standards for the GI district
shall be the same as for the LI district as provided in section 15.2.24.12 of this chapter, except as follows:
A. Detonation Materials: No activity involving the storage, use, or manufacturing of materials that decompose by
detonation may be carried on except in accordance with the rules issued by the state fire marshal. These materials
include primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; high explosives such as
TNT, RDX, HMC, PETN, and picric acid; propellants and their components, such as nitrocellulose, black powder,
boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks, such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerin; unstable organic compounds,
such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid,
perchlorates, chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear
fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.2.26: SIU UNIVERSITY DISTRICT:
15.2.26.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
This district is created to delineate areas subject to the control of Southern Illinois University. The lands, buildings, and
uses thereof are subject to requirements of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.26.2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Any uses and structures ordinarily connected with the operation of a university. There are no standards for minimum lot
dimensions and minimum lot depth for permitted uses in this district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.26.3: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit a special use on any land zoned
SIU on the official zoning map which is not owned by Southern Illinois University. A special use shall be triggered in
the event of a change of use of land, use of structure, or use of land and structure in combination.
B. The lot area, lot width, yards and height limitations of this district shall be determined as part of the special use
approval process.
C. Special uses as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this title and the additional design or performance standards shall be
applied to any approved special use within this district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27: PAD PLANNED AIRPORT DISTRICT:
15.2.27.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 431/923
This district is created to allow for the planned and flexible development of property owned and maintained by the
Southern Illinois Airport Authority and Southern Illinois University. It is intended that a buffer be provided around the
perimeter of the airport district to lessen the impact of development on surrounding property owners. The airport land use
plan for Southern Illinois Airport approved at the time the property is zoned PAD planned airport district, shall be adopted
as the development plan for the district. Any land designated for this use shall have a minimum of five hundred (500)
contiguous acres. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.2: PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES:
Principal uses and structures shown with a "P" (for "permitted") in the PAD column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of
this chapter shall be allowed in the planned airport district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Only those accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures, including, but not
limited to:
Artificial lakes.
Market facilities for sale of products grown on the premises.
Open storage of equipment, but not junkyards, in accordance with performance measures.
Water treatment and sewage disposal facilities; public.
See section 15.3.4.1 of this title for standards for accessory structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.4: SPECIAL USES:
A. After a public hearing before the planning commission, the city council may permit as special uses any of the uses
shown with an "S" (for "special use") in the PAD column on the use table in section 15.2.29 of this chapter.
B. Some special uses are subject to additional design or performance standards, as set forth in section 15.3.3.1 of this
title; the existence of such standards for a particular use in a particular district is generally indicated through a note on
the use table, but in case of any conflict, the provisions of section 15.3.3.1 of this title shall control.
C. Any land zoned PAD on the official zoning map of the city which is not owned by Southern Illinois Airport Authority nor
owned by or leased to Southern Illinois University shall be treated as a special use in the event a change of use of
land, use of structure, or use of land and structure in combination is applied for. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
None. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.6: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
As set forth in airport hazard zoning regulations adopted by the division of aeronautics on April 28, 1976, and as
hereafter amended. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.7: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY FOR RESIDENTIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 432/923
One family per dwelling unit plus one person; or two (2) persons for the first three hundred (300) square feet of floor area
plus one person for each additional two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.8: AIRPORT USES:
For purposes of these PAD planned airport district regulations, an airport use may be situated at any location within the
planned airport district, whether or not within any building site area designated on the airport land use plan. An "airport
use" is hereby defined to mean any one of the following:
A. Airfield components including runways, taxiways, ramps, aprons, related site improvements, lighting systems,
navigational aids and weather systems; aircraft hangars; aircraft fueling stations; airport administrative and
maintenance buildings; airport utility systems; parking and roadway systems; fencing, gates and overhead lighting
systems; or any use mandated by the federal aviation administration or the division of aeronautics. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.9: DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
Any use hereafter established in the planned airport district shall conform to the following performance standards prior to
the issuance of a zoning certificate. Evidence that the proposed use, as planned or built will conform to these
performance standards, shall be presented to the administrative official.
A. All uses, other than "airport uses" as defined in section 15.2.27.8 of this chapter, shall maintain a sixty foot (60')
setback from any adjoining district. The setback area shall be maintained as open space/greenways, parking lots or
in agricultural crops, except that for industrial uses the setback area shall include a landscaped berm at least eight
feet (8') in height.
B. The minimum setback between a residential structure and any other principal structure shall be at least twenty feet
(20').
C. All uses must comply with the performance standards as required in section 15.2.24.12 of this chapter, except for
subsection 15.2.24.12K of this chapter.
D. Miniwarehouses as permitted shall meet the following requirements in addition to any other requirements established
by this chapter:
1. Storage of explosives or radioactive materials is prohibited.
E. Open storage of materials shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner. Open storage shall not exceed twenty feet (20')
in height. Where an open storage use is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a residential district, the storage area
shall be screened from public view by a fence or planting screen of at least six feet (6') in height. All open storage
areas shall be paved with a dust free surface. Open storage, other than display of items for sale, is not permitted in
conjunction with retail, wholesale and warehousing uses.
F. Day care centers, including child care centers, shall provide adequate screening and/or fencing and be designated to
be compatible with permitted uses and be subject to all state licensing and fire regulations.
G. All utilities shall be underground except electrical transmission lines and water storage facilities. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.10: AIRPORT LAND USE PLAN, ZONING CERTIFICATES, AND BUILDING PERMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 433/923
A. The airport land use plan for the Southern Illinois Airport approved at the time the property is zoned PAD shall serve
as the development plan. The plan shall delineate building site areas. Structures within the district, other than "airport
uses" as defined in subsection H of this section, shall be constructed only within areas delineated on the airport land
use plan as building sites.
B. In the event construction, alteration, or moving of structures or use of land is to occur within the PAD which is an
"airport use" as defined herein, or a use or structure connected with the operation of Southern Illinois University, the
airport authority or Southern Illinois University, as the case may be, shall give written notification to the city which
briefly describes the use or structure, accompanied by a copy of the airport layout plan of the airport authority as
submitted to the federal aviation administration, which shall be marked so as to delineate the location and size of
such use or structure. The city shall expeditiously indicate its receipt of such notification by issuance of a zoning
certificate for such purpose.
C. In the event construction, alteration, or moving of structures or use of land is to occur within the PAD which is not an
"airport use" as defined herein, nor a use or structure connected with the operation of Southern Illinois University, a
zoning certificate shall be obtained from the city prior to construction which will certify that the use or structure is
consistent with the development plan.
D. Neither a site plan nor a building permit application shall be required of the airport authority or Southern Illinois
University, nor shall a building permit be required of either, for any development in the PAD unless the PAD is in the
corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.2.27.11: PROCEDURES AMENDING THE PLANNED AIRPORT DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT
PLAN:
If the airport authority desires to amend the development plan, then an amended plan must be approved by the city
council. Approval of amendments to the development plan requires the following:
A. Planning Commission Review: The following is required in order to amend the planned airport district development
plan:
1. An amendment to the airport district development plan may be permitted by the city council only after a public
hearing by the planning commission. The Southern Illinois Airport Authority shall present plans and related
information in general detail to enable the planning commission to evaluate the proposed amendment to the
airport's development plan. Such plans shall be in accordance with this section, and shall be of a general nature
utilizing the airport land use plan with requested changes demonstrated thereon as to building sites and
nonbuilding areas, incorporating therein the setbacks required by this section. (Ord. 2013-20)
2. A date for a public hearing shall not be set until all of the above required information has been presented to the
administrative official, and upon receipt of same, the administrative official shall schedule a public hearing before
the planning commission in accordance with section 15.6.8 of this title.
3. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing and thereafter make a recommendation to the city council
on the appropriateness of the location for each new or altered building site and for denial or approval of the
amended development plan.
B. City Council Review: The city council shall deny or approve the amended development plan within forty five (45) days
after the planning commission public hearing. If approved, the amended development plan shall serve as the
development plan for the PAD planned airport district, and all proposed development must be consistent with the plan
prior to the issuance of any zoning certificate by the city. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.2.28: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES, RESIDENTIAL AND RURAL DISTRICTS:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS USE TABLE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 434/923
Residential uses:
Household living (see
subsection 15.3.1.7A
of this title)
Single-family dwellings, except
townhouses
P P P
P
P
P
P
Single-family dwellings, except
mobile homes
P P P
P
P
P
P
Single-unit dwelling including
townhouses with no more than
2 adjoining dwelling units,
excepting mobile homes
P
Single-unit dwellings, including
townhouses, but excepting
mobile homes
P
P
Single-unit dwellings including
townhouses with no more than
4 adjoining dwelling units,
excepting mobile homes
P
Single-unit dwellings, including
mobile homes, but not
including mobile home parks
P S
Two-unit dwellings
(townhouse/
duplex) excepting mobile
homes
P
P
P
P
Three-unit dwellings, excepting
mobile homes
P
P
P
Four-unit dwellings, excepting
mobile homes
P
P
P
Multiple dwelling units P
P
Condominiums (residential)
with 2 or fewer units
P
P
Condominium buildings
(residential) with 4 or fewer
units
P
P
Condominiums residential P
P
Mobile homes P S P 15.3.2.1C
and
15.3.3.1U
Mobile home parks Only allowed in planned
mobile home district
P
Senior housing development
conversion
S
S
S
15.3.3.1X
UUssee CCaatteeggoorriieess SSppeecciiffiicc UUssee TTyyppeess
F
AG
RR
R-
1
R-
1-
D
R-
2
R-
3
PUD
RMH
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 435/923
Living quarters for a person
employed on the premises and
his/her family on parcels 10
acres or more accessory to the
permitted principal use
P S
Living quarters for a person
employed on the premises and
his/her family on parcels less
than 10 acres accessory to the
permitted principal use
S S
Group living (see
subsection 15.3.1.7B
of this title)
Boarding or rooming houses P
P
Dormitories P
P
Fraternity and sorority homes S
P
Group home I in compliance
with administrative occupancy
permit requirements related to
spacing and licensing in
section 15.6.4 of this title
P P P
P
P
P
P 15.3.3.1P
Group home I not in
compliance with administrative
occupancy permit
requirements related to
spacing and/or licensing in
section 15.6.4 of this title
S S S
S
S
S
S 15.3.3.1P
Group home II in compliance
with administrative occupancy
permit requirements related to
spacing and licensing in
section 15.6.4 of this title
S S S
S
S
P
S 15.3.3.1P
Group home II not in
compliance with administrative
occupancy permit
requirements related to
spacing and/or licensing in
section 15.6.4 of this title
S S S
S
S
S
S 15.3.3.1P
Nursing home S S
S
P
Public and civic uses:
Community service
(see subsection
15.3.1.8A of this title)
Civic clubs or community
centers
S
S
P
Fire stations P
P S S
S
S
S
S
Home museum S
S
S
Use Categories Specific Use Types
F
AG
RR
R-
1
R-
1-
D
R-
2
R-
3
PUD
RMH
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 436/923
Public library and public
building
S
S
P
Day care (see
subsection 15.3.1.8B
of this title)
Day care centers, including
child care centers, adult day
care centers, day nurseries,
nursery schools,
kindergartens, playgroups, and
centers or workshops for
mentally or physically
handicapped
S S S
P 15.3.3.1I
Day care home I P S S
S
S
S
S 15.3.3.1J
Day care home II S S S
S
S
S
S 15.3.3.1J
Day care home III S S S
S
15.3.3.1J
Family day care home P P P
P
P
P
P P
Educational facilities
(see subsection
15.3.1.8C of this title)
Grade and high schools, public
or private
P S S
S
S
S
P
Government facilities
(see subsection
15.3.1.8D of this title)
Government offices S 15.3.3.1Y
Township governmental
services
S 15.3.3.1Y
Parks and open
space (see subsection
15.3.1.8F of this title)
Cemeteries P
P P
Conservation areas P
Forest preserves P
P P
Golf courses and country clubs
P P P
Parks and playgrounds S
P P P
P
P
P
P P
Parks and recreational
buildings
S
S
S
S
P
Swimming clubs P
Woodlands P
P
Passenger terminals
and services (see
subsection 15.3.1.8G
of this title)
Airports or heliports S 15.3.3.1O
Use Categories Specific Use Types
F
AG
RR
R-
1
R-
1-
D
R-
2
R-
3
PUD
RMH
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 437/923
Religious institution
(see subsection
15.3.1.8H of this title)
All religious institutions and
subordinate uses
P S S
S
P
P
P
Social service
institutions (see
subsection 15.3.1.8I
of this title)
Licensed home or institution
which provides for the care or
custody or education or
welfare of persons, not
including hospitals
S S
S
S
Transient lodging or shelter for
the homeless
S
Telecommunications
facilities
Wireless communications
facilities
S
P S S
S
S
S
S S 15.3.6.1I
Utilities, major (see
subsection 15.3.1.8J
of this title)
Electrical public utility
substation with 8 foot minimum
screen or fence
S S S
S
S
S
S
Electrical transmission facilities
over 30 kV
S
S S S
S
S
S
S
Municipal sewage disposal
plant
P
S
Municipal water treatment
plants
S
Public utility substation with 8
foot screening or fencing,
except electrical public utility
substations
P S S
S
S
S
S S
Railroads S S S
S
S
S
Renewable energy production
(wind, solar, etc.)
S
Commercial uses:
Eating and drinking
establishments (see
subsection 15.3.1.9A
of this title)
All eating and drinking
establishments
S P 15.3.3.1O
Winery, microbrewery, and
microdistillery
S 15.3.3.1O
Entertainment, indoor
(see subsection
15.3.1.9B of this title)
Private clubs and lodges
restricted to members and/or
bona fide guests of members
and not operated as a public
facility
S S
S
15.3.3.1O
Entertainment,
outdoor (see
subsection 15.3.1.9B
of this title)
Commercial fishing or hunting
lodges or clubs
S
Drive-in theaters S 15.3.3.1L
Use Categories Specific Use Types
F
AG
RR
R-
1
R-
1-
D
R-
2
R-
3
PUD
RMH
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 438/923
Recreational use compatible
with district intent
S
P
Riding stables S
Stadium or coliseum, horse or
auto racetrack
S
Offices (see
subsection 15.3.1.9C
of this title)
Professional offices S S
S
Overnight
accommodations (see
subsection 15.3.1.9D
of this title)
Bed and breakfasts S S S
S
S
S
S 15.3.3.1F
Cabins, lodges, etc. S S P 15.3.3.1G
Hotels and motels
Inns S S S
S
S
S
S 15.3.3.1Q
Travel trailer parks and
campgrounds
S
S
Parking, commercial
(see subsection
15.3.1.9E of this title)
All commercial parking S
P 15.3.3.1D
Retail sales and
service, sales oriented
(see subsection
15.3.1.9F of this title)
All retail sales and service,
sales oriented
S P 15.3.3.1O
Personal services P
Sales of nonmotorized
recreational equipment
S
Retail sales and
service, personal
service oriented (see
subsection 15.3.1.9F
of this title)
Funeral homes with
crematorium
S
S
Funeral homes without
crematorium
S
S
Kennel P S
Laundromat P
Veterinary clinics P
Retail sales and
service, repair
oriented (see
subsection 15.3.1.9F
of this title)
All retail sales and service,
repair oriented
S 15.3.3.1O
Self-service storage
(see subsection
15.3.1.9G of this title)
Miniwarehouse S
15.3.3.1S
Industrial uses:
Use Categories Specific Use Types
F
AG
RR
R-
1
R-
1-
D
R-
2
R-
3
PUD
RMH
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 439/923
Light industrial
service (see
subsection 15.3.1.10A
of this title)
Contract construction services
S 15.3.3.1H
Warehouse and
freight movement (see
subsection 15.3.1.10B
of this title)
Commercial agricultural
storage operation
S
Waste related service
(see subsection
15.3.1.10C of this
title)
Junkyard or auto wrecking
yard, or storage
Sanitary landfill or other
qualified solid waste disposal
system
S
Wholesale trade (see
subsection 15.3.1.10D
of this title)
All wholesale trade S 15.3.3.1O
Rural uses:
Agriculture (see
subsection 15.3.1.11A
of this title)
Agricultural production P P
Raising, breeding, training, and
boarding of animals
P
Raising, breeding, training, and
boarding of animals for
personal use
P P
All other agriculture P
Resource extraction
(see subsection
15.3.1.11B of this title)
Mining operation, including, but
not limited to: coal, oil, gas,
rock, gravel, sand and the
storing and sale of such
materials with the exception of
hydraulic fracturing
S1
Other uses:
Accessory uses Home occupations P S S
S
S
S
S S 15.3.4.2B
Vacation rental units P P P
P
P
P
P P 15.3.4.2C
Vehicles and access Motorized recreational vehicle
uses; for commercial purposes
S
Private access roads or streets
to or from a permitted use in
an adjoining zoning district
S S S
S
S
S
S S 15.3.3.1V
Note:
1. Hydraulic fracturing (fracking) shall not enter or infringe upon the City of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction from a
location outside of the zoning jurisdiction.
Use Categories Specific Use Types
F
AG
RR
R-
1
R-
1-
D
R-
2
R-
3
PUD
RMH
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 440/923
(Ord. 2017-03)
15.2.29: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES, NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS USE TABLE
Residential uses:
Household living
(see subsection
15.3.1.7A of this
title)
Single-family
dwellings
P P7
Single-family
dwellings, except
mobile homes
P S S P P7 15.3.3.1N
Two-family houses
(duplex)
P P7
Corner lot duplexes
P P7
Condominiums
residential
S S P 15.3.3.1N
Condominium
buildings
(residential) with 4
or fewer units
P S S P P7 15.3.3.1N
Dwelling units
above the main floor
P
Dwelling units on
the main floor of
residential
structures existing
on September 16,
2003, including
rooming houses,
excepting
dormitories, group
homes, and mobile
homes
S
Two-unit dwellings,
except mobile
homes
S S S P P7 15.3.3.1N
Three-unit
dwellings, except
mobile homes
S S S P P7 15.3.3.1N
Four-unit dwellings,
except mobile
homes
S S S P P7 15.3.3.1N
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 441/923
Single-unit
dwellings, including
townhouses, but
except mobile
homes
P S S P 15.3.3.1N
Multi-unit dwellings S S P 15.3.3.1N
Dormitories or
apartments for
students residing on
site
P7
Dwelling units as
permitted in the
lowest density
adjoining residential
district and subject
to the same
occupancy
restrictions as said
residential district
P
Dwelling units other
than those
permitted in the
preceding row
S 15.3.3.1N
Group living (see
subsection 15.3.1.7B
of this title)
Boarding or rooming
houses
S S 15.3.3.1N
Fraternities and
sorority homes
S P9 15.3.3.1N
Public and civic
uses:
Community service
(see subsection
15.3.1.8A of this
title)
Business
associations
S P P P
Civic, social and
fraternal
S P P P P P
Community centers
S P P P
Libraries S P P P
Museums S P P P P
Day care (see
subsection 15.3.1.8B
of this title)
Adult day care S P S S S
S
P 15.3.3.1I
Day care centers for
children
S P P S S1 S S
S
P 15.3.3.1I
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 442/923
Day care centers
including child care
centers, adult day
care centers, day
nurseries, nursery
schools,
kindergartens, play
groups, and centers
or workshops for
mentally or
physically
handicapped
S 15.3.3.1I
Day care homes I P S 15.3.3.1J
Day care homes II S S 15.3.3.1J
Day care homes III S S 15.3.3.1J
Family day care
homes
P P
Nursery education
or school
S P S S S
S
Educational facilities
(see subsection
15.3.1.8C of this
title)
Art and music
schools
P P P P S
Barber and beauty
schools
S P P P P S
Dancing schools P P P P S
Driving schools S P P S 15.3.3.1M
Junior colleges S P P
Primary
(elementary)
schools
S P S
Secondary schools S P S
University and
colleges
S P P
University, college,
junior college and
professional school
education
S P P
Vocational or trade
schools
P P P P
Other special
training and
schools, NEC
S P P P S
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 443/923
Government
facilities and
services (see
subsection
15.3.1.8D of this
title)
Civil defense and
related activities
P P P P
Executive,
legislative, and
judicial functions
P P P P P P
Fire stations and
related activities
S S P P P P
Governmental
maintenance
facilities and
services
P P
P
P
Police protection
and related
activities
S P P P P P
Postal services P P P P P P
Other protective
functions and
related activities,
NEC
P P P P
Medical facilities
(see subsection
15.3.1.8E of this
title)
Blood/plasma
donation center
P P P P
Emergency and
walk-in medical
clinics
P P P P P
Hospital P P P
Medical laboratory
services
P P P P P
Nursing,
convalescent and
rest homes
P P P P
Outpatient surgical
centers
P P P
Note: Medical and
dental offices
without surgical
facilities are listed
under "Offices" uses
Parks and open
space (see
subsection 15.3.1.8F
of this title)
Parks and
playgrounds
P P P P P P
Passenger
terminals and
services (see
subsection
Airport or heliport P
Transportation
terminals,
passenger
P P P
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 444/923
15.3.1.8G of this
title)
Transportation
terminals,
passenger and
freight
P P
P
P
Religious institution
(see subsection
15.3.1.8H of this
title)
All religious
institutions
S P P S P
Social service
institutions (see
subsection 15.3.1.8I
of this title)
Transient lodging or
shelter
S S S
Welfare and
charitable services
P P S P
Telecommunications
facilities
Wireless
communications
facilities
S S S S S S S S
P
P 15.3.6.1I
Utilities, major (see
subsection 15.3.1.8J
of this title)
Electrical public
utility substation
with 8 foot minimum
screen or fence
S S S S S S
S
S
Electrical
transmission lines of
30 kilovolts or larger
S S S S S
S
P
Public utility
substation with 8
foot screen or
fence, except
electrical public
utility substation
P P P
P
P
Railroads S S S S S P
P
P
Renewable energy
production (solar,
wind, etc.)
S
S
Sewage treatment
plant
Wastewater
treatment facilities
Commercial uses:
Eating and drinking
establishments (see
subsection 15.3.1.9A
of this title)
Commercial
kitchen/catering
P P P P P P
P
Drinking places
(alcoholic
beverages)
S P2
P2 S P2 S
Micro-brewery S P2
P2 P2 P2
P2
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 445/923
Micro-distillery S S S S P2
P2
Restaurants S P P P P P
P
P 15.3.3.1W
Restaurants with
drive-through
P P P S P
P
15.3.3.1K
Winery S S S S P2
P2
Entertainment,
indoor (see
subsection 15.3.1.9B
of this title)
Adult uses
Bars or nightclubs P2
P2 P2 S
Bowling alleys and
other similar
recreational
activities
P S P
Dance halls P2
S P2 P2
Gambling facilities S S S
Health clubs S P P P P
Indoor sports
facilities, including,
but not limited to,
racquetball,
handball, tennis,
basketball and other
court games,
gymnasiums;
soccer; hockey
P P P P
P
P
Pool halls P S P P
Roller and ice
skating
P S P P
P
Theaters and
auditoriums
P P P P
Entertainment,
outdoor (see
subsection 15.3.1.9B
of this title)
Country clubs, golf
courses, swimming
clubs and similar
recreational uses
P
Miniature golf,
batting cages,
driving ranges
S P S 15.3.3.1T
Offices (see
subsection
15.3.1.9C of this
title)
Banking and
financial institutions,
with drive-through
P P P S P 15.3.3.1K
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 446/923
Banking and
financial institutions,
without drivethrough
P P P P P P
Business,
administrative, and
professional offices
except those listed
separately
S P P P P P P P
P
P
Credit services
(other than banks),
including payday
loan and check
cashing services
S S P P
Dental offices and
dental labs
S P P P P P P
Educational and
scientific research
S P P P P P
P
P
Employment
services
P P P P P
Medical offices
without surgical
facilities
S P P P P P P
Printing services P P P P
Professional offices
P
Professional
schools
P P
P
Studios, recording S P P P P
Studios, television
and radio
S P P P P
Telecommunications
offices and
exchanges
P P
Overnight
accommodations
(see subsection
15.3.1.9D of this
title)
Bed and breakfast
establishment
S P3 P3
P P 15.3.3.1F
Hotels and motels P P P P
Inn S S S P P P P 15.3.3.1Q
Travel trailer parks
or campground
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 447/923
Parking, commercial
(see subsection
15.3.1.9E of this
title)
Automobile parking
public and
commercial, for
uses on adjoining
parcels or in
adjacent districts
S P P P P P P
Public or
commercial parking
P P
P
All other commercial
parking
P P
Retail sales and
service, salesoriented
(see
subsection 15.3.1.9F
of this title)
Antiques and
secondhand
merchandise
P8
P P P
Apparel and
accessories
P8
P P P P
Art galleries P8
P P P P P P
Auto parts and
accessories
P P P
Building supplies
and lumber,
including electrical,
plumbing, HVAC
and other
P8
P4
P4 P P
P
P
Computers and
accessories
P8
P P P P
Convenience stores
with gasoline
service/gasoline
service station
P P P P
Convenience store
without gasoline
service
P8
P P P
Electronics,
including audio,
video and other
P P P P
Fuel and ice
dealers, including
coal, bottled gas
P P
Furniture, home
furnishings and
equipment
P P P P
Garden supplies P P P P
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 448/923
Hardware without
lumber and building
supplies
P4
P4 P P4 P
P
P
Hay, grain and
feeds
P
Household
appliances
P P P P
Liquor P2
P2 P2 P2
Medical appliances
and supplies
P4
P P P P
Office supplies and
equipment
P P P P
Optical goods P8
P4
P P P P
Outdoor recreation
equipment and
vehicles
P P P P
P
P
Pets P P P P
Pharmacy P4
P P P P
Retail, general,
except as otherwise
listed
P8
S10
P P S P P
Retail, groceries,
except as otherwise
listed
P8
P P P P
Schools, trade and
business
P P P
P
P
Retail sales and
service, personal
service-oriented (see
subsection 15.3.1.9F
of this title)
Art, music, and
dancing schools
P8
P P P P
Art, music, and
photographic
studios
P8
P P P P P
Beauty and barber
services
P8
P P P P P
Funeral services
with crematorium
S
Funeral services
without crematorium
P
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 449/923
Laundering and dry
cleaning (selfservice)
P8
P P
Pressing, alteration
and garment repairs
P8
P P
Radio and television
repair
P8
P P
Shoe repair P8
P P
Small animal
hospital or clinic
with boarding
P P P P P
Tattoo parlor P P
Retail sales and
service, repairoriented
(see
subsection 15.3.1.9F
of this title)
Apparel repair,
alteration and
cleaning pickup;
shoe repair services
P8
P P P P
P
P
Armature rewinding
P P
P
P
Electrical repair
(except radios and
TV)
P8
P P P
P
P
Fur repair and
storage services
P8
P P
P
P
Pressing, alteration,
and garment repair;
laundry and dry
cleaning pickup only
P8
P P P
P
P
Radio and television
repair
P8
P P P
P
P
Re-upholstery and
furniture repair
P8
P P P
P
P
Shoe repair, shoe
shining, and hat
cleaning services
P8
P P P
P
P
Watch, clock and
jewelry repair
P8
P P P
P
P
Other repair
services, NEC
S P P
P
P
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 450/923
Self-service storage
(see subsection
15.3.1.9G of this
title)
Commercial storage
of recreational
vehicles
P4
P
P
P
Mini-warehouses S4
P P
P
P 15.3.3.1S
Vehicle and similar
sales and service
(see subsection
15.3.1.9H of this
title)
Aircraft and
accessories
P P
P
P
Auto service,
including quick and
minute lube drive
through (except
repair/wash), NEC
P4
S4 P P
Automobile and
truck rental services
S S P P
P
P
Automobile repair
and service
S S4
P5 P P
P
P 15.3.3.1E
Automobile wash S S S P
Farm and industrial
equipment and
supplies
P
P
Marine craft and
accessories
P P P P
Mobile homes and
accessories
S P P
P
Motor vehicles (new
and used cars)
P P P
Motor vehicles
(used cars only)
P S P
Motorcycle and allterrain
vehicle (ATV)
sales
P P P S 15.3.3.1C
Tires, batteries and
accessories
P4
P4 P P
Truck stops P P
P
Industrial uses:
Light industrial
service (see
subsections
15.3.1.10A and E of
this title)
Building services,
including janitorial,
exterminating,
general
maintenance
P P
P
P
Coating engraving
and allied services
P P
P
P
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 451/923
Concrete services P P
P
P
Contractors, general
and specialty, with
outdoor storage
P P
P
P
Contractors, general
and specialty,
without outdoor
storage
P8
P P
P
P
Drugs, chemicals
and allied products
P
P
P
Laboratories,
including film
processing
P
P
P
Laundering, dry
cleaning and dyeing
plants
P P
P
P
Linen supply and
industrial laundry
services
S P P
P
P
Low-impact
manufacturing
P P P
P
P
Manufacturing,
fabricating,
processing, or
assembling of
products or
materials
P
P
P
Newspaper
distribution services
P P P
Research,
development and/or
testing services
S P4
P4
P P
P
P
Transportation
equipment
P
P
P
Other special
construction trade,
NEC
P P
P
P
Heavy industrial
(see subsection
15.3.1.10F of this
title)
Acid manufacturing
S
Ammunition
manufacturing
S
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 452/923
Blast furnace,
steelworks, or the
rolling and finishing
of ferrous metals
S
Glue manufacturing
P
Iron and steel
foundry
S
Meatpacking plant
or slaughterhouse
S
Nonferrous metal
foundry
S
Smelting and
refining of
nonferrous metals
S
Stockyards or
livestock sales
barns
S
Tannery S
Wood preserving
operation
S
S
Warehouse and
freight movement
(see subsection
15.3.1.10B of this
title)
Equipment rental
and leasing services
S P P
P
P
Farm products
warehousing
S S4
P P
P
P
Food lockers (with
or without food
preparation
facilities)
P P
P
P
Freight forwarding
service
P P
P
P
General
warehousing and
storage
S S4
P P
P
P
Parcel services P P
Railroad and motor
freight salvage
P P
P
Refrigerated
warehousing
(except food
lockers)
P P
P
P
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 453/923
Waste-related
service (see
subsection
15.3.1.10C of this
title)
Junkyard or auto
wrecking yard, or
storage
S
S
15.3.3.1R
Wholesale trade
(see subsection
15.3.1.10D of this
title)
Beer, wine, and
distilled alcoholic
beverages
P P
P
P
Commercial and
industrial machinery
and equipment
P
P
Construction
equipment
P
P
Drugs, chemicals
and allied products
P P
P
P
Dry goods and
apparel
P P
P
P
Electrical and
electronic goods
P P
P
P
Farm and grain mill
products
P
P
Farm equipment P P
P
Furniture and home
furnishings
P P
P
P
Groceries and
related products
P P
P
P
Hardware,
plumbing, and
heating equipment
and supplies
P4
P P
P
P
Lumber and other
building materials
S P P
P
P
Machinery,
equipment and
supplies
P P
P
P
Mail-order house S P P
P
Merchandise
vending machine
operators
S P P
P
Motor vehicles,
equipment, parts
and accessories
P P
P
P
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 454/923
Paint, glass and
wallpaper
P4
P4 P
P
Paper and paper
products
P P
P
P
Professional
equipment,
instruments and
supplies
P P
P
P
Transportation
equipment
P
Welding equipment
and supplies
P P
P
Wholesale trade of
products produced
on the premises
P P
P
Other uses:
Accessory uses Vacation rental units
P 15.3.4.2C
Agriculture (see
subsection
15.3.1.11A of this
title)
All agricultural uses
P
Plant nursery or
greenhouse
S S P P
P
P
Resource extraction
(see subsection
15.3.1.11B of this
title)
All resource
extraction except
hydraulic fracturing6
S
S
Vehicles and access
Motorized
recreational vehicle
use
S S S
S
Private access
roads or streets to
or from a permitted
use in an adjoining
zoning district
S S S S S S
S
S 15.3.3.1V
Notes:
1 . In BPL, day care centers for children including child care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, kindergartens, play
group and centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped children shall be permitted as a permitted use
only when they are approved as part of the development plan.
2 . Within 250 feet of property owned by a public school agency and used for elementary or secondary school
educational purposes, uses identified with this note shall be considered as special uses in the respective districts.
3 . In PAR and PA, bed and breakfasts are subject to the special use standard detailed in subsection 15.3.3.1F of this
title.
4 . Only if within completely closed buildings.
5 . In BPL, automotive repair services are permitted only as accessory uses to: a) the retail sale of motor vehicles, or b)
the retail sale of automotive accessories.
6 . Hydraulic fracturing (fracking) shall not enter or infringe upon the City of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction from a
location outside of the zoning jurisdiction.
Use Categories Use Types
NB
PAR
PA
SB
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
PAD
Use
Standard
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 455/923
7 . Airport related residential uses with maximum FAR of 0.566 for the land designated for residential uses.
8 . No outdoor storage allowed. No more than 4 employees on the premises at any one time on a regular basis. Hours
of operation shall not exceed 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. The following uses shall require a special use permit: railroad and
motor freight salvage; sporting goods, including firearms and ammunitions sales; and welding equipment and supplies.
9 . Shall only apply to residential structures existing on September 16, 2003.
10 . The applicant shall identify which specific business use is being requested for the special use. The specific use shall
be included as a condition of approval if the special use is approved.
(Ord. 2018-37)
Chapter 3
USE REGULATIONS
15.3.1: USE CATEGORIES:
15.3.1.1: GENERAL:
A. Basis For Classification: Use categories classify land uses and activities based on similar functional, product, or
physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents,
how goods or services are sold or delivered, likely impact on surrounding properties and site conditions. The use
categories provide a systematic basis for assigning land uses to appropriate zoning districts.
B. Principal Use Characteristics: A principal use is assigned to the use category that most closely corresponds to its
nature as described in the "characteristics" section of each use category.
C. Similar Use Interpretations:
1. Determination of the appropriate category for a proposed principal use shall be made by the zoning administrator
in accordance with the provisions of subsection C2 of this section.
2. The following shall be used to determine the appropriate category for a proposed use and whether a use is
considered principal or accessory:
a. The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in relationship to the stated characteristics of each use
category;
b. The relative amount of site area or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity;
c. Relative amounts of sales from each activity;
d. The customer type for each activity;
e. The relative number of employees in each activity;
f. Hours of operation;
g. Building and site arrangement;
h. Vehicles used and their parking requirements;
i. The relative number of vehicle trips generated;
j. Required signage;
k. How the use is advertised;
l. The likely impact on surrounding properties; and
m. Whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 456/923
3. The development services director may use the North American industry classification system to assist in the
interpretation of similarity of uses.
4. When considering appropriate districts for a use not listed in the use table, the district purpose statements of the
respective districts shall be taken into consideration. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.1.2: DEVELOPMENTS WITH MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL USES:
Developments with multiple principal uses shall conform to the following:
A. When all principal uses of a development fall within one use category, the entire development is assigned to that use
category.
B. When the principal uses of a development fall within different use categories, each principal use is classified in the
applicable use category and each use is subject to all applicable regulations for that use category.
C. Developments with multiple principal uses (such as shopping centers) shall incorporate only those uses allowed in the
underlying district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.1.3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are allowed by right, but only in conjunction with a principal use, unless otherwise stated elsewhere in
this chapter. Unless otherwise stated, accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the principal use. Common
accessory uses are listed as examples in the use category descriptions. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.1.4: USE OF EXAMPLES:
The "examples" section of each use category lists uses common to that use category.
A. The examples provided are not all inclusive, but describe the types of uses that are common to that category. Similar
uses may also be permitted upon determination by the zoning administrator that they are appropriate for that use
category.
B. The names of these sample uses are generic and are based on common meanings, not on what a specific use may
call itself. For example, a use that calls itself "wholesale warehouse", but sells mostly to retail consumers, is included
in the retail sales and service category rather than the wholesale trade category. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.1.5: USES NOT INCLUDED:
The "uses not included" section provides cross references to uses that may appear to be part of a particular category,
but which are explicitly handled in a different use category. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.1.6: USE CATEGORIES:
Sections 15.3.1.7 through 15.3.1.11 of this chapter describe the characteristics of categories of uses, examples from
each category, common accessory uses and uses that are not part of a given use category. These sections are
descriptive and the examples listed are not all inclusive. Determination of the appropriate category for a proposed
principal use or accessory use not specifically listed will be made by the development services director. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 457/923
15.3.1.7: RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES:
A. Household Living:
Characteristics: Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household on a month to month or longer basis.
Examples of principal uses:
Congregate care facilities where individual units comply with the definition of a "dwelling unit".
Group homes (8 persons or fewer).
Multi-family building, retirement center apartments, other apartments.
Single-family detached, single-family attached, two-family houses (duplex), corner lot duplexes, multiplexes, zero
lot line houses, townhouses, manufactured homes.
Upper story residential.
Other structures with self-contained dwelling units.
Examples of accessory uses:
Accessory apartments.
Greenhouses and nurseries not engaged in retail trade.
Hobbies.
Home occupations.
In-home care for fewer than six (6) persons.
Parking of occupants' registered vehicles.
Raising of pets.
Recreational activities.
Storage sheds.
Swimming pools.
Uses not included:
Bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, motels, inns, extended stay facilities (see subsection 15.3.1.9D,
"Overnight Accommodations", of this chapter).
Boarding or rooming houses (see subsection B, "Group Living", of this section).
Group home/other (more than 8 persons) (see subsection B, "Group Living", of this section).
Halfway house (see subsection 15.3.1.8I, "Social Service Institutions", of this chapter).
Nursing or convalescent home (see subsection B, "Group Living", of this section).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 458/923
Residential assisted living facility not having individual dwelling units (see subsection B, "Group Living", of this
section).
B. Group Living:
Characteristics: Residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people that does not conform to the definition of
"household living". Tenancy is usually arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Generally, group living structures
have a common eating area for residents, and the residents may receive care, training or treatment.
Examples of principal uses:
Assisted or congregate living.
Boarding or rooming houses.
Dormitories.
Fraternities.
Group home/other (more than 8 persons).
Group homes/senior (more than 8 persons).
Hospices.
Monasteries and convents.
Nursing or convalescent homes.
Orphanages.
Sororities.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Food preparation and dining facilities.
Parking of vehicles for occupants and staff.
Physical rehabilitation as in the case of a nursing home.
Recreational facilities.
Uses not included:
Alternative- or post-incarceration facilities (see subsection 15.3.1.8I, "Social Service Institutions", of this chapter).
Bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, motels, inns, extended stay facilities (see subsection 15.3.1.9D,
"Overnight Accommodations", of this chapter).
Congregate care facilities where individual units comply with the definition of a dwelling unit (see subsection A,
"Household Living", of this section).
Exclusive care and treatment for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents (NAICS2
62221, 6232) (see subsection 15.3.1.8I, "Social Service Institutions", of this chapter).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 459/923
Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household on a month to month or longer basis (see subsection A,
"Household Living", of this section).
Treatment centers, transient lodging or shelters (see subsection 15.3.1.8I, "Social Service Institutions", of this
chapter). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.1.8: PUBLIC AND CIVIC USE CATEGORIES:
A. Community Service:
Characteristics: Uses of a public, nonprofit or charitable nature providing ongoing education, training or counseling
to the general public on a regular basis, without a residential component.
Examples of principal uses:
Community centers.
Libraries.
Museums.
Philanthropic institutions.
Senior centers.
Social service facilities.
Youth club facilities.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Food preparation and dining facilities.
Health, arts and crafts, child care and therapy areas.
Indoor or outdoor recreation and athletic facilities.
Limited retail sales.
Meeting areas.
Parking.
Uses not included:
Athletic or health clubs (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this chapter).
Churches, mosques, synagogues, or temples (see subsection H, "Religious Institutions", of this section).
Counseling in an office setting (see subsection 15.3.1.9C, "Offices", of this chapter).
Parks (see subsection F, "Parks And Open Areas", of this section).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 460/923
Soup kitchen (see subsection I, "Social Service Institutions", of this section).
Treatment centers, transient lodging or shelters for the homeless (see subsection I, "Social Service Institutions",
of this section). (Ord. 2013-20)
B. Day Care:
Characteristics: Uses providing care, protection and supervision for more than six (6) children or adults on a
regular basis away from their primary residences. Care is typically provided to an individual for less than eighteen
(18) hours each day, although the facility may be open twenty four (24) hours each day.
Examples of principal uses:
Adult day care programs.
Child care center.
Child care institution.
Day care.
Latch key programs.
Nursery schools.
Preschools.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Counseling in an office setting (see subsection 15.3.1.9C, "Offices", of this chapter).
Food preparation and dining facilities.
Health, arts and crafts and therapy areas.
Indoor or outdoor recreation facilities.
Parking.
Uses not included:
In-home child care for fewer than six (6) persons (see subsection 15.3.1.7A, "Household Living", of this chapter).
On site schools or facilities operated in connection with a business or other principal use where children are
cared for while parents or guardians are occupied on the premises (see subsection H, "Religious Institutions", of
this section).
C. Educational Facilities:
Characteristics: Public and private (including charter or religious) schools at the primary, elementary, middle, junior
high or high school level that provide basic academic education. Also includes colleges and other institutions of
higher learning that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree, usually in a campus setting.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 461/923
Examples of principal uses:
Boarding schools.
Community colleges.
Elementary schools.
High schools.
Liberal arts colleges.
Middle schools.
Military academies.
Nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital.
Private schools.
Seminaries.
Universities.
Examples of accessory uses:
Adult continuing education programs.
Associated offices.
Auditoriums.
Before and after school child care.
Cafeterias.
Child care.
Food services.
Health facilities.
Housing for students and faculty.
Laboratories.
Libraries.
Maintenance facilities.
Meeting areas.
Parking.
Play areas.
Recreational and sports facilities.
Support commercial (a college operated bookstore, for example).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 462/923
Theaters.
Uses not included:
Business, driving, fitness/wellness, trade and other commercial schools (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales
And Service", of this chapter).
Dance, art, music studios or classes (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this chapter).
Preschools or nursery schools (see subsection B, "Day Care", of this section). (Ord. 2013-31)
D. Government Facilities:
Characteristics: Offices, storage, maintenance and other facilities for the operation of local, state or federal
government agencies.
Examples of principal uses:
City hall.
Courthouse or judicial building.
Detention centers.
Emergency medical and ambulance stations.
Fire stations.
Government offices.
Local, state, or federal offices.
Municipal office center.
Police stations.
Post offices.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated helicopter landing facilities.
Auditorium and meeting rooms.
Cafeterias.
Camouflage telecommunications.
Child care.
Holding cells.
Infirmaries.
Limited fueling facilities.
Parking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 463/923
Satellite offices.
Uses not included:
Educational facilities (see subsection C, "Educational Facilities", of this section).
Maintenance facilities (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this chapter).
Parks and recreational facilities (see subsection F, "Parks And Open Areas", of this section).
Utilities (see subsection J, "Utilities", of this section).
Waste related service (see subsection 15.3.1.10C, "Waste Related Service", of this chapter).
E. Medical Facilities:
Characteristics: Uses providing medical or surgical care to patients, with or without inpatient care.
Examples of principal uses:
Blood plasma donation centers.
Emergency and walk-in clinics.
Hospitals.
Medical and dental clinics.
Medical centers.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated helicopter landing facilities.
Associated offices.
Cafeterias.
Chapel or other ancillary worship space.
Child care.
Housing for staff or trainees.
Laboratories.
Limited support retail.
Maintenance facilities.
Meeting areas.
Outpatient clinics.
Parking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 464/923
Pharmacies.
Recreational facilities.
Teaching facilities.
Temporary housing for relatives of patients.
Uses not included:
Exclusive care and treatment for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents (see
subsection I, "Social Service Institutions", of this section).
Nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital (see subsection C, "Educational Facilities", of this
section).
F. Parks And Open Areas:
Characteristics: Uses focusing on natural areas consisting primarily of vegetation, with passive or active outdoor
recreation areas; also includes community gardens and other open spaces with structures occupying less than five
percent (5%) of the land area.
Examples of principal uses:
Botanical gardens.
Country club or golf course.
Forest and nature preserves.
Game preserves.
Memorial parks.
Miniparks.
Nature preserves.
Neighborhood parks.
Parks.
Reservoir.
Squares, plazas or greens.
Tot lot and playgrounds.
Examples of accessory uses:
Basketball courts.
Boat docks.
Boathouse.
Clubhouses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 465/923
Concessions.
Golf driving ranges and miniature golf facilities.
Maintenance facilities.
Parking.
Play equipment.
Recreational trails.
Swimming pools.
Tennis courts.
Water park.
Uses not included:
Athletic or health clubs (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this chapter).
Membership clubs and lodges (see subsection 15.3.1.9B, "Entertainment", of this chapter).
Water towers, tanks and standpipes (see subsection J, "Utilities", of this section).
G. Passenger Terminal And Services:
Characteristics: Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes and helicopters and terminals for rail, bus, taxi or
transit services.
Examples of principal uses:
Airports.
Bus passenger terminals.
Heliports.
Landing strips.
Taxi dispatch center.
Train passenger terminals.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Concessions, including food services and retail.
Freight handling areas.
Fueling facilities.
Limited retail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 466/923
Maintenance facilities.
Parking.
Uses not included:
Hotel and similar accommodations except as expressly permitted in applicable zoning district.
H. Religious Institutions:
Characteristics: Places of assembly for worship services and related activities.
Examples of principal uses:
Churches.
Mosques.
Synagogues.
Temples.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Food services and dining areas.
Meeting room/classroom for meetings or classes not held on a daily basis.
On site child care, schools or facilities where children are cared for while parents or guardians are occupied on
the premises.
Parking.
Preschools, child care centers, nursery schools, latch key programs, intermediate child care, or adult day care
programs (see subsection B, "Day Care", of this section).
Soup kitchen.
Uses not included:
Athletic or health clubs (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this chapter).
Educational facilities (see subsection C, "Educational Facilities", of this section).
Senior centers, community centers or social service facilities (see subsection A, "Community Service", of this
section).
Staff residences located on site.
Treatment centers, transient lodging or shelters for the homeless (see subsection I, "Social Service Institutions",
of this section).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 467/923
I. Social Service Institutions:
Characteristics: Uses that primarily provide treatment for individuals with psychiatric, alcohol or drug problems, and
transient housing related to social service programs.
Examples of principal uses:
Alternative- or post-incarceration facility.
Exclusive care and treatment for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents (NAICS
62221, 6232).
Halfway house.
Neighborhood resource center.
Rehabilitative clinic.
Social service facility, soup kitchen, transient lodging or shelter for the homeless (NAICS 624, 6242).
Examples of accessory uses:
Adult educational facility.
Ancillary indoor storage.
Associated office.
Day care.
Food services and dining area.
Meeting room.
Parking.
Staff residences located on site.
Uses not included:
Assisted living facility with individual self-contained dwelling units (see subsection 15.3.1.7A, "Household Living",
of this chapter).
Assisted living facility without individual dwelling units, community residential home (see subsection 15.3.1.7B,
"Group Living", of this chapter).
Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum, memorial park (see subsection F, "Parks And Open Areas", of this
section).
Educational facility (see subsection C, "Educational Facilities", of this section).
Philanthropic institution (see subsection A, "Community Service", of this section).
J. Utilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 468/923
Characteristics: Public or private facilities that are parts of local infrastructure system providing sewer, water,
stormwater, telecommunications, electrical, natural gas or other utility services; "minor utilities" generally do not
have permanent on site staff; "major utilities" typically have on site staff on a regular basis.
Examples of principal uses:
Minor utilities:
Lift stations.
Stormwater retention and detention facilities.
Telephone exchanges.
Water and wastewater pump stations.
Major utilities:
Electrical generating plants and substations.
Electrical transmission facilities.
Stormwater pumping station.
Telecommunications tower and facilities.
Television and radio broadcasting transmitters.
Wastewater treatment plants.
Water towers, tanks, or standpipes.
Water treatment plants.
Examples of accessory uses:
Cell antennas.
Control, monitoring, data or transmission equipment.
Parking.
Security measures, such as fences.
Storage.
Uses not included:
Maintenance yards and buildings (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this chapter).
Reservoir (see subsection F, "Parks And Open Areas", of this section).
TV and radio studios (see subsection 15.3.1.9C, "Offices", of this chapter).
Utility offices (see subsection 15.3.1.9C, "Offices", of this chapter). (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 469/923
15.3.1.9: COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES:
A. Eating Establishments:
Characteristics: Establishments that prepare and sell food for on premises consumption.
Examples of principal uses:
Bistro.
Coffee shops.
Drive-ins.
Fast food without drive-through.
Outdoor vendors with permanent facilities.
Pizza delivery establishments.
Restaurant and bar.
Restaurants, limited.
Restaurants with drive-through.
Small scale catering establishments.
Yogurt or ice cream shops.
Examples of accessory uses:
Bars.
Decks and patios for outdoor seating.
Drive-through facilities.
Live music.
Off street customer and employee parking.
Valet parking facilities.
Uses not included:
Bars and nightclubs (see subsection B, "Entertainment", of this section).
B. Entertainment:
Characteristics: Generally commercial uses, varying in size providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation or
entertainment activities. Such activities may take place indoors or outdoors.
Examples of principal uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 470/923
Indoor:
Bars and nightclubs.
Indoor entertainment activities such as bowling alleys, game arcades, pool halls, dance halls, indoor firing
ranges and movie or other theaters.
Membership clubs and lodges.
Outdoor:
Batting cages.
Commercial golf driving ranges, miniature amusement parks, miniature golf facilities and water parks.
Dog or horse track.
Drive-in theaters.
Fairgrounds.
Flea markets.
Golf driving ranges.
Miniamusement parks.
Miniature golf facilities.
Riding academy or boarding stable.
Stadiums and arenas.
Theaters.
Water parks.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Concessions.
Food preparation and dining areas.
Maintenance facilities.
Parking.
Restaurants.
Uses not included:
Adult entertainment.
Botanical gardens and nature preserves (see subsection 15.3.1.8F, "Parks And Open Areas", of this chapter).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 471/923
Golf courses or country clubs (see subsection 15.3.1.8F, "Parks And Open Areas", of this chapter). (Ord. 2013-
20)
C. Offices:
Characteristics: Activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, or
financial services. These uses are sometimes compatible with residential uses, and most generate limited traffic.
Accessory uses generally have no external access or signs.
Examples of principal uses:
Advertising offices.
Business management consulting.
Counseling in an office setting.
Data processing.
Financial businesses such as lenders, investment or brokerage houses, collection agencies, or real estate and
insurance agents.
Professional services such as lawyers, accountants, bookkeepers, engineers, or architects.
Sales office.
TV and radio studios.
Travel agency.
Utility office.
Examples of accessory uses:
Cafeterias.
Camouflage telecommunications facilities.
Child care.
Health facilities for employees working on site.
Meeting rooms.
On site child care, schools or facilities where children are cared for while parents or guardians are occupied on
the premises.
Other amenities primarily for the use of on site employees.
Parking.
Small retail operations for on site workers (with no external signage).
Technical libraries.
Uses not included:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 472/923
Banks (see subsection F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this section).
Contractors and others who perform services off site, but store equipment and materials or perform fabrication or
similar work on site (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this chapter).
Dental offices except where specifically allowed as a permitted use.
Government offices (see subsection 15.3.1.8D, "Government Facilities", of this chapter).
Mail order houses (see subsection 15.3.1.10D, "Wholesale Trade", of this chapter).
Mailing or stenographic services (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this chapter).
Medical offices except where specifically allowed as a permitted use.
Offices that are part of and located with a principal use in another category (see examples of accessory uses in
other use categories).
Research, testing and development laboratories (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this
chapter).
Urgent care or emergency medical offices (see subsection F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this section).
Veterinary clinics. (Ord. 2013-31)
D. Overnight Accommodations:
Characteristics: Hotel or similar rooms designed for short term rent or lease, generally less than thirty (30) days.
Examples of principal uses:
Bed and breakfast establishments.
Extended stay facilities.
Hotels and motels.
Inns.
Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Food preparation and dining facilities.
Laundry facilities.
Limited storage.
Meeting facilities.
Parking.
Stealth cell antennas.
Swimming pools and other recreational facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 473/923
Uses not included:
Transient lodging or shelters for the homeless (see subsection 15.3.1.8I, "Social Service Institutions", of this
chapter). (Ord. 2013-20)
E. Parking, Commercial:
Characteristics: Facilities that provide parking for a fee where the parking is not accessory to a specific use and/or
where the parking is consistently open to the general public.
Examples of principal uses:
Mixed parking lots (partially accessory to a specific use, partly to rent for others).
Public transit park and ride facilities.
Short and long term fee parking facilities.
Examples of accessory uses:
Small structures intended to shield parking attendants from the weather.
Uses not included:
Bus barns (see subsection 15.3.1.10B, "Warehouse And Freight Movement", of this chapter).
Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use, but that charge the public to park for occasional events
nearby (see examples of accessory uses in other use categories).
Sales or servicing of vehicles (see subsection H, "Vehicle Sales And Service", of this section). (Ord. 2013-31)
F. Retail Sales And Service:
Characteristics: Establishments providing new or used consumer products for sale or rental or providing personal
services or entertainment to the general public.
Examples of principal uses:
Sales oriented:
Farmers' markets or farm stand.
Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home and business goods including alcoholic beverages,
antiques, appliances, art, art supplies, baked goods, bicycles, building supplies and lumber, books, cameras,
carpet and floor coverings, crafts, clothing, computers, convenience goods, dry goods, electronic equipment,
fabric, flowers, furniture, flea market or auction, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home
improvements, household products, jewelry, liquor, manufactured homes, medical supplies, musical
instruments, pet food and/or pets, pharmaceuticals, photo finishing, picture frames, plants, printed material,
produce, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco and related products, vehicle parts and videos.
Personal service oriented:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 474/923
Animal care facilities, including veterinary clinic, animal hospital, kennels and grooming services.
Athletic or health clubs.
Banks.
Body art studios.
Business, driving, trade and other commercial schools.
Dance, art, fitness/wellness, gymnastic or music studios or classes.
Dry cleaning and laundry drop off establishments.
Hair, nail, tanning and personal care services.
Laundromats.
Massage therapy.
Mortuaries or funeral homes.
Photocopy, blueprint and quick sign services.
Photographic studios.
Psychics and mediums.
Security services.
Taxidermists.
Urgent care or emergency medical offices.
Repair oriented:
Locksmith.
Repair of appliances, bicycles, canvas products, clocks, computers.
Examples of accessory uses:
Accessory residential unit for security purposes.
Associated offices.
Automatic teller machines (ATM).
Crematorium.
Food preparation and dining areas.
Kennels.
Manufacture or repackaging of goods for on site sale.
Parking.
Parking lot/sidewalk sales.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 475/923
Storage of goods.
Uses not included:
Adult entertainment except where expressly allowed as a permitted use.
Large scale catering (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this chapter).
Laundry and dry cleaning plants (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this chapter).
Lumberyards and other building material sales that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail
orientation (see subsection 15.3.1.10D, "Wholesale Trade", of this chapter).
Repair and service of motor vehicles, motorcycles, RVs, boats, and light and medium trucks (see subsection H,
"Vehicle Sales And Service", of this section).
Restaurants (see subsection A, "Eating Establishments", of this section).
Sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies,
machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment and store fixtures (see subsection
15.3.1.10D, "Wholesale Trade", of this chapter).
G. Self-Service Storage:
Characteristics: Facilities providing separate storage areas for personal or business use, designed to allow private
access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property or goods.
Examples of principal uses:
Miniwarehouses.
Self-storage warehouse.
Examples of accessory uses:
Accessory residential unit for security purposes.
Leasing offices.
Outside storage of boats and campers.
Uses not included:
Rental of light or medium trucks (see subsection H, "Vehicle Sales And Service", of this section).
Storage areas used as manufacturing uses (see subsection 15.3.1.10A, "Light Industrial Service", of this
chapter).
Storage areas used for sales, service and repair operations (see subsection F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this
section).
Transfer and storage businesses where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the
primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred (see subsection 15.3.1.10B, "Warehouse And Freight
Movement", of this chapter). (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 476/923
H. Vehicle Sales And Service:
Characteristics: Direct sales of and service for passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer
motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles.
Examples of principal uses:
Fuel stations, including full service, miniservice and self-service.
Towing service.
Vehicle sales, rental, or leasing facilities, including passenger vehicles, motorcycles, light and medium trucks,
boats and other recreational vehicles.
Vehicle service, full; including auto body shops, auto paint shops, upholstery shops.
Vehicle service, limited; including auto detailing, auto repair, battery sales and installation, quick lubrication
facilities, tire sales and mounting, car washes.
Examples of accessory uses:
Associated offices.
Parking.
Sales of parts.
Towing.
Vehicle fueling.
Vehicle storage.
Uses not included:
Refueling facilities for fleet vehicles that belong to a specific use (see examples of accessory uses in other use
categories).
Retail sales of farm equipment and machinery and earthmoving and heavy construction equipment (see
subsection 15.3.1.10F, "Heavy Industrial", of this chapter).
Vehicle parts sales as a principal use (see subsection F, "Retail Sales And Service", of this section). (Ord. 2013-
31)
15.3.1.10: INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES:
A. Light Industrial Service:
Characteristics: Establishments engaged in manufacturing, assembly, repair or service of industrial, business or
consumer machines, equipment, products or byproducts, mainly by providing centralized services for retail outlets.
This category includes contractor, building maintenance and similar establishments that provide services off site.
These are distinguished from consumer repair services in part because few individual customers come to the site.
Examples of principal uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 477/923
Building, heating, plumbing or electrical contractors, contractors and others who perform services off site, but
store equipment and materials or perform fabrication or similar work on site.
Catering facility, large scale.
Clothing or textile manufacturing.
Commercial bakery.
Crematorium.
Dental laboratories.
Dry cleaning plant.
Exterminators.
Janitorial and building maintenance services.
Large scale catering establishments.
Laundry, dry cleaning and carpet cleaning plants.
Mailing and stenographic services.
Maintenance facilities.
Manufacture or assembly of consumer equipment, instruments (including musical instruments), appliances,
precision items and other electrical items.
Movie production facilities.
Photofinishing laboratories.
Printing, publishing and lithography.
Production of artwork and toys.
Repair of scientific or professional instruments, electric motors.
Research, testing and development laboratories.
Sign making.
Storage areas used as manufacturing uses.
Truck stop or truck plaza.
Vehicle and equipment maintenance facilities.
Welding, machine and tool repair shops.
Woodworking, including cabinetmakers and furniture manufacturing.
Examples of accessory uses:
Cafeterias.
Child care.
Employee recreational facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 478/923
Offices.
On site repair facilities.
Parking.
Single residential unit for security purposes.
Storage.
Uses not included:
Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material (see subsection C, "Waste Related
Service", of this section).
Small scale catering establishments (see subsection 15.3.1.9A, "Eating Establishments", of this chapter).
B. Warehouse And Freight Movement:
Characteristics: Establishments involved in the storage or movement of goods, primarily for commercial users with
few retail customers coming to the site.
Examples of principal uses:
Bus barn.
Cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers.
Household moving and general freight storage.
Parcel services.
Separate warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores.
Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials.
Transfer and storage businesses where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the
primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred.
Examples of accessory uses:
Cafeterias.
Child care.
Employee recreational facilities.
Offices.
Outdoor storage yard.
Parking.
Single residential unit for security purposes.
Truck fleet parking and maintenance areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 479/923
Uses not included:
Mailing and shipping services.
Miniwarehouses, multi-story enclosed storage facilities or storage garages (see subsection 15.3.1.9G, "Self-
Service Storage", of this chapter).
Solid or liquid waste transfer or composting (see subsection C, "Waste Related Service", of this section).
C. Waste Related Service:
Characteristics: Uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for processing or for transfer to another
location.
Examples of principal uses:
Animal waste processing.
Landfill.
Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material.
Recycling centers.
Solid or liquid waste transfer or composting.
Wrecking or salvage yard.
Examples of accessory uses:
Offices.
On site refueling and repair.
Parking.
Recycling of materials.
Repackaging and shipment of byproducts.
Uses not included:
Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials (see subsection B, "Warehouse And Freight
Movement", of this section).
D. Wholesale Trade:
Characteristics: Establishments involved in the sale, lease or rental of products primarily intended for industrial,
institutional or commercial customers. The uses emphasize on site order taking and may include display areas.
These businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are typically very
limited.
Examples of principal uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 480/923
Lumberyards and other building material sales that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail
orientation.
Mail order houses.
Sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies,
machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment and store fixtures.
Wholesale of food, clothing, auto parts and building hardware.
Examples of accessory uses:
Cafeterias.
Child care.
Minor fabrication services.
Offices.
Parking.
Product repair.
Repackaging of goods.
Single residential unit for security purposes.
Warehouses.
Uses not included:
Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home and business goods (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales
And Service", of this chapter).
Warehouse and freight movement uses (see subsection B, "Warehouse And Freight Movement", of this section).
E. Light Industrial:
Characteristics: Establishments involved in research and development activities and operations involving light
assembly.
Examples of principal uses:
Drink bottling.
Milk processing plant.
Processing of food and related products.
Examples of accessory uses:
Cafeterias.
Drainage structures.
Offices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 481/923
Parking.
Product repair.
Repackaging of goods.
Warehouses.
Uses not included:
Animal waste processing (see subsection C, "Waste Related Service", of this section).
Repair and service of motor vehicles, motorcycles, RVs, boats, and light and medium trucks (see subsection
15.3.1.9H, "Vehicle Sales And Service", of this chapter).
Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home and business goods (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales
And Service", of this chapter).
F. Heavy Industrial:
Characteristics: Manufacturing and processing operations that do not fall under subsections A, "Light Industrial
Service", and E, "Light Industrial", of this section and that are not excluded below.
Examples of principal uses:
Abattoirs and slaughterhouses.
Animal concentrations, including commercial feedlots, pig farms and similar uses.
Animal processing, packing, treating and storage.
Concrete batching and asphalt mixing.
Feed and fertilizer mills.
Fuel oil distributors.
Heavy equipment sales and rental.
Power generation.
Production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products.
Production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing.
Railroads and appurtenances, right of way and tracks.
Retail sales of farm equipment and machinery and earthmoving and heavy construction equipment.
Sawmills.
Sheet metal shops.
Woodworking, including cabinetmakers and furniture manufacturing.
Examples of accessory uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 482/923
Cafeterias.
Drainage structures.
Offices.
Parking.
Product repair.
Repackaging of goods.
Warehouses.
Uses not included:
Animal waste processing (see subsection C, "Waste Related Service", of this section).
Repair and service of motor vehicles, motorcycles, RVs, boats, and light and medium trucks (see subsection
15.3.1.9H, "Vehicle Sales And Service", of this chapter).
Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home and business goods (see subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales
And Service", of this chapter). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.1.11: OTHER USE CATEGORIES:
A. Agriculture:
Characteristics: Farming and related uses and uses that are commonly incidental to agricultural uses.
Examples of principal uses:
Agricultural crops.
Community gardens.
Feed stores.
Grain storage.
Examples of accessory uses:
Auction ring.
Barns.
Farm stands with retail sales of products produced or harvested on site.
Garages.
Offices.
Sheds.
Silos.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 483/923
Stables.
Uses not included:
Animal concentrations, including commercial feedlots, pig farms and similar uses (see subsection 15.3.1.10F,
"Heavy Industrial", of this chapter).
Animal processing, packing, treating and storage (see subsection 15.3.1.10F, "Heavy Industrial", of this chapter).
Animal waste processing (see subsection 15.3.1.10C, "Waste Related Service", of this chapter).
Kennels with overnight facilities (see personal service oriented in subsection 15.3.1.9F, "Retail Sales And
Service", of this chapter).
Processing of food and related products (see subsection 15.3.1.10F, "Heavy Industrial", of this chapter).
B. Resource Extraction:
Characteristics: Mining, quarrying and similar uses.
Examples of principal uses:
Mines.
Quarries, gravel or rock.
Surface mines.
Examples of accessory uses:
Garages.
Materials storage, open air.
Offices.
Sheds.
Silos.
Uses not included:
Materials processing (see various industrial categories in section 15.3.1.10 of this chapter). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.2: PRINCIPAL USES:
15.3.2.1: STANDARDS FOR PRINCIPAL USES:
A. General Standards:
1. All principal uses are subject to the general standards for height, setback, signs, parking and other matters, as
applicable to the district in which the use is located.
2. Approval of principal uses may be subject to reasonable conditions imposed through the approval process to
ensure compatibility between the proposed use and the permitted uses in the district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 484/923
B. Special Performance And Design Standards:
1. Certain principal uses are subject to additional standards in some or all districts.
2. Additional standards and/or conditions may be added as part of a special use approval.
3. Additional standards are set forth in section 15.4.7 of this title and are in addition to the general district standards.
C. Mobile Home Standards:
1. Nonconforming, Removal By December 1, 2014: All existing nonconforming mobile homes located in an AG, RR,
SIU, or R-1 district that are not the primary structure, and all nonconforming mobile homes located in any other
zoning district, other than those located within a registered mobile home park, shall be removed by December 1,
2014. Following that date they will not be considered a legal nonconforming use and shall not be subject to chapter
7, "Nonconformities", of this title.
2. Property Maintenance: All existing mobile homes in all zoning districts, used for residential purposes, shall comply
with the international property maintenance code and must be maintained in a sanitary and habitable condition.
3. Vacant, Nuisance: All existing nonconforming mobile homes used for residential purposes that are vacant for a
period of six (6) months or more after December 1, 2009, are hereby declared to be abandoned for residential
purposes and if used for residential purposes after such abandonment, will constitute a nuisance under this code.
D. Extended Stay Motels/Hotels:
1. Occupancy Standards: Occupancy of any hotel or motel, or bed and breakfast inn, by any individual shall be
limited to no more than thirty (30) consecutive days; provided that such occupancy shall be allowed for more than
thirty (30) days within extended stay units as defined in section 15.11.4 of this title and which comply with the city of
Carbondale's adopted residential building and fire codes. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.3: SPECIAL USES:
15.3.3.1: STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USES:
A. General Standards:
1. All special uses are subject to the general standards for height, setback, signs, parking and other matters, as
applicable to the district in which the use is located.
2. Approval of special uses may be subject to reasonable conditions imposed through the approval process to ensure
compatibility between the proposed use and the permitted uses in the district.
B. Special Performance And Design Standards:
1. Certain special uses are subject to additional standards in some or all districts.
2. Those standards are set forth in this section and are in addition to the general district standards and any conditions
that may be imposed through the special use review process.
C. All-Terrain Vehicle And Motorcycle Sales (In BPR District): Motorcycle and all-terrain vehicle (ATV) sales shall:
1. Provide off street loading in accordance with section 15.4.8 of this title.
2. Be limited to indoor sales and storage of merchandise only and shall not include repair or maintenance services.
3. Test driving of merchandise shall be limited to those vehicles which can be legally operated on public streets in
accordance with title 18 of this code and the current Illinois vehicle code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 485/923
D. Automobile Parking, Public And Commercial (R-3 District): Automobile parking, public and commercial is allowed as a
special use in an R-3 district, subject to the following standards. Such parking facility shall:
1. Provide adequate screening and/or fencing.
2. Be provided with lighting situated in such manner as to protect all adjoining property from unreasonable
interference.
3. Be surfaced to meet the paving standards required in the zoning district in which the principal use is located.
E. Automobile Repair Establishments (NB District): Automobile repair establishments are allowed as a special use in an
NB district, subject to the following standards. Such repair facility shall:
1. An automobile repair business shall only repair automobiles and pickup trucks. No motorcycles or large trucks
shall be repaired.
2. All vehicle repairs shall be done within the enclosed building.
3. At the time the special use is granted, the city council shall determine the maximum number of service bays
permitted for the establishment.
4. No vehicles being repaired shall be stored or parked outside the building.
5. No vehicles shall be offered for sale at the automobile repair business.
6. An automobile repair establishment shall meet all requirements in this code and state of Illinois laws and
regulations pertaining to air, water and noise pollution and proper disposal of fluids and wastes.
F. Bed And Breakfast Establishments (In AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PUD, NB, PAR, Or PA District): Bed and
breakfast establishments in any AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PUD, NB, PAR, or PA district shall meet the following
requirements:
1. A residential appearance of the premises shall be maintained when a bed and breakfast is built new, renovated
from an existing residential structure, or located in a residential appearing structure.
2. The operator shall reside in the bed and breakfast establishment or on contiguous property.
3. The city council shall determine the maximum number of guestrooms at the time the special use is granted.
4. The city council may restrict the location and size of signs in a more restrictive manner than allowed in sections
15.4.10.5 and 15.4.10.6 of this title at the time the special use is granted.
5. The facility shall be licensed as a bed and breakfast establishment by the appropriate jurisdiction. If located in a
jurisdiction with no licensing procedure for bed and breakfast establishments, the facility shall meet all applicable
requirements of sections 5-4-1 through 5-4-12 of this code prior to issuance of a zoning certificate.
G. Cabins, Lodges, Etc. (AG And RR Districts): Cabins in the AG or RR district shall meet the following requirements:
1. A residential appearance of the premises shall be maintained when a cabin or lodge is built new, renovated from
an existing residential structure, or located in a residential appearing structure.
2. The operator shall reside on the property or on contiguous property.
3. The city council shall determine the maximum number of cabins and/or guestrooms at the time the special use is
granted. The density shall be no greater than one cabin per the minimum lot size for the district in which it is
located.
4. The city council may restrict the location and size of signs in a more restrictive manner than allowed in sections
15.4.10.5 and 15.4.10.6 of this title at the time the special use is granted.
5. The facility shall meet all applicable city, township, county and/or state requirements including fire, revenue
requirements and issuance of and shall submit evidence of compliance prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 486/923
H. Contract Construction Services (AG District): Contract construction services shall be allowed in the AG district subject
to the site plan review process of section 15.6.10 of this title and subject to the following standards:
1. Outdoor storage areas shall not be placed in any required setback.
2. All outdoor storage areas used in conjunction with contract construction services shall be screened from view by a
planting screen of at least six feet (6') in height.
3. "To screen" means densely planted vegetation that is site obscuring and that prevents direct illumination from
passing through from one side to another.
4. All open storage areas shall be paved with a dust free surface. Access aisles, loading zones and parking areas
shall be surfaced to meet the standards of subsection 15.4.8.5B2 of this title.
5. Any outdoor lighting at such facilities shall be shielded so as to not deflect onto adjacent properties.
I. Day Care Centers:
1. Day Care Centers In The AG, RR, R-3, BPR, BWA, BPL, NB, SB, PA, LI And GI Districts: Day care centers, child
care centers, adult day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, kindergartens, playgroups, and centers or
workshops for the mentally and physically handicapped located in any AG, RR, R-3, BPR, BWA, BPL, NB, SB, PA,
LI, or GI district shall provide adequate screening and/or fencing and be designed to be compatible with permitted
uses and be subject to all state licensing and fire regulations.
2. Adult Day Care Centers In The PUD, LI And GI Districts: Day care centers for adults including adult day care
centers, and centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped adults shall be allowed in the PUD, LI,
and GI districts as special uses, subject to requirements for adequate screening and/or fencing and be designed to
be compatible with permitted uses and be subject to all state licensing and fire regulations.
3. Additional Day Care Centers In PUD District: Day care centers for children which were not approved as part of the
development plan including child care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, kindergartens, playgroups, and
centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped children which shall provide adequate screening
and/or fencing and be designed to be compatible with permitted uses and be subject to all state licensing and fire
regulations. (PUD)
J. Day Care Homes:
1. Day Care Homes I, II, And III (AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PA, PAR And PUD Districts): Day care homes I, II,
and III in any AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, NB, PA, PAR, or PUD district shall:
a. Provide adequate screening and/or fencing.
b. Be designed to be compatible with permitted uses.
c. Be subject to all state licensing and fire regulations.
d. Permit outdoor play only between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and dusk.
e. Place no play equipment in front yard.
f. Shall comply with occupancy limits as defined in section 15.11.4 of this title.
K. Drive-In Or Drive-Through Facility (BPR District): A drive-in or drive-through facility in any BPR district shall provide an
appropriate parking and vehicular circulation plan and if deemed necessary by the nature of the proposed use, as
well as stacking space for vehicles as required by section 15.4.8.9 of this title.
L. Drive-In Theaters (AG District): Drive-in theaters in the AG district shall provide adequate screening to protect
adjoining property from unreasonable interference.
M. Educational Facilities (NB District):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 487/923
1. Driving schools in the NB district shall meet the following requirements:
a. Shall be limited to activities within completely enclosed buildings. This may include indoor simulators, indoor
classrooms, and office use.
N. Dwelling Units In Certain Nonresidential Districts (NB, PA, PAR, And SB):
1. In the SB or PA district, dwelling units shall be permitted that are permitted in the R-3 district and subject to the
same design standards and occupancy restrictions that apply in the R-3 district. The minimum setbacks for the
development shall conform to the R-3 district but shall not be less than the district in which it is located.
2. In the PAR district, dwelling units are permitted as in the R-2 district and subject to the same occupancy
restrictions. Such residential uses and structures shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of the R-2
district, the same as if they were located in such district.
3. In the NB district, dwelling units other than those permitted in the lowest density adjoining residential district, are
allowed in nonresidential buildings constructed in residentially zoned areas, but for which conversion to a different
use is proposed. Occupancy of each dwelling unit shall be subject to the same occupancy restrictions as in the
lowest density adjoining residential district. Adjoining shall be interpreted to include across any street or alley.
O. Ecotourism Related Activities In The AG District: Certain uses are allowed as a special use in the AG district with the
intent of accommodating the expansion of the ecotourism industry. When requesting a special use, the applicant shall
clearly indicate how the proposed development supports the city's goal of promoting ecotourism.
P. Group Homes:
1. Except as otherwise provided in certain districts, where a group home I is allowed as a special use, it shall comply
with the administrative occupancy permit requirements related to spacing and licensing in section 15.6.4 of this
title.
2. Except as otherwise provided in certain districts, where a group home II is allowed as a special use, it shall comply
with the administrative occupancy permit requirements related to spacing and licensing in section 15.6.4 of this
title.
Q. Inns (AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PAR, Or PA District): Inns in any AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PAR, or PA
district shall meet the following requirements:
1. A residential appearance of the premises shall be maintained when an inn is built new, renovated from an existing
residential structure, or located in a residential appearing structure.
2. The operator shall reside in the inn or on contiguous property.
3. The city council shall determine the maximum number of guestrooms at the time the special use is granted.
4. At the time the special use is granted, the city council shall determine if a public eating facility is permitted and
shall determine the maximum number of seats in the public eating facility.
5. The city council may restrict the location and size of signs in a more restrictive manner than allowed in sections
15.4.10.5 and 15.4.10.6 of this title at the time the special use is granted.
6. The facility shall meet all applicable city, township, county and/or state requirements including fire, revenue
requirements and issuance of and shall submit evidence of compliance prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate.
7. Alcoholic beverages may be sold if permitted by a valid local liquor license but shall be sold by the drink with
meals. No package sales for consumption on or off the premises shall be permitted.
R. Junkyard, Auto Wrecking Yard, Or Storage (LI And GI Districts): Junkyards, automobile wrecking yards, or storage
may be allowed as special uses in the LI and GI districts. These uses shall be permanently screened from view to a
height of at least eight feet (8').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 488/923
S. Miniwarehouses (R-3 And SB Districts): Miniwarehouses may be permitted as special uses in R-3, high density
residential and SB, secondary business, subject to the following requirements in addition to any other requirements
for miniwarehouses established by this title:
1. Storage shall be within completely enclosed building. Outside storage is prohibited.
2. Storage of explosives or radioactive materials is prohibited.
3. Maximum height of storage buildings shall be eighteen feet (18').
4. A decorative landscaped area not less than five feet (5') in width shall be provided continuously (except for
authorized curb cuts) along all property boundaries that adjoin a public street. Grass, seed, or sod shall not
constitute decorative landscaping. Said landscaped area shall be maintained in such a manner as not to impair
vehicle visibility at corner intersections. No additional decorative landscaped areas for the project office, the
manager's quarters (if provided), or the driveways shall be required.
T. Miniature Golf, Batting Cages, And Driving Ranges (NB District): Miniature golf, batting cages, and driving ranges in
the NB district shall meet the following requirements:
1. Not to include driving ranges.
2. Hours of operation not to exceed nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
U. Mobile Homes On Individual Lots (RR District): Mobile homes placed on lots as special uses in an RR district must
meet all of the minimum setback and floor area requirements for the district in which they are located. Mobile homes
placed as special uses shall meet the minimum floor area requirement as they are originally designed and
manufactured to be assembled, without additions, except additions commonly referred to as "tip outs" which are
specifically designed and manufactured to be assembled with the particular mobile home. For purposes of this
section, floor area calculations shall be measured from the faces of exterior walls including "tip outs", if any, but
excluding tongue and hitch. The tongue, hitch, and wheels must be removed; the mobile home must be mounted on
a permanent foundation; the mobile home must be completely skirted and tied down in accordance with this code.
The mobile homes must comply with all applicable energy efficiency codes.
V. Private Access Roads (All Districts Where Allowed): Private access roads or streets to or from a permitted use in an
adjoining district shall:
1. Provide appropriate screening and/or fencing.
2. Be provided with lighting situated in such a manner as to protect all adjoining property from unreasonable
interference.
3. Be surfaced to meet the paving standards required in the zoning district in which the principal use is located or the
zoning district in which the access road is located, depending upon which district's standards are stricter, as
provided in subsection 15.4.8.5B of this title.
4. Be limited to one-way traffic flow (entrance only or exit only) where feasible.
W. Restaurants (NB District): Restaurants in the NB district shall meet the following requirements:
1. The city council shall determine the maximum amount of patron seating allowed, at the time the special use is
granted.
2. No drive-through or curb service shall be permitted.
3. Alcoholic beverages may be sold if permitted by a valid local liquor license but shall be sold only by the drink with
meals. No package sales for consumption on or off the premises shall be permitted.
X. Senior Housing Conversion Development (R-1, R-2, And R-3 Districts): Senior citizen housing conversion
developments in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts may be allowed as a special use. The special use shall be granted
only to allow the conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to residential use by senior citizens. Special use shall
be granted and developed on the basis of the plan and building facade design submitted with the special use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 489/923
application. The number of dwelling units in a senior citizen housing conversion development shall be set by the city
council at the time the special use is approved. The following additional development standards apply to such a
development when allowed in the R-1 district:
1. Minimum Floor Area: Three hundred (300) square feet of floor area within each dwelling unit. Garages and
common areas shall not be counted toward the three hundred (300) square feet.
2. Maximum Occupancy: Occupancy of a senior citizen housing conversion unit shall be limited to one senior citizen
and his or her spouse except that one additional person may occupy the dwelling unit while acting as a caregiver to
the senior citizen and/or the spouse occupying the dwelling unit. In the case of unmarried or widowed senior
citizens, maximum occupancy of the senior citizen housing conversion unit shall be limited to two (2) senior citizens
except that one additional person may occupy the dwelling unit while acting as a caregiver to a senior citizen
occupying the dwelling unit.
3. Minimum Parking Spaces: A minimum parking ratio of one space per senior citizen housing conversion unit shall
be provided unless the city council determines at the time of special use approval that a higher minimum number is
required. The determination shall be based on the nature of the proposed occupancy, e.g., size of units, number of
occupants, number of on site service providers, likelihood of occupants to own cars, etc.
4. List Of Occupants: The owner of a senior citizen housing conversion development or senior citizen housing
conversion unit shall maintain at all times a current list of all occupants of the development or unit. Said list shall
contain the names, birth dates and relationship status of each occupant of each unit by unit number. Said list shall
be made available to the city at the request of the city for purposes of determining compliance with the occupancy
requirements of this section. To facilitate securing occupant's information, said owner shall require in all rental
agreements or leases a condition requiring occupants to furnish all information required for said list. Any failure to
secure, maintain or provide said list of occupants to the city shall constitute a violation of this section on the part of
the owner.
Y. Township Governmental Services (AG District):
1. Upon special use approval for a township governmental service facility by the city council, development of the
facility shall be subject to site plan requirements as outlined in section 15.6.10 of this title.
2. All outdoor storage areas used in conjunction with township governmental services shall be screened from view by
an opaque fence or planting screen of at least six feet (6') in height. Such storage areas shall not be placed in any
required setbacks.
3. Any outdoor lighting at such facilities shall be shielded so as to not deflect onto adjacent properties. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.3.4: ACCESSORY USES, STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS:
15.3.4.1: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. General Standards: Accessory buildings and other accessory structures except communication towers expressly
permitted by this title shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Location: No accessory building shall be erected within three feet (3') of any side or rear lot line, and no accessory
building shall be erected in any required minimum front yards. No separate accessory building shall be erected
within five feet (5') of any other structure. No accessory building shall be erected or remain on any lot or site that
does not contain a principal structure.
2. Use:
a. The use of an accessory building or structure shall be limited to an allowed accessory use or to an extension of
the principal use of the principal building on the site;
b. In no case shall an accessory building or structure be used for a second principal use on a site.
B. Size/Scale/Number; Special Standards For R-1, R-2, R-3 And PUD Districts: The following standards shall apply to
accessory buildings in all R-1, R-2, R-3 and PUD districts:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 490/923
1. There shall be no more than two (2) accessory buildings on a lot or tract with one principal building.
2. The floor area of any accessory building shall not exceed the larger of the following:
a. Eight hundred (800) square feet; or
b. The combined floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.
3. The height of an accessory building shall not exceed the lower of the following:
a. Ten feet (10') less than the permitted height for the zoning district; or
b. Twenty five feet (25').
Note that this height limit does not apply to permitted antenna structures or the towers or other support systems
for them.
C. Size/Scale/Number; GI And LI Districts:
1. Accessory buildings in these districts shall not be located in a required yard, buffer or setback area of any kind;
2. There is no separate limit for the height or size of an accessory building in these districts;
3. There is no limit on the number of accessory buildings in these districts. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.4.2: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Home Office:
1. Applicability:
a. A home office shall be allowed as an accessory use in any lawful dwelling unit located in the AG, RR, R-1, R-1-
D, R-2, R-3, PUD or PAD district, provided that it conforms to the standards set forth in subsection A2 of this
section;
b. This use is a use by right; no permit or other approval shall be required for a home office; and
c. An activity or use that does not qualify as a home office may qualify as a home occupation, requiring a permit in
accordance with the provisions of subsection B of this section.
2. Standards: To qualify as a home office, the use must meet all of the following criteria:
a. It shall involve no modifications to the exterior of the dwelling;
b. It shall involve no structural alterations to the interior of the dwelling;
c. If the home office is in an accessory building, it shall involve no modifications to the accessory building that affect
the outside of the building other than the installation of necessary windows and doors for the office;
d. It shall involve no special equipment other than typical office equipment;
e. The occupation to which it relates shall not involve a commercial vehicle or a personal vehicle containing
advertising other than bumper stickers if the principal parking place for the vehicle is at the dwelling unit;
f. The home office shall not employ for work on the premises any person who does not reside in the dwelling;
g. There shall be no storage of inventory for sale in the home office or other parts of the dwelling unit;
h. There shall be no regular practice of inviting customers, clients, suppliers or others to the home office to conduct
business; and
i. There shall be no exterior sign related to the home office or the occupation that it serves.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 491/923
B. Home Occupation:
1. Applicability:
a. A home occupation located in any lawful dwelling unit located in the AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PUD, or PAD
district, meeting all of the criteria set forth in subsection B2 of this section is a use by right; it shall require a
zoning certificate, to be issued administratively in accordance with section 15.6.2 of this title;
b. A home occupation located in any lawful dwelling unit located in the AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PUD, or PAD
district, that meets most but not all of the criteria set forth in subsection B2 of this section may be allowed as a
special use by the city council, in accordance with section 15.6.8 of this title.
2. Standards: To qualify as a home occupation, the use must meet all of the following criteria:
a. No persons other than members of the family residing on the premises in question shall be engaged in such
occupation;
b. The total horizontal area, including, but not limited to, basement areas and cellar areas, used for a home
occupation does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the entire, aggregate horizontal floor area, including,
but not limited to, basement areas and cellar areas, of all dwelling units and all accessory buildings located on
the premises in question;
c. There is no change in the outside appearance of any buildings or of the premises or other visible evidence of the
conduct of such home occupations other than any sign permitted for home occupations by section 15.4.10.5 of
this title;
d. No sales, other than the sale of goods produced or repaired in connection with such occupation and occasional
sales of products normally sold by other businesses similar to the home occupation are made on the premises in
question;
e. Any need for parking space created because of the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing
off the street parking space;
f. No noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, smoke, or electrical interference of any kind that is either noxious or
unreasonably disturbing to others not engaged in such home occupation is caused by or results from such home
occupation;
g. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary hereinabove contained, home occupation shall not be construed to
include the occupations of chiropractic treatment, dentistry, law, medicine, optometry and real estate sales and
rentals.
h. A petition of support, signed by the occupants of all adjoining property and adjacent properties across the street,
shall be submitted to the planning services division at the time of application.
C. Vacation Rental Units:
1. Applicability:
a. A vacation rental unit meeting all of the criteria set forth in subsection C2 of this section is a use by right; it shall
require a zoning certificate, to be issued administratively in accordance with section 15.6.2 of this title;
2. Standards: To qualify as a vacation rental unit, the use must meet all of the following criteria:
a. Vacation rental units shall be limited to owner occupied or lessee occupied property;
b. Vacation rental units shall be limited to any legally constructed primary or accessory structure designed and built
for use as a dwelling;
c. Occupancy of the vacation rental unit shall comply with the occupancy standards of the zoning district in which
the unit is located;
d. For any one renter, vacation rental units shall not be rented for any period shorter than twenty four (24) hours or
longer than twenty nine (29) days;
e. All advertisements for the vacation rental unit must include the applicable permit number in its listing;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 492/923
f. The homeowner or lessee must maintain a vacation rental unit license as permitted by the building and
neighborhood services division;
g. The licensee must maintain fire, hazard and liability insurance on the property;
h. The licensee must maintain minimum liability insurance with limits not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for each individual and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence;
i. Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit. A property owner may count one on street parking
space toward the number of parking spaces required. Minimum parking requirements do not apply to vacation
rental units located in the BPR, primary business, zoning district. (Ord. 2017-03)
15.3.4.3: ON SITE STORAGE AND PARKING OR USE OF MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
OR CERTAIN VEHICLES:
A. Parking, Storage, Or Use Of Major Recreational Equipment: For purposes of these regulations, "major recreational
equipment" is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup truck campers not mounted on said
pickup truck, motorized dwellings exceeding twenty feet (20') in length, tent trailers, utility trailers and the like, tents,
and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No
major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in a carport or
enclosed building or behind the front line of a building. The recreational vehicle must be parked or stored on an
improved surface in accordance with the paving standards for the district in which it is located. Such recreational
equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed seventy two (72) hours during
loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked
or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use.
B. Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: Automotive vehicles, trucks or trailers of any kind or type without current
license shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings.
C. Mobile Homes, Trailers, Vehicles, Semitrailers, Cargo Shipping Containers, And Movable Structures:
1. Prohibited: No mobile home, trailer, vehicle, semitrailer, or cargo shipping container, except those as allowed in
subsection C2 of this section, or similar movable structure shall be located or used on any property for business or
industrial use, or for uses accessory to any principal structure, including storage of any kind, in all zoning districts.
2. Exceptions: This subsection shall not apply to licensed and operable vehicles, trailers, or semitrailers parked in off
street loading spaces for a maximum of ninety (90) days, construction trailers at active construction sites, or those
portable or modular storage buildings for which building and zoning permits have been issued by the city of
Carbondale. Bona fide truck or equipment terminals or truck or equipment sales or leasing establishments for
which a zoning certificate has been issued in conformance with this title may store those vehicles, trailers, or
semitrailers sold, leased, or stored as part of their business operation. This subsection shall not apply to mobile
homes used for residential purposes in conformance with all other provisions of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.4.4: RECREATIONAL PLAY EQUIPMENT:
For purposes of these regulations, "recreational play equipment" is defined as including, but not limited to, trampolines,
swing sets, swimming pools, etc. No recreational play equipment shall be located within any required minimum front yard
on any lot in a residential district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.4.5: SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS REGULATED:
Satellite dish antennas shall not be considered accessory structures in any zoning districts within the jurisdiction of this
title, but will be subject to the following restrictions:
A. Installation Generally:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 493/923
1. No satellite dish may be mounted so that it blocks, wholly or partially, a required exit, including egress windows
required by the building code.
2. In any historic district or on any historic building subject to local regulation, satellite dishes may be installed only
after the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
B. Dishes Larger Than One Meter: Satellite dishes larger than one meter (1 m) in diameter shall be subject to the
following additional restrictions:
1. In the R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PAR, PUD, and the RMH districts, such satellite dish antennas shall not be located in
any "front yard" (as defined in chapter 11 of this title), in any portion of the lot closer to a public street than a
principal building located on said lot is to that public street, or within ten feet (10') of any side and/or rear lot lines.
2. In all other zoning districts not specified above, satellite dish antennas shall not be located in any "front yard" (as
defined in chapter 11 of this title) or within ten feet (10') of any lot lines.
C. Removal Of Abandoned, Damaged, Or Nonfunctioning Satellite Dishes: Any satellite dish that has been abandoned,
damaged, or is no longer functioning shall be removed from the premises by the owner. This includes satellites
mounted within the yard or attached to a structure. All components of the satellite dish shall be removed including the
satellite dish, any mounting devices, and wiring. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.5: TEMPORARY USES:
15.3.5.1: CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, REVIVAL TENTS, AND SIMILAR USES:
Circuses, carnivals, and similar amusement enterprises and revival tents shall be permitted in any zoning district, but
only after a special permit has been granted by the city council for a specific use, time and place. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.3.6: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
15.3.6.1: STATEMENT OF INTENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communication
facilities (WCFs) and to encourage the orderly development of WCFs for the benefit of the community while
protecting the character of residential neighborhoods and preserving the utility of the Southern Illinois Airport. In the
interest of protecting the public's health, safety and general welfare, and to advance sound planning principles, it is
important that the city encourage the delivery of new wireless technologies while controlling the proliferation of
transmission towers. The objectives of the wireless communication facilities siting regulations and development
standards are the following:
1. To protect residential areas from the uncontrolled development of WCFs by requiring reasonable siting conditions;
2. To encourage the users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual
impact of the towers and antennas;
3. To provide a range of locations for WCFs throughout the city's zoning jurisdiction;
4. To promote the use of suitable land for the location of wireless antennas, towers and/or other WCFs;
5. To encourage collocation and site sharing of existing and new WCFs;
6. To encourage the location of WCFs onto existing structures to reduce the number of new communication towers
needed within the city of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction;
7. To regulate the type of tower facility constructed when towers are permitted;
8. To enhance the ability of providers of wireless communication services to provide such services to the community;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 494/923
9. To preserve aircraft safety, access and the utility of the Southern Illinois Airport; and
10. To establish development standards to address the siting of WCFs which are consistent with the requirements of
the federal telecommunications act of 1996, and are in the best interest of the future of the city of Carbondale.
In furtherance of these objectives, the city shall give due consideration to the comprehensive plan and zoning map,
the Southern Illinois Airport hazard zoning regulations, existing land use and the location of environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of WCFs.
B. Applicability:
1. New Wireless Communication Facility: No person, firm or corporation shall install or construct any new WCF,
unless and until, a tower and/or antenna use permit (TAUP) is issued by the development services director
pursuant to the requirements of this section.
2. Preexisting Wireless Communication Facility: WCFs which exist, or WCFs which have been issued a zoning
certificate to construct, prior to February 6, 2001, shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section,
unless expansion or additions are requested. Alterations to a support structure, or the addition of antenna arrays to
a structure, must meet the requirements of this section and may be completed after appropriate permits are issued.
3. Exemptions: The provisions of this section do not apply to a ground or building mounted receive-only radio or
television antenna used for residential purposes; a ground or building mounted citizens band radio antenna; a
ground, building or tower mounted antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur (ham) radio operator; and
satellite dish antennas less than one meter (1 m) in diameter for residential uses, and less than two meters (2 m) in
diameter for commercial or industrial uses, including direct to home satellite services, when used as an accessory
use of the property. Such installations shall comply with any other applicable provisions of the zoning code.
C. Shared Facilities And Collocation Policy: All new wireless communication facilities shall be engineered, designed and
constructed to be capable of sharing the facility with other applicants, to collocate with other existing WCFs and to
accommodate the future collocation of other WCFs. A tower and/or antenna use permit (TAUP) shall not be issued
until the applicant proposing a new WCF shall demonstrate that it has made, in reasonable good faith, an attempt to
locate its WCF onto an existing structure. Competitive conflict and financial burden alone are not deemed to be
adequate reasons against collocation.
D. Inventory Of Existing Sites: Upon adoption of this section, all wireless communication service providers operating in
the city of Carbondale are required to register with the city of Carbondale. Registering service providers shall provide
to the development services department an inventory of existing WCF towers and/or antennas that are within the
zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale, which includes all areas in the city limits and within one and one-half
(11/2) miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower.
E. Preference Locations For Facilities: The order of preference for locating new wireless communication facilities within
the city of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction shall be as follows:
1. Locating antenna attachments to existing support structures or to existing buildings or other structures which shall
include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs and water towers. All antenna attachments shall be permitted by
administrative approval subject to the development standards of subsection J of this section.
2. Locating new support structures on land that meet all of the following requirements:
a. The site is located on property zoned AG, GI, or PAD.
b. The site has a setback distance of five hundred feet (500') from residentially zoned property (RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-
2, R-3, PUD, and RMH).
c. The site has a minimum spacing requirement distance of one thousand feet (1,000') from any other support
structure greater than one hundred feet (100') in height.
d. The support structure does not exceed three hundred feet (300') in height. In the PAD district the support
structure may not exceed one hundred feet (100') in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 495/923
e. Support structures on these lands shall be permitted by administrative approval subject to the development
standards of subsection J of this section.
f. Locating new support structures on any other lands not meeting the requirements in this subsection E2. Support
structures on these lands shall only be permitted by means of approval of a special use and subject to the
development standards of subsection J of this section. When applying for a special use, the applicant shall
provide the city with adequate information to establish that no lands included in this subsection E, can be made
suitable for the applicant's proposed WCFs in accordance with subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2013-20)
F. Review Procedures:
1. Permitted Wireless Communications Facilities: Attached WCFs that meet the development standards prescribed in
subsection J of this section shall be permitted by administrative review. All WCFs with support structures that are
located on land in accordance with the requirements prescribed in subsection E of this section and meet the
development standards prescribed in subsection J of this section shall be permitted by administrative review.
2. Wireless Communications Facilities Permitted By Special Use: All other proposed WCFs not included in
subsection F1 of this section shall be subject to the special use approval process.
3. Temporary Wireless Communications Facilities: Temporary WCFs may be permitted by administrative approval for
a term not to exceed sixty (60) days. Once granted, a temporary WCF permit may be extended for an additional
sixty (60) days upon evidence of need by the applicant. Upon termination of the administrative approval for the
temporary WCF, the temporary WCF shall be removed at the owner's expense.
4. Certificates Of Appropriateness: Any wireless communication facilities, regardless of type, to be located within an
established national register or Carbondale registered historic district or landmark, shall be subject to review by the
preservation commission in accordance with section 15.2.5.4 of this title. (Ord. 2013-31)
G. Tower And/Or Antenna Use Permit Submittals (TAUP):
1. All requests for a WCF, regardless of type, shall submit an application for a tower and/or antenna use permit
(TAUP) on forms prescribed by the city and attach the following supporting documents and exhibits:
a. Scaled site plan.
b. Scaled elevation view.
c. Color rendering and/or photo simulation(s) of the proposed tower with its antennas, all facilities and required
landscaping viewed from the nearest adjacent street or streets.
d. Copy of the FCC license of each proposed user of the tower, or in the case of new towers, approval from the
FCC to construct the tower to demonstrate that all federal and state requirements have been met, including, but
not limited to, those requirements of the national environmental policy act (NEPA), the federal aviation
administration (FAA) and the state historic preservation office (SHPO) of the state of Illinois, if applicable.
e. Other supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate Illinois
licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information
concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing,
landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the development services director to be necessary
to assess compliance with this section.
f. Copy of a collocation agreement wherein the applicant acknowledges that a condition to granting any tower
and/or antenna use permit is the applicant's ongoing commitment to make available and reasonably market
collocation sites on each new tower.
g. Evidence of compliance with subsections C, D, and H of this section.
H. Administrative Review Procedure: The following administrative review process shall apply to all WCF applications
eligible for administrative review:
1. Review Authority: Review of proposed WCFs under this section shall be conducted by the development services
director, or his/her designee, upon filing a TAUP application. The development services director may waive or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 496/923
amend specific requirements in subsection G of this section for the submittal of a TAUP application, if it is
determined by the development services director that the goals of this section would be better served thereby.
2. Review Criteria: Each TAUP application shall be reviewed for compliance with the development standards
specified in subsection J of this section.
3. Timing Of Decision: The development services director, or his/her designee, shall render a decision on the TAUP
application by written response to the applicant within twenty (20) business days after receipt of the complete
application, except that an extension may be agreed upon by the applicant.
4. Application Approval: If the TAUP application is in compliance with the development standards in subsection J of
this section, and otherwise meets the requirements of this section, the development services director shall issue a
TAUP.
5. Application Denial/Appeal Process: If administrative approval is denied by the development services director, the
reason for denial must be made to the applicant in writing. The applicant may appeal the denial to the city
manager. The city manager shall hear the appeal within ten (10) days of receiving a written request from the
applicant. The city manager shall submit his/her written determination on the appeal to the applicant and to the
development services director within five (5) working days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing. If administrative
approval is denied by the city manager, the applicant may appeal the denial to the city council for the final
determination in approving or denying the TAUP application.
I. Special Use Review Procedure: The following shall apply to all TAUP applications requiring submission to the planning
commission for review in accordance with section 15.6.8 of this title. The planning commission shall consider the
following in reaching a decision for recommendation to the city council:
1. Review Criteria: Each TAUP application shall be reviewed for compliance with the development standards set forth
in subsection J of this section.
2. Tower Siting Conditions: The planning commission may recommend to the city council that conditions and
restrictions be imposed on the application, or on the premises benefited by the TAUP, as it deems necessary to
reduce or minimize any adverse effects and to enhance the compatibility of the WCF with the surrounding property,
in accordance with the purposes and intent of this section.
3. Factors In Granting Special Use Permits For Towers: In addition to any standards for consideration of special use
permit applications pursuant to section 15.6.8 of this title, the planning commission and city council shall consider
the following factors when reviewing TAUP applications for new towers:
a. Height of the proposed tower;
b. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;
c. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
d. Surrounding topography;
e. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; and
f. Proposed ingress and egress.
4. Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures Or Alternative Technology: No new support structure
shall be permitted unless the applicant submits a written brief demonstrating that no existing tower, structure, or
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, can accommodate the applicant's
proposed WCF. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the
applicant's proposed WCF shall be prepared by a qualified and licensed Illinois professional engineer and may
consist of one or more of the following:
a. Existing towers or structures are not located within a reasonable geographic area which meets the applicant's
engineering requirements.
b. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
c. Existing towers or structures cannot be altered to provide sufficient structural strength to support applicant's
proposed antenna and related equipment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 497/923
d. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
e. The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure,
or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing, are unreasonable based upon market information provided
to the development services director. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
f. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
g. The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures
is unsuitable.
h. Applicants are required to demonstrate by providing proof of certified mailings or other reasonable means:
(1) That they have contacted the owners of reasonably suitable structures within a one thousand foot (1,000')
radius of the proposed site and, which from a location standpoint, could provide part of a network for
transmission of signals;
(2) That they have asked for permission to install the antenna on those structures; and
(3) That they were denied for reasons other than economic feasibility.
J. Development Standards: Development standards for wireless communications facilities shall include the following
standards:
1. Height Standards: Attached WCFs are exempt from any height standard. The following height standards shall
apply to support structure installations and shall supersede the height limitations of the zoning districts in this title:
a. WCFs in the RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, RMH, and PAR districts shall be restricted to fifty feet (50') in height.
b. WCFs in the PAD district shall be restricted to one hundred feet (100') in height or shall be subject to the special
use procedures outlined in section 15.6.8.2 of this title.
c. WCFs in the R-3, PUD, NB, PA, SB, BPL, and BPR districts shall be restricted to one hundred fifty feet (150') in
height. In addition, any WCF with a support structure in these districts shall be engineered and constructed to
accommodate multiple antenna arrays.
d. WCFs in the BWA district shall be restricted to two hundred feet (200') in height. In addition, any WCF with a
support structure in this district shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate multiple antenna arrays.
e. WCFs in the F, AG, LI, and GI districts shall be restricted to three hundred feet (300') in height. All WCFs with a
support structure up to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be engineered and constructed to
accommodate multiple antenna arrays. All WCFs with a support structure of greater than one hundred fifty feet
(150') shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three (3) antenna arrays.
f. All WCF installations shall be subject to the Southern Illinois Airport hazard zoning regulations and the FAA
standards contained in title 14, code of federal regulations (14 CFR) part 77.
2. Setback Standards: The following setback standards shall apply to all WCF installations:
a. All support structures shall be constructed to comply with the setback provisions of the zoning district in which
they are located, or as may be required by the site distance or spacing requirements prescribed in subsection E2
of this section, but in no instance shall any support structure be less than ten feet (10') from any lot line.
b. Attached WCFs are exempt from any setback standard. An antenna array may extend up to five feet (5')
horizontally beyond the edge of an attachment structure so long as the antenna array does not encroach upon
an adjoining parcel.
c. Equipment facilities and guy anchors, if permitted, must satisfy the minimum setback requirements of the zoning
district in which they are located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 498/923
3. Landscaping: The following landscaping requirements shall be maintained by the applicant and shall apply to all
new WCF installations:
a. Trees And Shrubs: Support structures and attached WCFs with new building construction shall be landscaped
around the perimeter of the security fencing by a row of evergreen trees or evergreen shrubs capable of creating
a continuous hedge and obtaining a height of at least ten feet (10'). Trees shall be a minimum of one and onehalf
inch (1.5") caliper, or shrubs a minimum of thirty six inches (36") tall, at the time of planting.
b. Landform Preservation: Existing mature tree growth and natural landform on the site shall be preserved to the
extent feasible, provided that vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the
equipment facility may be trimmed or removed.
c. Existing Vegetation: Existing vegetation on a WCF site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where
approved by the development services director.
d. Minimum Site Disturbance: Grading for the new WCF shall be limited only to the area necessary for the new
facility.
4. Aesthetics, Materials And Colors: The following standards shall apply to all WCF installations:
a. Support structures shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the
FAA, be painted a neutral color, or such shades as are appropriate and compatible with the surrounding
environment, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
b. Antenna array attachments and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be of a color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the attachment structure so as to make the antenna array and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
5. Security Fencing: WCFs with support structures shall be enclosed by an opaque security fence not less than six
feet (6') in height. Security features may be incorporated into the buffer, landscaping and screening requirements
for the site. Nothing herein shall prevent security fencing that is necessary to meet requirements of state or federal
agencies.
6. Lighting: The following lighting requirements shall apply to all WCF installations. WCFs shall not be artificially
illuminated, directly or indirectly, except for:
a. Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings, if such lighting is appropriately down shielded to keep light
within the boundaries of the site; and
b. Such illumination of the WCF as may be required by the FAA, or other applicable authority, installed in a manner
to minimize impacts on adjacent residences.
7. Signage: WCFs shall not display any signage, logos, decals, symbols or any messages of a commercial or
noncommercial nature, except for a message containing provider identification and emergency telephone numbers
and other emergency warning information as may be required by local, state or federal regulations governing
WCFs.
8. Radio Frequency Emissions/Sound: The following radio frequency emissions standards shall apply to all WCF
installations:
a. Radio Frequency Impact: Applicants for WCFs shall be required to provide information with the application on
the measurement of the effective radiated power of the facility to document that the facility complies with all
applicable FCC standards.
b. Sound Prohibited: No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers or the like are permitted.
9. Structural Integrity: WCFs with support structures shall be constructed and maintained in compliance to the
Electronics Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222-E standard entitled
"Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Towers And Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be
updated and amended. Each support structure shall be capable of supporting multiple antenna arrays.
10. Collocation Support Structure Design: To encourage collocation of WCFs, all WCFs shall be designed to
accommodate multiple antenna arrays in accordance with the development standards prescribed in subsection J1
of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 499/923
11. Collocation Agreement: All applicants for WCFs are required to submit a collocation agreement with the tower
and/or antenna use permit (TAUP) application agreeing to allow and reasonably market collocation opportunities to
other WCF users. The agreement shall include the applicant's policy regarding the collocation of other providers
and the methodology to be used by the applicant in determining reasonable rates to be charged to other providers.
The collocation agreement shall be considered a condition of issuance of a TAUP. A TAUP shall not be issued
unless the applicant complies with the shared facilities and collocation policy outlined in subsection C of this
section.
12. Other Applicable Regulations:
a. State Or Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the
national environmental policy act (NEPA), state historic preservation office (SHPO), federal aviation
administration (FAA), federal communications commission (FCC) and any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed,
then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
13. Building Codes Requirements: Construction of all WCFs, within the corporate limits of the city, shall comply with
the requirements of the Carbondale building codes and permitting process in addition to the requirements of this
section.
K. Nonconforming Facilities: WCFs in existence, or WCFs which have been issued a zoning certificate to construct, prior
to the date of the adoption of this section, which do not comply with requirements of this section, shall be considered
nonconforming wireless communications facilities and are subject to the following provisions:
1. Expansion: Nonconforming WCFs may continue in use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded
without complying with this section, except as further provided in this section.
2. Additions: Nonconforming WCFs may add additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other providers)
subject to administrative review under this section.
3. Repairs Or Reconstruction: Nonconforming WCFs which become damaged due to any reason or cause, may be
repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to the provisions of this section.
Provided, however, that if the damage to the WCF exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost, said WCF
may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance with this section.
4. Abandoned: Any nonconforming WCF not in use as a WCF for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or
longer, which is thereafter determined to be abandoned by the development services director as defined in this
code, shall no longer be a nonconforming use.
L. Abandoned Facilities: The owner of a WCF shall file annually a declaration with the development services director as
to the continuing operation of every facility installed and that the facility continues to meet EIA/TIA 222-E standards
and any applicable state and building code standards. Failure to do so shall be determined to mean that the facility is
no longer in use and may be considered abandoned subject to the following:
1. Any WCF that has not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned,
unless the owner of the WCF provides evidence, to the satisfaction of the development services director, that in
reasonable good faith, attempts have been made to market the WCF to a provider, pursuant to the requirements of
this section.
M. Removal Of Abandoned Facilities: The city, at its election, may require the owner of an abandoned WCF to remove
the WCF within ninety (90) days from the date owner receives notice from the city to remove the WCF. If there are
two (2) or more users of a single WCF, this provision shall not become effective until all providers cease to use the
WCF. If the owner of an abandoned WCF cannot be located, or is no longer in business, the requirements of this
section shall be the responsibility of the landowner on whose property the WCF is located.
N. Revocation Of Tower And Antenna Use Permits:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 500/923
1. Any tower and/or antenna use permit (TAUP) issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the city after a
hearing as provided hereinafter. If the development services director finds that any permit holder has violated any
provision of this section, or the conditions, restrictions or additional development standards of an approved special
use; or has failed to make, in reasonable good faith, efforts to provide or seek collocation, the development
services director shall notify the permit holder in writing that the TAUP is revocable due to the permit holder's
noncompliance with the conditions of the permit. The development services director shall convene a meeting with
the permit holder no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the letter. The development services director may
require the permit holder to correct the violation within a reasonable amount of time or the director may recommend
to the city manager that the TAUP be revoked.
The city manager shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific areas of noncompliance and specify the
date by which such deficiencies must be corrected. The time for correction of the deficiencies shall not exceed sixty
(60) days. The permit holder shall provide the city manager with evidence that the required corrective action has
been taken. Should the permit holder fail to correct the deficiencies in the time required, the city manager shall
request that the city council convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the TAUP. The hearing shall be
conducted pursuant to notice by publication in a newspaper with general circulation in the city not less than fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing. The permit holder may be represented by an attorney and may cross examine
opposing witnesses. Other interested persons may comment. The city council may impose reasonable restrictions
with respect to time and procedure of the hearing. The proceedings shall be recorded. After the appropriate public
hearing, the city council may revoke the TAUP upon receipt of evidence which proves by a preponderance of the
evidence that the permit holder has violated or is in noncompliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2013-
20)
Chapter 4
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
15.4.1: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER YARDS:
15.4.1.1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for required landscaping for development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.1.2: APPLICABILITY:
The following general standards apply to all land within the city of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.1.3: GENERAL LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
All landscaping shall meet the following minimum requirements:
A. Landscape Requirements And Maintenance:
1. All required front yards that are not covered by an approved impervious surface shall be seeded and/or sodded
with grass or otherwise landscaped. Landscaped beds shall be defined using mulch or decorative rock and shall be
well kept and maintained free of weeds and other deleterious growth.
2. Any dead tree located on private property shall be completely removed, including the stump and any exposed
roots. The city may require the replacement of the tree if it is required as part of a site plan development.
3. These provisions do not apply to land zoned F, AG, or RR. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.1.4: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 501/923
A. Landscaping Plan: All commercial and residential developments except one single-unit dwelling or one two-unit
dwelling shall be required to submit a landscape plan meeting all of the requirements of this chapter. The landscape
plan shall be reviewed for compliance and approved by the planning services division.
B. Design Standards:
1. Landscaped areas shall be provided totaling a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total paved parking area. All
landscaped areas shall be clearly defined by decorative rock and/or mulch and contain plantings proportional to the
square footage of the landscaped area. All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained and kept free of weeds
and other invasive species.
a. In areas where the amount of landscaping required exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the
applicant may exchange the amount of required landscaping over two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
at a rate of six hundred (600) square feet for one shade tree. The development services director or designee
shall determine the location of the shade trees and the approval and location shall be given in writing, with
complete documentation of the requirements.
2. Landscaped islands shall be included at the end of each row of parking stalls that abuts an internal traffic aisle.
a. Landscaped islands at the end of a row of parking stalls containing a single parking module shall provide at a
minimum a ninety (90) square foot landscaped island.
b. Landscaped islands at the end of a row of parking stalls containing a double parking module shall provide at a
minimum a one hundred eighty (180) square foot landscaped island. (Ord. 2013-20)
3. All parking lots shall include new trees in accordance with the following schedule:
Parking
Spaces Trees Required Additional Trees Required
1 to 5 1 None
6 to 30 1 tree for each 6 spaces or fraction thereof up to
30 spaces
None
31 to 100 5 trees for the first 30 spaces 1 tree for each additional 7 spaces or fraction
thereof
101 to 196 15 trees for the first 100 spaces 1 tree for each additional 8 spaces or fraction
thereof
197 to 303 27 trees for the first 196 spaces 1 tree for each additional 9 spaces or fraction
thereof
304 to 503 39 trees for the first 303 spaces 1 tree for each additional 10 spaces or
fraction thereof
504 or more 59 trees for the first 503 spaces 1 tree for each additional 11 spaces or
fraction thereof
(Ord. 2013-31)
4. In parking lots with more than twenty (20) spaces, thirty percent (30%) of required trees shall be placed within the
perimeter of the actual paved parking lot surface area.
5. In no case shall ornamental trees account for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total required trees planted.
6. Trees shall be protected from potential damage by vehicles with curbs or other approved barriers.
7. Where parking lots are adjacent to a public right of way on an arterial or collector street, a minimum seven foot (7')
buffer shall be provided between the parking lot and the right of way line. This buffer shall be seeded or sodded
and include at least one tree every fifteen feet (15'). Where the code requires a larger buffer between the parking
lot and the right of way line, the larger buffer shall be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 502/923
8. All other parking lots, not located on an arterial or collector street, shall provide a minimum three foot (3') buffer
between the parking lot and the right of way line. This buffer shall be seeded or sodded.
9. Flexibility in placement of treed landscape islands may be allowed for creative parking lot design and preservation
of existing trees and vegetation. However, no more than twenty (20) parking spaces not separated by a treed
landscape island shall be allowed. Islands shall always be required at each end of a row of parking spaces.
10. Up to forty (40) contiguous parking spaces may be allowed where rows of head to head parking spaces are
separated by a six foot (6') wide linear treed landscape island.
11. Parking lots shall be designed to avoid creating large open expanses of paving. All parking lots shall include
landscaping in accordance with the standards established by this section. Existing trees shall be preserved where
possible. Surfaces denuded of vegetation shall be seeded or sodded to prevent soil erosion.
C. Primary Materials: Trees, low shrubs, and ground cover shall be used as the primary landscape materials.
Ornamental, medium sized, and shade trees shall be incorporated into the design. Tall shrubs or low branching trees
that may restrict the visibility of motorists or pedestrians should be avoided. (Ord. 2013-20)
1. The following table includes a list of approved tree species. If a request is made to plant a species not included on
the list, it must first be approved in writing by the city's forestry division.
ORNAMENTAL TREES
(15 - 30+ Feet In Height At Maturity)
Common Name Cultivars
Akebono cherry
American hornbeam, single stem
Bald cypress Lindsey's skyward
Canada red cherry
Carolina silverbell
Crabapple Donald Wyman, golden raindrops, prairiefire, royal raindrop
Crimson cloud hawthorn
Eastern redbud Appalachian red, floating clouds, forest pansy, Oklahoma, Tennessee pink
Flowering dogwood
Golden rain tree
Japanese maple Bloodgood
Japanese tree lilac, single stem Beijing gold, China snow, ivory pillar, ivory silk
Kawansa cherry
Korean maple
Kousa dogwood
Little gem magnolia
Okame cherry
Pagoda dogwood
Paperbark maple
Parrotia
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 503/923
Red buckeye or red horse chestnut
Royal star magnolia
Serviceberry, single trunk Autumn brilliance, cumulus, robin hill
Sourwood
Tatarian maple
Thornless cockspur hawthorn
Three flower maple
Thundercloud cherry plum
Trident maple
Washington hawthorn
White redbud
Yoshino cherry
SHADE TREES
(35 - 80+ Feet In Height At Maturity)
Common Name Cultivars
American hophornbeam
American linden American sentry
Bald cypress Goldrush, Shawnee brave
Black gum Wild fire
Chinese pistache
Columnar hornbeam
Dawn redwood
Elm, hybrids Accolade, dura heat, frontier, patriot, triumph
European hornbeam
Ginkgo Autumn gold, princeton sentry
Japanese zelkova City sprite, green vase, village green, wireless
Kentucky coffeetree Espresso
Lacebark elm
Little leaf linden Green spire
Miyabe maple State street
Oaks All cultivars except pin oak
Red maple All cultivars except autumn blaze maple
Silver linden Green mountain, sterling silver
Sugar maple All cultivars
Summer sprite Halka
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 504/923
Sweet gum Happi daze, rotundiloba, fruitless only
Thornless honey locust Imperial, shade master, skyline, street keeper
Turkish filbert
Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to current biological threats or other recognized
industry practices.
(Ord. 2016-72)
2. Wherever practicable, new landscaping shall use native materials, as specified by the University Of Illinois
Extension Service in its "Illinois Plant, Landscape And Nursery Technology" publications and website.
3. Preservation and protection of existing native species of plant material is strongly encouraged. Existing native
species and natural cover should be retained wherever possible. Where planting requirements for landscaped
areas result in the need for additional trees or shrubs in an existing natural area, there shall be minimum
disturbance to native species.
4. Where it is not possible to retain existing natural ground cover, landscaped areas shall be seeded and/or sodded,
or provided with other acceptable ground cover.
5. Landscaping should be used to minimize potential erosion through the use of plant materials, which aid in soil
stabilization.
6. Landscaping should maximize shading of streets and off street parking areas.
D. Standards For Plant Materials: When the seasonal nursery stock does not provide for the required plant and tree
sizes, the development assistance committee may approve alternative sizes of the required plantings. All vegetation
to be planted shall meet the following standards:
1. Nursery stock shall meet with minimum requirements of the "American Standards For Nursery Stock" (ASNS),
published by the American Association Of Nurserymen, Inc.
2. Plants shall be sound, healthy, vigorous, free from mutilation, plant diseases, insect pests or their eggs, and fungus
and shall have healthy, normal root systems. Plants shall be nursery grown stock in containers or freshly dug,
balled, and burlapped.
3. Caliper measurement, height measurement, minimum container volume, drown spread, and number of canes shall
conform to the requirements of the "American Standards For Nursery Stock" (ASNS), published by the American
Association Of Nurserymen, Inc.
4. Shade trees shall be at least two inches (2") in diameter at a point three feet (3') above the ground when planted.
Ornamental trees shall be a minimum one inch (1") in diameter at a point three feet (3') above the ground when
planted. Trees shall not be planted any closer than two and one-half feet (2.5') from the edge of any landscaped
area within and along the edges of parking areas and ingress/egress points.
5. Shrubs shall be a minimum of twelve inches (12") to eighteen inches (18") high and/or eighteen inches (18")
spread for internal landscaped areas of parking areas and a minimum of twenty four inches (24") to thirty inches
(30") height for landscaped strips lying between parking areas. Shrubs making up buffer types "A" and "B" where a
continuous hedge is required shall be a minimum of thirty six inches (36") high, otherwise, a minimum size of
twenty four inches (24") to thirty inches (30") height is allowable. Shrubs making up buffer types "C" shall be a
minimum of thirty six inches (36") high with an aggregate average height of forty eight inches (48").
6. Ground covers other than grass shall be planted in such a manner as to provide reasonably complete coverage
within one year after planting.
7. Turf establishment areas may be seeded, sodded, plugged, or sprigged except that sod and/or ground cover
plants are required for slopes greater than four to one (4:1) (25 percent).
8. Landscaping materials shall meet the requirements of the corner site visibility standards in section 15.4.6 of this
chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 505/923
E. Design For Safety: To ensure both the perceived and actual safety of pedestrians and bicyclists, it is important to
provide clear visibility of the immediate environment along sidewalks and trails. Buffers and other landscaped areas
adjacent to sidewalks, trails or other pedestrianways required for pedestrian circulation shall be subject to the
standards in this subsection; these standards shall not apply to landscaped areas adjacent to recreational trails:
1. Such areas shall include low growing shrubs (less than 3 feet in mature height) and flowers and grasses within
twenty feet (20') of the nearest edge of the sidewalk or trail;
2. Such areas shall not include berms within fifty feet (50') of the nearest edge of the sidewalk or trail;
3. Such areas may include fences or walls, subject to the following additional standards:
a. Fences or walls that are no taller than three feet (3') shall be allowed within a buffer area adjacent to sidewalks
or trails;
b. Fences, such as split rail fences, that do not impair visibility, shall be allowed;
c. All other fences or walls are prohibited in portions of open space areas within fifty feet (50') of a sidewalk or trail
subject to this subsection.
4. Where berms are used within a landscaped area, slopes shall not exceed forty five degrees (45°) and shall be
completely covered with vegetation. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.1.5: LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE:
A. Maintenance of all required landscaped and buffer areas shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Failure to
maintain plantings and other features of a required landscaped area in an attractive and healthy state shall be
considered a violation of this zoning ordinance. Remedies shall include, but not be limited to, revocation of a
certificate of compliance and the related certificate of occupancy.
The planning services division shall periodically conduct the inspection of all landscaping planted as a site plan
requirement to ascertain whether or not the landscaping is still alive. In the event that landscaping has died or been
removed, the city shall require their replacement. If compliance is not received within three (3) months of written
notice to the property owner, appropriate steps shall be taken to secure compliance. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.1.6: BUFFER YARDS:
A. Determination Of Buffer Requirements: Buffers shall be required for all new development and redevelopment except
as provided in subsections A5 and A6 of this section. The table of buffer requirements (see table in subsection C2 of
this section) describes the type of buffer required as determined by the type of proposed use and the type of use
which is designated, approved, or existing on lands adjacent to the proposed project. In order to determine the type
of buffer required, the following procedures shall be followed:
1. Identify the type of use for the proposed project.
2. On sites with extensive tree cover or large tracts of land, an aerial photograph depicting impacted/nonimpacted
areas may be submitted with a survey of a representative area no less than one-half (0.5) acre in size.
3. Where an abutting property has a lawful nonconforming use of less intensity than the allowable use of the property,
buffering shall be based upon the allowable use.
4. Refer to the table of buffer requirements in subsection C2 of this section, for buffer requirements on each property
boundary or portion thereof and select the required buffer option for the specified type of buffer from those outlined
in subsection B of this section.
5. The following developments are not required to provide buffers:
a. Construction of single-family homes or duplexes.
b. Passive agriculture activities such as livestock grazing, orchards, silviculture, or croplands.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 506/923
c. Passive recreation such as golf courses, hiking/equestrian/bicycle trails, or boardwalks.
d. Conservation lands.
6. Buffers are also not required in the following circumstances:
a. When the property line abuts a railroad right of way.
b. Within fifteen feet (15') of the edge of a street surface or curb line to prevent obstructing visibility.
c. When the nonresidential use is compatible with a residential use, such as cropland, forests, parks, etc. (The
parking lot or active recreational area of a park requires a buffer yard.)
d. When the use of a property changes from one nonresidential or high density residential use to another
nonresidential or high density residential use and the new use is not expanded in the direction of or parallel to a
residential use and when the new use does not result in an increase in noise or light reaching a residential use
that would otherwise be required to be protected by a buffer yard.
e. When natural features of the property provide the required screening and buffer yard.
f. Existing legal nonresidential uses or proposed uses that have an approved site plan on file on the effective date
hereof, unless expansion beyond that approved as of the effective date hereof occurs in the direction of or
parallel to a residential use.
7. When it is determined to be in the public interest, the buffer yard requirement may be waived by the city council
when a senior citizen housing conversion development is established as a special use in an R-1 zone.
B. Types Of Buffers: Required buffer types shall consist of A, B, and C. Trees in buffers of ten feet (10') or less should be
understory trees. Trees in buffers of more than ten feet (10') may be canopy or understory trees provided however, at
least one-half (1/2) of the required trees shall be canopy trees.
1. Landscape Credits: Landscape credits for buffers shall be determined from the following table:
LANDSCAPE CREDIT UNIT (LCU) VALUES
Deciduous (Minimum
Caliper)
Evergreen Or
Ornamental
(Minimum Height)
LCU Value
New planting:
Trees 3 inches 10 feet 9
2.5 inches 9 feet 6
2 inches 8 feet 5
1.5 inches 6 feet 3
Shrub 18 inches height or spread 2
Ornamental grasses or perennial
beds
1 gallon size 1
Minimum Caliper LCU Value
Existing tree:
Mature >13 inches 15
Large 11 to 13 inches 12
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 507/923
Medium 6 to 10 inches 8
Small 3 to 5 inches 5
2. Type A Buffer: A type A buffer shall be at least ten feet (10') in width and shall have plant materials equal to twenty
(20) landscape credits per one hundred feet (100') with a visual screen four feet (4') high consisting of evergreen
plantings, fences, walls or a combination thereof.
3. Type B Buffer: A type B buffer shall be at least fifteen feet (15') in width and shall have plant materials equal to
thirty (30) landscape credits per one hundred feet (100') with a visual screen five feet (5') high consisting of
evergreen plantings, fences, walls or a combination thereof.
4. Type C Buffer: A type C buffer shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width and shall have plant materials equal to
forty (40) landscape credits per one hundred feet (100') with a visual screen six feet (6') high consisting of
evergreen plantings, fences, walls or a combination thereof.
5. Buffers Along Sidewalks: Where a public street separates a land use required to install a buffer from the protected
land use and where the land use required to install the buffer will include a parking lot adjoining that street, the
required buffer shall be broken into two (2) parts:
a. A buffer five feet (5') wide shall be established between the parking area and the public street or sidewalk; such
buffer shall have plant materials with ten (10) landscape credits per one hundred feet (100') and a visual screen
no more than thirty inches (30") high;
b. An additional buffer meeting the standards required by this section less five feet (5') in width and ten (10)
landscape credits per one hundred feet (100') shall be installed on the other side of the parking lot, providing
visual separation between the use required to include the buffer and the protected use, with the parking lot and
the smaller buffer in between.
C. Required Buffers:
1. Purpose/Principles: The intent of this subsection is to require a more intensive use to provide a landscaped buffer
to provide visual screening, separation and some sound buffering between it and a nearby protected use. (Ord.
2013-20)
2. Buffer Table: Any use falling in a zoning district listed across the top of the following table shall be required to
install a buffer as designated by the letters A, B or C to separate it from any use or land located in a zoning district
listed down the left side of the table; if the cell reflecting the intersection between two (2) districts is blank, no buffer
between them is required. REQUIRED BUFFERS
District Required To Provide Buffer
Protected
District F AG RR R-1 R-1-D R-2 R-3 PAR PA SB BPL BWA LI GI
F A B B B B B B C C
AG A B B B B B B C C
RR A B B B B B B C C
R-1 A B B B B B B C C
R-1-D A B B B B B B C C
R-2 B B B B B B C C
R-3 B B B B B C C
PAR
PA
SB
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 508/923
BPL
BWA
BPR
LI
GI
(Ord. 2013-31)
3. Exceptions: Where a use that would be required by this section to provide a buffer is separated from the use that
would be protected by any of the following, no buffer is required:
a. A railroad track in active use;
b. A state highway; or
c. A public street with at least fifty feet (50') of right of way.
D. Modifications To Buffer Requirements:
1. A proposed development may be allowed a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the required buffer width in no case to
allow a required buffer to be less than five feet (5') in width providing one of the following conditions exists and is
indicated on the plan for the proposed development or project:
a. The adjacent property is designated with a nonresidential land use district and is vacant;
b. The adjacent property has an existing required landscaped buffer; or
c. The adjacent property has existing vegetation sufficient in size, types of plantings, and location that serve in the
same capacity as a required buffer.
2. For projects that propose to retain an undisturbed open space area between the extent of the development and the
property line, if the director of development services finds that such area will substantially serve the purpose of a
buffer, the director of development services may give credit to the owner or owner's designee for part or all of the
undisturbed open space toward the buffer requirements of this section. This exemption does not apply to industrial,
extractive, or outdoor recreation uses. Additionally, the plan must show the undisturbed area has an existing
mixture of grass, trees, and shrubs, and other vegetation that would serve in the same capacity as the required
buffer.
3. For projects that are required to provide a buffer to adjacent residentially designated property that is currently
vacant, the owner or owner's designee may plant the required buffer at the proper density and configuration. All
plants utilized shall be of a type that the growth will reach the required height criteria within a three (3) year period
from the time of planting.
4. Alternative designs for required buffers may be approved by the director of development services upon a finding
that the required buffer will require alterations of the existing improvements on the property.
E. Use And Location Of Buffers:
1. Allowed Uses: Areas set aside as required buffers may also be used as follows:
a. Satisfaction of minimum setback requirements, if any.
b. Satisfaction of minimum open space requirements, if any.
c. May contain stormwater retention or detention areas, so long as the required buffer plantings are provided and
the design and landscaping of the buffer does not interfere with proper functioning of the drainage system and
the design water depth does not harm the viability of the plantings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 509/923
d. Passive recreation such as pedestrian, bicycle, or equestrian trails subject to the following limitations:
(1) No plant material is eliminated.
(2) There is a minimum width of ten feet (10') of pervious material at all points in the buffer, after subtracting any
part of a trail covered with impervious material.
(3) The total width of the buffer is maintained.
(4) All other requirements of this zoning ordinance are met.
e. Installation of underground utilities, so long as the location and use of the utility lines does not interfere with
required buffer plantings.
2. Prohibited Uses: The following uses shall not be allowed in a required buffer: principal structures, accessory
structures, play fields, stables, swimming pools, tennis courts, or similar active recreation uses; storage facilities, or
parking facilities.
3. Location And Design:
a. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending the entire length of the lot or parcel
boundary line.
b. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, proposed right of way, road easement, or
private street.
c. Where an existing utility easement is partially or wholly within a required buffer, the developer shall design the
buffer to eliminate or minimize plantings within the easement. Such design may require a buffer with more land
area (see subsection B of this section).
d. Where a proposed development is a mixed use project, buffers shall not be required between various constituent
parts except that any nonresidential use shall be separated from the residential use by internal landscaping.
(Note: It is the intent to allow flexibility of design within the confines of a mixed use development, but to
nevertheless require landscaping for the residential portion of the project from potential negative impact of a
proposed nonresidential portion of the project.)
e. All general landscape requirements of section 15.4.1.3 of this chapter shall be met.
F. Fencing Within Buffers: Fencing for the purpose of security or protection is allowable within all buffers provided the
fence is in compliance with applicable standards of section 15.4.2 of this chapter. Developments proposing a privacy
fence five feet (5') or more in height within a required buffer, may be allowed a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the
density of plantings required. Such request shall be submitted in writing by the owner or owner's agent and shall
include provisions by the owner for maintenance of the buffer and the fencing. This reduction does not apply to
industrial, extractive, or active outdoor recreational uses. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.2: FENCES, WALLS, SCREENS, OR HEDGES:
15.4.2.1: HEIGHT AND LOCATION LIMITATIONS FOR FENCES, WALLS, SCREENS, OR HEDGES:
These standards shall apply to all land within the city of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction. Fences, walls and hedges
other than those required under section 15.4.1.6 of this chapter are allowed in required yards and are not subject to
setback requirements that apply to other structures but are subject to the following standards:
A. General Height Limit: Unless expressly required by another provision of this title, no fence, wall or hedge shall exceed
eight feet (8') in height.
B. Height Limit In Relation To Adjacent Structures: Any segment of a wall, screen, hedge or fence (other than a chainlink
or equally open fence without slats) located closer than eight feet (8') to a window in a residential structure on an
adjoining lot shall not exceed the following height restrictions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 510/923
MAXIMUM WALL, SCREEN, HEDGE OR FENCE HEIGHT
Proposed Distance
From Window
Maximum Height Above
Bottom Of Window
8' 5'
7' 4'
6' 3'
5' 2'
4' 1'
3' 0'
2' 0'
1' 0'
Note: The proposed distance and corresponding maximum height may be interpolated to the next nearest inch. In no
case shall the height of any wall, screen, hedge or fence exceed 8 feet in height or be required to be less than 3 feet 6
inches in height.
C. Accessibility To Utilities: No wall, screen, hedge, or fence shall be located or constructed in a manner that denies
access to an existing utility meter or emergency shutoff for a structure on an adjacent lot. If sufficient space between
the wall, screen, hedge or fence and the existing structure is not provided for such access, then access may be
provided by placing in the wall, screen, hedge or fence, a gate, door, or other opening of sufficient size to allow for
access to the meter or emergency shutoff.
D. Safety Considerations: Where allowed by this section, a fence or wall that is seven feet (7') or more in height shall be
allowed only if it has no gates, openings or other breaks in any section of the fence or wall that is within fifty feet (50')
of the nearest edge of the sidewalk or trail. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.2.2: LIMITATIONS ON MATERIAL FOR FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENS:
These standards shall apply to all land within the city of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction.
A. Intent: It is the intent of this subsection to allow the construction of fences and walls from any materials designed or
manufactured for that purpose while preventing the use of materials designed for other purposes for fences. This
section shall be broadly construed to fulfill that purpose. The determination of the planning services division of
whether a fence conforms to the intent of this section shall be determinative but is appealable to the board of zoning
appeals.
B. Approved Materials: Materials approved for fencing under this section include, but are not necessarily limited to:
1. Chainlink;
2. Wire mesh;
3. Barbed wire (in AG, RR, F, and PAD districts only or as necessary for security for the following types of
nonresidential uses: electrical substations, auto storage yards, construction material storage yards, etc.);
4. Split rail;
5. Pickets;
6. Any type of cedar fencing material;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 511/923
7. Plastics and other synthetic materials designed to resemble traditional fencing material;
8. Brick;
9. Concrete block;
10. Adobe or other pressed brick;
11. Any building material used lawfully as exterior material for the principal building located on the site with the fence;
or
12. Rough cut or natural wood.
C. Prohibited Materials: The following materials are expressly prohibited from use as fencing in the city; this list is
representative and not fully inclusive:
1. Wooden pallets;
2. Trash or other barrels;
3. Vehicles or vehicle parts;
4. Railroad ties (may be used as posts);
5. Railroad cars; and
6. Roofing material, including corrugated steel. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.3: SITE LIGHTING:
15.4.3.1: APPLICABILITY:
The following standards apply to all property within the city of Carbondale's zoning jurisdiction. For parking lot lighting
standards see subsection 15.4.8.6K of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.3.2: STANDARDS:
Where lighting facilities are provided, they shall be designed to provide safe, convenient and efficient lighting for
pedestrians and vehicles. Lighting shall be designed in a consistent and coordinated manner for the entire site and shall
be designed to meet the following standards:
A. Exterior light sources such as luminaires or lampposts shall not exceed the following heights:
1. Within a parking lot that is not located in or within one hundred feet (100') of any R-1 or R-2 zoning district, thirty
feet (30');
2. Within a parking lot that is located in or within one hundred feet (100') of any R-1 or R-2 zoning district, fifteen feet
(15'); or
3. Within any nonvehicular pedestrian areas, fifteen feet (15').
4. No luminaire or lamppost shall exceed thirty feet (30') in height except those provided in an LI, GI, PAD, or SIU
district or those illuminating recreational sports fields or arenas during hours of use.
B. All new and replacement outdoor lighting fixtures shall employ one or more of the following techniques to reduce glare
or spillage: full cutoff fixtures; fully shielded fixtures, or "NEMA" type II, III and IV reflectors and shall be maintained in
such a manner as to confine light rays to the premises. All lighting, regardless of location, shall be designed to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 512/923
prevent direct glare, light spillage, and hazardous interference with residential property or automotive, bicycle and
pedestrian traffic on adjacent streets and properties. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.3.3: LIGHT GLARE FROM VEHICLES:
When a parking lot adjoins or is within three hundred feet (300') of a residential area, provision shall be made to screen
all vehicle lights to curtail direct illumination of the residential area; screening provided on the land may be provided by
the use of closely spaced evergreen trees or physical structures which will harmonize with the developed use of the land
and with the residential area. Vehicle light need not be screened on that portion of a site bounded by and parallel to a
street. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.4: DRAINAGE, STORM SEWERS, AND DETENTION BASINS:
15.4.4.1: APPLICABILITY:
A. New subdivisions or resubdivisions shall provide stormwater detention as detailed in section 15.8.6.8 of this title.
B. The standards in this section shall apply to any development for which a site plan must be submitted in the following
cases:
1. Any development greater than two (2) acres.
2. Any development less than two (2) acres in which there is an expected increase in stormwater runoff when
comparing the predevelopment and postdevelopment stormwater drainage calculations. The predevelopment site
shall be considered those conditions which existed a maximum of twelve (12) months prior to the site plan being
submitted. Detention shall be provided to accommodate the expected increase in stormwater runoff for the site.
C. The standards of this section shall not apply to any development located within the BPR, primary business, district.
(Ord. 2015-04)
15.4.4.2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. All drainage designs, storm sewers, detention/retention basins, and other such stormwater runoff appurtenances shall
be laid out and designed by an Illinois licensed professional engineer in accordance with the requirements set forth
herein and standard engineering practices.
B. Surface water runoff from parking lots, driveways, roofs and pavements shall not be allowed to cross sidewalks or be
directed onto private property that is not a part of the site unless easements have been obtained to permit such off
site drainage.
C. Surface water runoff shall be directed into municipal stormwater/drainage facilities, if available.
D. Stormwater runoff shall not be directed to nor connected to the sanitary sewer system. Any existing connections of
stormwater runoff systems (i.e., storm sewers, downspouts, roof drains, etc.) to the sanitary sewer system shall be
immediately removed or the persons in control of said connections shall be subject to citation.
E. Retaining walls shall be constructed where necessary for land stabilization. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.4.3: STORM SEWERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 513/923
A. Referenced Standards: Specific technical aspects of all storm sewers shall be designed in accordance with this code,
and in accordance with, but not limited to, the latest editions of following design standards:
1. "Illinois Department Of Transportation (IDOT) Manual Of Policies And Procedures".
2. "IDOT Design Manual".
3. "IDOT Drainage Manual".
4. IDOT "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
5. "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.4.4: HYDROLOGIC DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. General Information: This chapter applies to hydrologic design for detention basins and other storm drainage facilities
(storm sewers, swales, ditches, culverts, bridges) within the city limits and the one and one-half (11/2) mile extra
territorial zoning jurisdiction.
Hydrologic design calculations are required and shall be reviewed by the city of Carbondale for all site plans
submissions, developments, redevelopments, and subdivisions, and the like.
B. Referenced Standards: Design standards for hydrologic design shall comply with this code and with the provisions of
the latest edition of the "IDOT Drainage Manual" otherwise stated herein.
C. Rainfall Data: Rainfall duration and frequency distributions shall be taken from Illinois state water survey (ISWS)
bulletin 70 or ISWS circular 172 or most recent ISWS equivalent, unless the use of other local data is approved in
writing by the city engineer.
D. Rainfall Recurrence Interval: The design rainfall recurrence interval shall be set by the design application as follows:
1. Detention: 10-year inflow, 5-year outflow.
2. Emergency overflow routing: 100-year.
3. Bridges: 100-year.
4. Underpasses: 50-year.
5. Swales, ditches, and culverts: 25-year.
6. Streets and storm sewers: 10-year.
E. Design:
1. Choose an applicable hydrologic design method according to the "IDOT Drainage Manual" figure 4-001. More
complex hydrologic design methods, such as TR-20 or HEC-1, may always be substituted for less complex
methods when selecting appropriate design methods.
2. Hydrologic design calculations shall include contour map(s) clearly showing the design drainage area(s),
stormwater facilities, storm sewers, swales, ditches, culverts, bridges and receiving stormwater facilities. Critical
spot elevations, invert elevations, pervious and impervious areas shall be clearly indicated. See subdivision
regulations for other subdivision and site plan submittal requirements.
3. Submittals shall include design calculations, drainage basin areas and surface types, rainfall data used, critical
storm duration, generated site specific hydrographs (i.e., predesign, postdesign, detention, postdetention, etc.) and
justification of duration selection.
4. See section 15.4.4.5 of this chapter for detention routing and design requirements. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 514/923
15.4.4.5: DETENTION BASIN STANDARDS:
A. General Information:
1. The purpose of this section is to explain the city's policy regarding the ownership, design, construction, and
maintenance responsibility for detention basins. Detention basins are used to collect and hold stormwater runoff for
a period of time to compensate for increases in stormwater runoff caused by reduced ground surface perviousness
due to activities such as paving or building construction.
B. Design:
1. General:
a. Use section 15.4.4.4, "Hydrologic Design Standards", of this chapter, to determine design storm and hydrologic
method of determining peak inflows - 10-year design storm of most critical duration (minimum 60 minute storm)
as determined by the city engineer.
b. Detention basin sizing shall follow the methodology in "IDOT Drainage Manual", Pond Pack. software, Hydroflow
Hydrographs. software, or AutoCAD Civil 3D. software.
c. Outflow shall be limited to the calculated rate of runoff for the sites existing topography as if it was entirely
covered with grass; assuming normal soil conditions, reasonable grass coverage, and normal ground saturations
for a 5-year design storm of the most critical duration (minimum 60 minute storm) as determined by the city
engineer.
d. Parking lot and other such surfaces shall not be permitted to be used for stormwater detention.
e. Plans shall clearly indicate normal and high water elevations, design storage volume, minimum, maximum and
typical slopes.
f. Detention basins shall release the 10-year storage volume within twenty four (24) to forty eight (48) hours after
the end of the rainfall event.
g. Emergency overflow routes shall be clearly designated for runoff in excess of the 10-year storm.
h. Minimum outlet storm sewer size shall be twelve inches (12"); smaller diameter restrictions (e.g., orifice plate or
short pipe length) are acceptable.
i. Inlet and outlet pipes shall be provided with concrete end sections and erosion protection.
j. Detention ponds and their appurtenances (i.e., storm sewer systems, weirs, dams, orifices, and specialized
outflows) shall be designed by a professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois.
k. "Bubble up" outlets are prohibited.
l. Pumped outlets and other active control structures are discouraged and must be preapproved on a case by case
basis by the city engineer.
m. Temporary erosion techniques shall be used as required to ensure a full stand of cover vegetation in minimum
time.
n. Detention basin side slopes above normal pool shall be designed with permanent erosion protection consisting
of grass, nongrass vegetation, or other permanent finish. Permanent erosion protection shall be aesthetically
suitable to the development or existing surrounding land use.
2. Dry Bottom Basins:
a. Side slopes shall be a maximum of 4H:1V. If retaining walls are used, their height is limited to four feet (4').
Retaining wall design and material type shall be approved by the city engineer.
b. Dry bottom basins shall have one percent (1%) minimum bottom slopes or underdrain systems as approved by
the city engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 515/923
c. Dry bottom basins shall include a low flow channel with some form of erosion protection, for example a concrete
"V" gutter.
3. Wet Bottom Basins:
a. Above water side slopes shall be a maximum of 4H:1V. If retaining walls are used, their height is limited to four
feet (4'). Retaining wall design and material type shall be approved by the city engineer.
b. In accordance with IDOT standard specifications section 204, below water slopes shall be a maximum of 4H:1V
except that slopes of 2H:1V will be permitted below a point where the proposed water depth will be eight feet (8')
or greater.
c. Wet bottom basins shall have a natural or artificial means of aeration.
d. If fish or other aquatic wildlife are desired, a minimum depth of eight feet (8') shall be maintained over at least
twenty five percent (25%) of the pond's surface area.
e. So called "safety shelves" are not required as they promote the growth of algae and may cause entrapment.
f. To minimize erosion caused by wave action, shoreline stabilization shall be required around all wet bottom
detention basins. Shoreline stabilization shall extend down the side slope to an elevation one foot (1') below the
normal water surface elevation and up the side slope to an elevation one foot (1') above the normal water
surface elevation. Approved shoreline stabilization methods include riprap revetment constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition; cast in place portland cement concrete retaining walls; or modular concrete block
retaining walls. Alternative shoreline stabilization methods may be submitted to the city engineer for review and
approval. Any proposed shoreline stabilization method shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer prior
to installation.
g. An outlet structure shall be provided to allow dewatering of the pond for maintenance. Gravity dewatering is
strongly preferred.
h. Wet bottom basin design shall include an evaluation of soil permeability. A basin liner shall be included in the
design if needed to ensure water retention to normal pool elevation.
4. Underground Detention Systems:
a. Underground systems may be permitted subject to the approval of the city engineer.
b. All underground systems shall be designed so that inspection and cleaning of these systems is easily
accomplished.
c. Normal and accepted engineering practices shall be used for the design and construction of underground
detention systems.
C. Diagrams And Checklists:
1. Basin plans and specifications for review and approval.
2. Design calculations for basin hydrology and sizing.
a. Hydrologic calculations shall include areas tributary to the basin and their land use types.
b. Basin stage-storage-discharge tables shall be included in the submittal.
c. Emergency overflow routes shall be included in the submittal.
d. Inflow and outflow hydrographs both, for both pre- and post-conditions, shall be included in the submittal.
e. A statement of engineering assumptions (i.e., soil conditions, grass coverage percentages, impervious area
percentages, soil saturations, design storms, etc.) shall be included in the submittal. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.5: OUTDOOR RUBBISH, GARBAGE, AND STORAGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 516/923
15.4.5.1: APPLICABILITY:
The following standards apply to any existing or proposed commercial development or multi-family housing
development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.5.2: STANDARDS:
A. Outside rubbish and storage areas shall be permanently screened from view to a height of at least six feet (6') and
shall be constructed to prevent accidental dispersal of the material contained therein. Where storage areas abut a
residentially zoned property, a minimum six foot (6') vegetative barrier shall be provided between the fence and the
residential property.
B. All dumpsters, grease vats, and recycling receptacles shall be located within an enclosure with a height of at least six
feet (6') and shall be constructed to ground level to prevent dispersal.
C. Open storage is not allowed in the front yard or any side yard that abuts a public street except in the event of
seasonal uses with the issuance of a zoning certificate. For the purposes of this section, open storage shall also
include vehicles being repaired.
D. This section does not apply in the GI, LI, BWA and PAD districts, which have separate standards addressing this
issue. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.6: SIGHT VISIBILITY:
15.4.6.1: VISIBILITY IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to
impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (2.5') and ten feet (10') within fifteen feet (15') from the edge of
the street or curbline. The intent is that driveways shall have one hundred eighty degrees (180°) of unobstructed street
visibility at a point no less than fifteen feet (15') from adjacent street where such driveway exists.
(Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 517/923
15.4.7: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS IN CERTAIN DISTRICTS:
15.4.7.1: LARGE BUILDINGS IN R-3 AND PUD DISTRICTS:
The following design standards shall apply to any building in the R-3 or PUD district, or any building approved as a
special use in the PA or SB district, if such building includes three (3) or more dwelling units or more than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet of gross floor area.
A. Facades:
1. Facades facing or visible from a public street shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of
at least five percent (5%) of the length of the facade and extending at least twenty percent (20%) of the length of
the facade.
2. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed sixty (60) horizontal feet.
B. Entryways:
1. The principal entry to a building with any facade facing or visible from a public street should be on a facade facing
a public street; if a building has facades facing or visible from two (2) or more public streets, only one principal
entrance is required.
2. The entryway design should include elements and variations that give orientation to the building.
3. Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible public entrances facing the street and
featuring no less than three (3) of the following:
a. Canopies or porticoes;
b. Overhangs;
c. Recesses/projections;
d. Arcades;
e. Raised corniced parapets over the door;
f. Peaked roof forms;
g. Arches;
h. Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design;
i. Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.
C. Doors And Windows: Any facade facing or visible from a public street shall include doors, windows or similar
architectural voids constituting at least twenty percent (20%) of the wall area of such facade.
D. Roof Treatments: Variations in rooflines should be used to add visual interest to, and reduce the massive scale of,
large buildings. Roof features should complement the character of adjoining neighborhoods. Roof designs must
incorporate no fewer than two (2) of the following features:
1. Parapets screening flat roofs and rooftop equipment;
2. Overhanging eaves;
3. Sloped roofs;
4. Three (3) or more roof slope planes; and/or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 518/923
5. Repeating pattern of change in color, texture, and material modules.
E. Illustration Of Standards:
ILLUSTRATIONS OF STANDARDS
IN THIS SECTION
* Wall plane projection
* Roof overhangs
* Architectural details including arches and awnings
* Wall plane recesses
* Varied roof treatments, including peaked roof
* Entryways facing street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 519/923
* Entryway recessed
* Architectural details above first floor, at roofline
and under windows
* Corniced parapets over entry
* Note architectural detail at roofline and above
windows
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 520/923
* Parapet over entry
* Peaked roof with overhang
* Window details
* Portico over entry
* Peaked roof
* Architectural details in windows
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 521/923
* Arcade
* Architectural details include arches
* Peaked roof with overhang
* Contrasting example that does not meet the standards of this section.
Note lack of architectural details, lack of recesses or projections, lack of varied roof treatments, lack of overhangs, lack
of windows on street-facing walls
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.7.2: BUILDINGS IN THE BPR DISTRICT:
A. Existing Buildings - Town Square: Any modifications to an existing building in any part of the Town Square shall
require a certificate of appropriateness issued in accordance with section 15.6.11 of this title, subject to the guidelines
set forth in the "Carbondale Architectural Preservation Guidelines" as published by the city of Carbondale and the
Carbondale preservation commission in 1996.
B. Existing Buildings - Other: Any exterior modifications to an existing building in any part of the BPR district that is not
designated as a historic district shall conform generally to the "minimum standards" set out in subsection E of this
section and shall require approval through the review process set forth in accordance with subsection F of this
section. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 522/923
C. New Construction - Town Square: Any new construction within the Town Square shall conform to the minimum
standards set below in subsection E of this section and will require a certificate of appropriateness issued in
accordance with section 15.6.11 of this title, subject to the guidelines set forth in the "Carbondale Architectural
Preservation Guidelines" as published by the city of Carbondale and the Carbondale preservation commission in
1996.
D. New Construction - Other: New buildings (including building additions that increase the size of the facade or the floor
area of a building) within the BPR but not within the Town Square shall conform to the minimum standards set in
subsection E of this section and shall require approval through the review process set forth in accordance with
subsection F of this section.
E. Minimum Design Standards:
1. Building Placement And Orientation:
a. At least seventy percent (70%) of the front of the building shall be constructed to a point not to exceed five feet
(5') from the front lot line. The front yard shall be limited to courtyard and/or pedestrian amenities including, but
not limited to: benches, bike racks, outdoor cafes, decorative planters, public art, etc. Adequate site distance
shall be provided at all points of ingress and egress.
b. The orientation of new buildings shall conform to the existing patterns in the BPR district. Buildings located on
corner lots should address the corner. Please note that exceptions to this general principle may be considered
for portions of a development that incorporate innovation in design.
2. Building Height, Width, And Massing:
a. All new construction within the BPR district shall be a minimum of two (2) stories or twenty five feet (25') in
height. The upper stories of buildings exceeding five (5) stories shall be set back ten feet (10') for all additional
stories.
b. New buildings and additions should maintain the major horizontal lines and pattern of building widths along the
block where these features exist. When these contextual elements have not been established, or are no longer
present, new construction should set the tone for subsequent developments.
c. Buildings should maintain a human scale. In addition, blank featureless walls shall be avoided. As such, facades
greater than seventy five feet (75') must incorporate features designed to minimize the perceived size of the
structure by breaking the facade into smaller bays or massing elements (not to exceed 50 feet). A minimum of
two (2) of the following, or equivalent, techniques shall be employed:
(1) Distinct vertical articulation.
(2) Expression of building modules with changes in the roof form.
(3) Articulation of the facade through varied surface planes and/or materials.
(4) Utilization of an upper story setback.
(5) Expression of floor positions in the external design of the building.
3. Building Materials, Colors, And Details:
a. New buildings and additions must be designed such that the quality of their aesthetic character is apparent from
all angles viewable from the public street. This includes, but is not limited to, materiality, color schemes, and
architectural features.
b. All new construction shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) facade materials. Clay brick and/or natural stone
should be incorporated into the building as a major design element comprising not less than twenty five percent
(25%) of the exterior material scheme on elevations viewable from the public street.
c. Certain exterior materials are prohibited. The following table includes a list of required, permitted, and prohibited
materials. If a request is made to utilize a material not on the list, it must first be approved in writing by the city's
development services division.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 523/923
Required Permitted Prohibited
Adding detail through decorative masonry
details, banding, metal ornaments/accents,
changes in color/texture, etc.
Clay brick and/or natural stone - 25%
minimum
Cement board siding
Concrete masonry units (CMUs) - color/texture
must be integral to the product - 50% maximum
on side or rear facades only
Corrugated metal - permitted as a roofing
material only with appropriate protection of public
rights of way
Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) -
50% maximum
Metal - anodized, painted, or powdercoated
Natural stone
Natural wood or wood-plastic composites - 25%
maximum
Precast concrete/cast stone - must mimic
appearance of natural stone
Structural glass
Aluminum
siding
Chainlink
fencing
Mirrored glass
Plain concrete
masonry units
(CMUs)
Vinyl siding
d. Transitions in material should be made at a change in plane, for instance an inside corner, or should be
mediated by some other architectural feature or detail such as stone banding.
e. Materials shall not transition at an outside corner edge, rather one material must turn the corner and carry along
the adjacent elevation to a point where the corner appears solidly finished.
f. A minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of a structure's exterior surfaces shall have muted colors with a light
reflectance value (LRV) of fifty percent (50%) or less. Bright, brilliant, intense, or saturated colors should be used
as accents only and comprise not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the overarching color scheme. This
should not be construed to limit the enhancement of facades with murals or other painted artwork.
g. Although architectural style is not restricted, in order to enhance the aesthetic quality of the BPR district, new
buildings and additions must provide visual interest through the incorporation of three (3) of the following or
equivalent architectural details:
(1) Decorative cornice (top of building/top of storefront).
(2) Window or wall opening treatments (e.g., sills, hoods, lintels).
(3) Clay brick/natural stone piers.
(4) Kickplates.
(5) Distinctive rooflines and/or parapets.
(6) Frieze boards.
(7) Porticos.
(8) Balconies.
4. Doors, Entrances, And Windows:
a. New buildings and additions shall contain square or vertical upper story windows. A minimum of thirty three
percent (33%) of the facade at the second story and above should be comprised of glazing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 524/923
b. New buildings and additions must feature commercial storefront windows at the street level. A minimum of sixty
percent (60%) of the facade must be transparent glazing on all major street frontages.
c. New buildings and additions must feature prominently articulated main entries that are visible from and/or face
the street and are integrated into the architectural scheme/aesthetics.
5. Awnings And Canopies:
a. Awnings and canopies are encouraged and must be in keeping with the overall architectural aesthetic of the
development with regard to material, form, color, etc.
b. Awnings and canopies may extend a maximum of six feet (6') from the building face when projecting over any
public right of way. Any awning or canopy which is located entirely on private property shall not be subject to the
six foot (6') maximum projection restriction. Any awning or canopy that projects or suspends over any sidewalk,
public or private, or any public right of way shall have at least eight feet (8') of clearance between the bottom of
the awning or canopy and the ground or sidewalk. The owner of any awning or canopy suspended over public
right of way agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability which may arise by reason of the
awning or canopy being projected or suspended over the public rights of way. The owner shall submit an
insurance certificate listing the city as additionally insured.
F. Design Review:
1. Application: The application for design review shall be filed with the planning services division and shall be
accompanied by such information, plans, elevations, specifications and other documents as may be required.
2. Review And Determination:
a. The planning services division shall review the proposed design for compliance with the design standards
outlined above. The review shall be within thirty (30) days of the date the application is filed. In reviewing the
application, the planning services division shall determine whether the proposed work is in accordance with the
design standards established by this section and is generally compatible with the character of the downtown.
The director of development services shall approve the application as submitted, approve the application with
modifications, or deny the application. If the applicant does not agree with the director of development services'
decision to modify an application, the application shall be denied. (Ord. 2017-17)
b. The director of development services may delegate the review of applications within the Town Square to the
preservation commission, which shall proceed in accordance with section 15.6.11 of this title.
c. Written notice of the director of development services' action shall be provided to the applicant. A denial of the
application shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for denial that shall include recommendations
concerning amendments to the application that would cause the director of development services to reconsider
its denial.
3. Resubmission Of Application Or Appeal Of Decision:
a. An application that has been denied may be resubmitted with amendments for reconsideration by the planning
services division.
b. An application that has been denied may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with section
15.6.9 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8: OFF STREET PARKING, LOADING AND STACKING:
15.4.8.1: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
The off street parking and off street loading provisions of this section shall apply as follows:
A. Accessory off street parking, off street loading and off street stacking facilities shall be provided as required by the
regulations of this title and the schedule of district regulations for all uses and structures established in each district
after the effective date hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 525/923
B. When the intensity of use of any structure or premises will increase through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor
area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement in the amount specified herein requiring parking or loading
facilities, such required parking and loading facilities for the addition shall be provided and the entire parking, loading
and stacking area shall be brought into conformance with the construction, lighting and landscaping standards of this
chapter.
C. Whenever the existing use of a structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be
provided as required for such new use. However, if the said structure was erected prior to the effective date hereof,
additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use
would exceed the requirements for the existing use. If additional parking is required, the entire parking, loading and
stacking area shall be brought into conformance with the construction, lighting and landscaping standards of this
chapter.
D. The issuance of a zoning certificate for new construction will require all existing driveway and parking areas serving
the new structure(s) to be brought into compliance with current code requirements, regardless of whether there may
have been a previous driveway and/or parking area on the lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8.2: EFFECT ON EXISTING PARKING AREAS WITH UNPAVED SURFACES:
A. Driveways and parking areas established after November 12, 2002, and serving multi-unit dwellings,
fraternities/sororities and rooming house occupied residential structures containing four (4) or fewer spaces and
encompassing no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet shall be surfaced in accordance with
subsection 15.4.8.5B of this chapter. All driveways and parking areas shall be designed to meet minimum off street
parking space dimensions to prevent vehicle encroachment onto public rights of way. Driveways and parking areas
existing on November 12, 2002, and serving all multi-unit dwellings, fraternities/sororities and rooming house
occupied residential structures containing four (4) or fewer spaces and encompassing no more than one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet shall be defined by six inch by six inch (6" x 6") landscaped timbers, railroad ties, or
an alternative method approved by the administrative official and anchored appropriately. Areas outside of the
defined driveway or parking area shall be maintained as lawn and/or landscaped areas.
B. Existing driveways and parking areas serving all multi-unit dwellings, fraternities/sororities and rooming house
occupied residential structures containing more than four (4) spaces may be reduced in size to a parking area
containing four (4) or fewer spaces (encompassing no more than 1,500 square feet) and shall be defined by six inch
by six inch (6" x 6") landscaped timbers or railroad ties, or an alternative method approved by the administrative
official and anchored appropriately or be surfaced in accordance with the surfacing standards located in subsection
14.4.8.5B of this chapter. All driveways and parking areas shall be designed to meet minimum off street parking
space dimensions to prevent vehicle encroachment onto public rights of way. The driveways and parking areas may
not be further reduced in size, if the use of the structure and/or property exceeds the number of parking spaces
required. The existing parking areas that are further expanded shall be done so in accordance with administrative site
plan review outlined in section 15.6.10 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8.3: PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking and loading facilities to
serve any existing uses or structures, provided that there is adherence to all regulations herein governing the access,
use, and design of such facilities, and providing the parking facilities are in the same district. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8.4: OFF STREET PARKING:
A. Existing Parking Facilities: Accessory off street parking facilities in existence on the effective date hereof shall not
hereafter be reduced below the requirements for a similar new structure or use under the provisions of this title.
B. Location: Except as hereinafter in this subsection provided, all required accessory off street parking spaces shall be
located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. Accessory parking spaces for principal nonresidential
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 526/923
structures or uses may be provided on other land situated within three hundred feet (300') of the aforesaid
commercial or professional structure or use. In the event that such spaces situated within said three hundred feet
(300') are no longer provided or available, then this permitted exception shall at once become inapplicable and
accessory off street parking spaces shall forthwith be required to be located on the same lot as the aforesaid principal
structure or use. (Ord. 2013-20)
C. Use: Accessory off street parking facilities, as accessory to uses listed herein, shall be solely for the parking of
vehicles of patrons, occupants, guests or employees. No major motor vehicle repair work shall be permitted in
accessory off street parking facilities. No motor vehicles or recreational equipment shall be advertised for sale in a
commercial accessory off street parking facility except as allowed by an approved dealership licensed by the state of
Illinois, although the owner or lessee of a commercial property may advertise one licensed motor vehicle also owned
by them. The vehicle shall not be advertised for more than thirty (30) days per calendar year and the owner or lessee
shall be limited to the sale of one vehicle every four (4) months. (Ord. 2016-10)
D. Limitation: Parking shall be limited to driveway or parking areas in all zoning districts. New driveway and parking
areas shall be designed and surfaced in accordance with the standards outlined in sections 15.4.8.5 and 15.4.8.6 of
this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8.5: STANDARDS FOR NEW PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS AND OFF STREET
PARKING AREAS REQUIRING FOUR OR FEWER SPACES:
Before the maintenance, operation, construction, or improvement of a driveway or an off street parking area with four (4)
or fewer spaces, a zoning certificate use shall be obtained for same.
A. Maximum Driveway Surface Area And Curb Cuts Allowed In Certain Zoning Districts: Driveway areas in front yards of
AG, RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, PUD, RMH, and PAR zoning districts with parking requirement of four (4) or fewer
spaces per lot shall not exceed twenty four feet (24') in width at the right of way line and shall not exceed thirty four
feet (34') in width at the curb or edge of pavement. No driveway shall be less than twelve feet (12') in width at the
right of way line. More than one curb cut is permitted per lot, provided, there is sixty five feet (65') of spacing between
curb cuts, measured between interior edges of pavement. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no more
than forty percent (40%) of any front yard may be used as a driveway or parking area.
B. Minimum Surfacing Standards: Minimum surfacing standards for new public and private driveways and parking areas
requiring four (4) or fewer spaces are provided in the table below:
MINIMUM SURFACING STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS
AND PARKING AREAS WITH FOUR OR FEWER SPACES
District Required Surfacing
AG and F Gravel
RR:
Lot size - 2.5 acres or more Gravel
Lot size - less than 2.5 acres A-3
All other districts Hot mix asphalt
1. Driveway and parking areas requiring gravel as the minimum surfacing standard shall be surfaced with a minimum
of six inches (6") of stabilized rock, gravel, or crushed stone material.
2. Driveway and parking areas requiring a type A-3 surface as the minimum surfacing standard shall be constructed
with a minimum of six inches (6") of stabilized rock, gravel, or crushed stone base, and surfaced with a minimum
type A-3 surface as set forth in "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" by the department of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 527/923
transportation of the state of Illinois, as adopted January 1, 2012, or as hereafter supplemented, amended or
superseded.
3. Driveway and parking areas requiring hot mix asphalt as the minimum surfacing standard shall be constructed with
a minimum of six inches (6") of stabilized rock, gravel, or crushed stone base, and surfaced with two inches (2") of
hot mix asphalt; or a minimum of six inches (6") of portland cement concrete poured over earth compacted to
ninety percent (90%) standard laboratory density.
4. Driveway or parking areas surfaced with hot mix asphalt or portland cement concrete in lieu of gravel or type A-3
surface shall be constructed to the specifications set forth in subsection 15.4.8.5B3 of this chapter.
C. Minimum Parking Space Dimension: The minimum standard parking space dimension shall be at least nine feet (9')
wide and eighteen feet (18') long.
D. Curb Cuts: Proposed curb cut widths shall be kept to a minimum consistent with vehicular and pedestrian safety; curb
cut radii shall allow safe ingress and egress of vehicles from and to the proper lane of traffic on the street which they
adjoin. All curb cuts and aprons located on the public right of way shall be a minimum of six inches (6") of portland
cement concrete. Existing curb cuts and curb cut radii shall be used only if they comply with standards for proposed
curb cuts and curb radii. If existing curb cuts are not utilized at the time of development, the curb cut shall be
removed and replaced in accordance with existing street conditions.
E. Front Yard Defined: As used in this section, the term "front yard" shall mean the area bounded by the front lot line(s),
the side lot line(s), and a line extending across the full width of the lot at the frontmost projection of any building on
the lot. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8.6: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE OFF STREET PARKING LOTS
REQUIRING MORE THAN FOUR SPACES:
Before the maintenance, operation, construction, or improvement of an off street parking lot with more than four (4)
spaces, a certificate of zoning use shall be obtained for same. No permit shall be issued until the plans and
specifications of the lot have been submitted to the administrative official and it is determined that all of the following
standards have been met:
A. Minimum Parking Space Requirements: Each required parking space shall meet the following minimum stall and aisle
requirements which are based on the angle of proposed parking stalls as shown in table A, "Parking Stall And
Module Dimensions", of this section.
B. Space And Aisle Construction:
1. All spaces and aisles in off street parking areas with more than four (4) spaces shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable provisions of "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" as adopted January 1,
2012, by the Illinois department of transportation, or as hereafter supplemented, amended or superseded as
follows with:
a. A minimum of six inches (6") of stabilized rock, gravel, or crushed stone base, and surfaced with two inches (2")
of hot mix asphalt; or
b. A minimum of six inches (6") of portland cement concrete poured over earth compacted to ninety percent (90%)
standard laboratory density, unless, due to soil conditions or other concerns, higher standards are deemed
necessary by the public works director and concurred with by the development assistance committee as
provided by section 15.5.3.3 of this title. All spaces and aisles in the LI and GI districts that are located within a
fenced storage area may be constructed to the standards as outlined in subsection 15.4.8.5B2 of this chapter.
2. All spaces and aisles in the F, AG, and RR districts of this title shall be constructed with: a minimum of six inches
(6") of stabilized rock, gravel, or crushed stone base, and surfaced with a type A-3 surface as set forth in "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" as adopted by Illinois department of transportation on January 1,
2012, or as hereafter supplemented, amended or superseded, unless due to other concerns, higher standards are
deemed necessary by the public works director and concurred with by the development assistance committee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 528/923
3. All accessible spaces shall comply with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) and the Illinois accessibility code
(IAC) and other applicable federal or state standards and requirements.
C. Parking Lot Striping: All standard spaces shall be marked using four inch (4") wide white paint. All accessible spaces
shall be marked using high visibility yellow paint in accordance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) and the
Illinois accessibility code (IAC) and other applicable federal or state standards and requirements. This shall apply to
any new construction or anytime an existing parking lot is repaired or resurfaced.
D. Accessibility: All accessible routes shall comply with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) and the Illinois
accessibility code (IAC) and other applicable federal or state standards and requirements.
E. Flow Direction Designation: The location of each parking space, each entrance or exit, and the direction of traffic flow
shall be marked by appropriate traffic control signs and surface marking.
F. Entrances And Exits: Entrances and exits shall be located so as to minimize traffic congestion and shall be approved
by the administrative official. Circulation patterns and exits shall be designed so that all vehicles will leave the parking
lot and enter the public street going forward. All exits shall include a minimum thirty inch (30") stop sign.
G. Circulation Pattern: Provisions shall be made for a safe and convenient circulation pattern within any parking lot.
Public rights of way and public and/or private streets shall not be used for parking lot circulation.
H. Curb Cuts: Proposed curb cut widths shall be kept to a minimum consistent with vehicular and pedestrian safety; curb
cut radii shall allow safe ingress and egress of vehicles from and to the proper lane of traffic on the street which they
adjoin. All curb cuts and aprons located on the public right of way shall be a minimum of six inches (6") of portland
cement concrete. Existing curb cuts and curb cut radii shall be used only if they comply with standards for proposed
curb cuts and curb radii. If existing curb cuts are not utilized at the time of development, the curb cut shall be
removed and replaced in accordance with existing street conditions. Curb cut widths shall be regulated by the Illinois
department of transportation's bureau of local roads manual.
I. Bumper Blocks: All parking lots shall provide bumper blocks or wheel stops to prevent encroachment of vehicles on
sidewalks.
J. Attendant Shelter: Shelter for the use of a parking lot attendant (if any) erected on a parking lot shall not exceed three
hundred (300) cubic feet and shall be designed so as to complement its surroundings.
K. Lighting: Parking lots are required to provide a system of lighting in accordance with the following standards. For
general site lighting requirements, see section 15.4.3 of this chapter.
1. A minimum of 0.125 foot-candle of illumination at any space and an average of 0.25 foot-candle of illumination for
the entire lot shall be provided and the foot-candles of illumination shall be consistent with city codes and subject to
review of the public works director. A photometric plan shall be submitted showing light levels at thirty foot (30')
intervals.
2. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall employ one or more of the following techniques to reduce glare or spillage: full
cutoff fixtures; fully shielded fixtures, or "NEMA" type II, III and IV reflectors and shall be maintained in such a
manner as to confine light rays to the premises. All lighting, regardless of location, shall be designed to prevent
direct glare, light spillage, and hazardous interference with automotive, bicycle and pedestrian traffic on adjacent
streets and properties.
3. In all residential areas or on any site located within one hundred feet (100') of property zoned in any R-1 or R-2
district, the maximum height above ground level of parking lot lights shall be fifteen feet (15').
4. Commercial or industrial areas that are not located within one hundred feet (100') of property zoned R-1 or R-2,
the maximum height above ground level of parking lot lights shall be thirty feet (30').
5. In nonvehicular pedestrian areas the light height shall not exceed fifteen feet (15').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 529/923
6. No luminaire or lamppost shall exceed thirty feet (30') in height except those provided in an LI, GI, PAD, or SIU
district or those illuminating recreational sports fields or arenas during hours of use.
7. In parking lots containing more than four (4) light poles, the light poles shall be numbered in a manner that makes
them easily identifiable. (Ord. 2013-20)
L. Minimum Off Street Parking Lot Stall And Module Dimensions:
1. Minimum Stall And Module Dimensions: All public and private off street parking lots shall meet the following
minimum stall and module dimensions as shown in table A, "Parking Stall And Module Dimensions", of this section.
TABLE A
PARKING STALL AND MODULE DIMENSIONS
Angle
Stall
Type Width
Vehicle
Projection
(A)
Aisle
(B)
Typical
Module
(C)
Interlock
Reduction
(D)
Vehicle
Overhang
(E)
0° PAR 21'0" 8'0" 10'0" 26'0" - 2'0"
45° STD 9'0" 18'10" 13'8" 51'6" 2'3" 2'3"
60° STD 9'0" 18'11" 15'8" 53'8" 1'6" 2'6"
75° STD 9'0" 19'2" 19'8" 58'0" 0'9" 2'9"
90° STD 9'0" 18'0" 24'0" 60'0" - 2'0"
a. The parking module (dimension C per figure A of this section) shall be computed by adding the vehicle
projection in the parked stall (dimension A) to the required aisle width (dimension B) for that angle of parking.
The module shall be the clear dimension between walls or other obstructions except that columns of a combined
maximum dimension of two feet (2') may protrude into a module with a parking angle between forty five degrees
(45°) and seventy five degrees (75°) up to two feet (2') from the face of the wall. A vehicle overhang (dimension
E) will be allowed as shown in table A of this section to reduce the overall paved module. No vehicle overhang
shall project into any sidewalk or landscaped area.
FIGURE A
PARKING MODULE
(Ord. 2013-31)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 530/923
2. Design Standards For Parking And Circulation For Miniwarehouses: Before the development, operation or
improvement of a miniwarehouse project, a zoning certificate shall be obtained for same. No permit shall be issued
until the plans and specifications of the development have been submitted to the administrative official and it is
determined that all of the following standards will be met:
a. There shall be a minimum of twenty two feet (22') between warehouse buildings for driveway, customer parking,
customer loading, and fire lane purposes. Where such driveways do not serve storage cubicles, or serve only
one row of cubicles, eighteen feet (18') shall be the minimum driveway width for two-way traffic. For one-way
traffic serving no cubicles, a twelve foot (12') minimum driveway width is required.
b. Required driveway shall be surfaced to meet the standards required in the zoning district in which the
miniwarehouse is to be located.
c. Off street parking spaces shall be required in accordance with this section for the use of current prospective
customers at the project office and for the manager's quarters (if provided). If more than four (4) spaces are
required for the project office, such spaces shall be developed in accordance with this section as required for
surface parking lots.
d. If the miniwarehouses are accessible to customers after dark, a system of lighting shall be provided for the
driveway areas servicing the storage cubicles.
3. Design Standards For Parking Structures: Parking structures shall meet the following standards in addition to
industry engineering design standards:
a. Each required parking space shall meet the minimum stall and module requirements established by table A of
this section.
b. The location of each parking space, each entrance or exit, and the direction of traffic flow shall be marked by
appropriate traffic control signs and surface marking as outlined in this section.
c. The grade (slope) of any portion of floor area designated for parking within any parking structure shall not
exceed six percent (6%) to maintain comfortable parking on any sloped floor.
d. Parking structures shall be designed with a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet (8') at all points necessary
to gain access and use of all proposed or designated handicap spaces. The minimum vertical clearances shall
be clearly marked at the entrances of the parking structure and elsewhere as appropriate within the parking
structure.
e. Where parking structures are to be used after dark, a system of lighting shall be provided in accordance with this
section.
(1) Generally, the maximum height above ground level of exterior lights shall be thirty feet (30'), excepting those
lights required to illuminate any roof deck parking areas. Such roof deck lights shall be shielded and positioned
to direct light only on the roof deck and not on adjacent areas.
f. Parking structures shall be designed to screen all vehicle light within the structure to prevent direct illumination of
adjacent areas. Opaque screening constructed to a minimum height of four feet (4') above the driving floor shall
be provided around the perimeter of the parking structure, except at approved entrances and exits.
g. Trees shall be required in accordance with the quantities established by section 15.4.1 of this chapter divided by
the number of floors in the parking structure.
h. Proposed curb cut widths shall be kept to a minimum consistent with vehicular and pedestrian safety; curb cut
radii shall allow safe ingress and egress of vehicles from and to the proper lane of traffic on the street which they
adjoin. Existing curb cuts and curb cut radii shall be used only if they comply with standards for proposed curb
cuts and curb radii.
i. Entrances and exits shall be located so as to minimize traffic congestion and shall be approved by the
administrative official.
Provisions shall be made for a safe and convenient circulation pattern within any parking structure. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.4.8.7: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 531/923
There shall be parking provided for each structure and use hereafter erected, structurally altered, or enlarged, unless
elsewhere exempted. The minimum number of accessory off street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
table B, "Off Street Parking Schedule", of this section. When determination of the number of off street parking spaces
required by this title results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded
while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
A. Parking Schedule:
TABLE B
OFF STREET PARKING SCHEDULE
Dwelling and lodging uses:
Bed and breakfast
establishment
2 spaces per dwelling unit for the permanent resident family in the dwelling
unit(s) plus 1 space for each 2 paid overnight guests (based on design
capacity)
Fraternities or sororities and
dormitories
2 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 2 occupants in accordance with
designed capacity
Group homes 1 space for each staff person on maximum shift, plus 1 space for each 6
members, or fraction thereof, of the service dependent population
Group living: assisted living 2 spaces plus 0.5 space for each dwelling unit
Group living: nursing homes
and similar types of
establishments
1 space for each 3 beds, in accordance with designed capacity
Hotels or motels 1.25 spaces for each lodging room or dwelling unit; plus parking spaces as
required for other uses on the premises (such as restaurant, bars, etc.) as
indicated elsewhere in this table B
Inn 2 spaces for the permanent resident family plus 1 space for each 2 paid
overnight guests (based on design capacity) plus 1 space for each 4 seats in
the eating facility if the eating facility is open to the public other than paid
overnight guests
Multi-unit dwellings; 2-, 3- or 4-
unit dwellings; and rooming
houses
1 space per bedroom with a minimum of 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Single-unit dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit if on a local street; 3 spaces per dwelling unit if on
an arterial road or collector street, provided, however, that a single-unit
dwelling that is occupied as a rooming house shall provide parking as
required in this subsection for a rooming house. Parking within a garage shall
not be counted toward the minimum parking requirement
Theaters, schools, institutions
and auditoriums or other places
of assembly:
Auditoriums, stadiums,
theaters, houses of worship
and similar public assembly
uses, except school
auditoriums
1 space for each 5 seats
Day care centers, child care
centers, day nurseries, nursery
schools, kindergartens,
playgroups and centers or
1 space for each 5 students in accordance with licensed or designed capacity
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 532/923
workshops for mentally or
physically handicapped
Hospitals 1.5 spaces per bed in accordance with designed capacity; plus additional
spaces for outpatient clinics, schools, etc., located within the hospital building,
in accordance with requirements indicated elsewhere in this table B
Libraries 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Museums, art galleries 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Private clubs and lodges 1 space for each 5 seats in accordance with designed seating capacity
School or institutional
auditoriums
If on same site as school, parking for school includes parking for the
auditorium
Schools, commercial or trade,
music, dance or business
school
1 space for each 250 gross square feet of office floor area or fraction thereof,
plus 1 space for each 3 students in accordance with designed capacity
Schools, elementary or junior
high
1 space for each 5 students of design capacity
Schools, high (except those
high schools with only 9th and
10th grades which follow
criteria for junior high school)
1 space for each 4 students of design capacity
Recreation uses, commercial or
noncommercial:
Bowling alleys 4 spaces for each alley and spaces as may be required herein for affiliated
uses such as restaurants
Health salons, swimming
pools, dance halls, recreational
buildings and community
centers
4 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area that is open to users
Business, commercial and
industrial uses:
Automobile service stations 1 space for each 6 pump meters or fraction thereof, and 2 spaces for each
service bay
Banks and other financial
institutions
1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Carryout establishments
handling sale of food and/or
refreshments for consumption
off the premises (excluding
grocery and similar stores)
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Carwash Self-serve, no parking but see stacking spaces, section 15.4.8.9 of this
chapter; if staffed, 1 space per projected peak hour employee, plus stacking
spaces
Coin operated laundromat 1 space for each 4 coin operated cleaning, washing, and drying machines, in
accordance with designed capacity
Home occupation 1 additional space
Industrial or manufacturing
operations
1 space per 2 employees on largest shift, plus 15 percent of that number of
spaces for company vehicles or visitors. Documentation regarding number of
employees shall be provided to the administrative official
Miniwarehouses 1 space for each 50 storage cubicles to be located at the project office for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 533/923
use of prospective customers or active customers conducting business with
the miniwarehouse management plus 2 spaces for the manager's quarters (if
provided). Off street parking and loading for miniwarehouse customers at
their individual cubicles shall be provided within the minimum circulation
driveways, as required, in subsection 15.4.8.6L2 of this chapter
Offices of doctors, dentists,
veterinarians and medical,
dental, or veterinary clinics;
and small animal hospitals or
clinics
1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Offices, public or private,
except medical, veterinary and
dental
1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Restaurants and cafes, high
turnover and fast food
1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area plus required stacking spaces
for drive-through lane(s)
Restaurants, quality 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space for every 2 seats
of permitted fire occupancy, whichever is less
Retail, convenience 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1.5 spaces for each
gas pump
Retail, large items, including
furniture and appliance stores,
motor vehicle sales, bona fide
wholesale stores not catering
to the general public,
household equipment,
machinery sales
1 space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
Retail, lumber and home
improvement
1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area (exterior lumberyards or
garden supply shopping areas shall be included in gross floor area for this
calculation)
Retail stores not elsewhere
classified (in this subsection);
this classification includes
"super stores", discount stores
and supermarkets
1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
Shopping centers 1 space per 225 square feet of gross leasable floor area or fraction thereof
Warehouse and storage
establishment and freight or
truck terminals
4 spaces plus 1 space for each 1,500 square feet over 4,500 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof plus truck parking
Service units:
Funeral home 1 space for each 5 chapel or parlor seats
Salons, hair, tanning, nail and
other
1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof
B. Reduction For Mixed Or Joint Use Of Parking Spaces: Upon a written request, the development assistance committee
may authorize a reduction in total number of required parking spaces for two (2) or more uses jointly providing off
street parking when their respective hours of need of maximum parking do not normally overlap. Reduction of parking
requirements, because of joint use, shall be approved if the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant submits a parking study with sufficient data to demonstrate that hours of maximum demand for
parking by the respective uses do not normally overlap.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 534/923
2. The applicant submits a legal agreement, approved by the city attorney, guaranteeing the joint use of off street
parking spaces so long as the uses requiring parking are in existence or until required parking is provided
elsewhere in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2013-20)
C. Reduction For Additional Bicycle Parking: Commercial developments are eligible for a onetime reduction in vehicle
parking spaces in exchange for additional bicycle parking facilities. The number of vehicle parking spaces may be
reduced by two (2) spaces in exchange for five (5) additional bicycle parking spaces.
D. Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of
employees on duty or residing on the premises at any one time.
E. Other Uses: Parking spaces for other permitted uses not listed above shall be provided on the same basis as required
for the most similar use or as reasonably determined by the development assistance committee. Parking spaces for
other special uses not listed above shall be provided as required by the city council after a hearing by the planning
commission and guided by the above requirements and the special use performance standards; however, the council
may set higher requirements for any special use case. (Ord. 2015-15)
15.4.8.8: OFF STREET LOADING:
Off street loading spaces scaled to the type of vehicle anticipated to utilize the spaces shall be provided accessory to
any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or
merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles in accordance with the following:
A. Location: Off street loading berths shall be on the same lot as the principal use and they shall not be located in a front
yard.
B. Screening: When a use which requires or provides off street loading facilities adjoins a residential district, such
facilities shall be concealed from view therefrom by a fence or wall not less than six feet (6') or more than eight feet
(8') in height. In lieu of a concealing fence, a densely planted evergreen tree or shrub hedge shall be provided and
maintained to not less than six feet (6') in height. If an evergreen tree or shrub hedge is utilized, original plantings
shall be at least three feet (3') in height.
C. Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements and shall be subject to the approval of the
administrative official.
D. Surfacing: All off street loading spaces and access to them shall be surfaced to meet the standards of section
15.4.8.6 of this chapter.
E. Use: Space allocated to any off street loading space shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space
requirements for any off street parking facilities. No storage of any kind or motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted within any required loading space.
F. Required Spaces:
1. Uses In Nonresidential Districts: Uses in SB, BPL, LI, GI, and BWA which require the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles shall provide off street loading spaces in accordance with
the following schedule:
REQUIRED SPACE
Gross Floor Area Required Spaces
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 535/923
Of Establishments
15,000 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 100,000 3
a. For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof over the
first one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, one additional loading space. "Gross floor area" shall mean
the sum of the several floors of a building or buildings devoted to the use for which off street loading is computed
as measured from the faces of exterior walls or the centerline of party walls. Gross floor area shall not include
covered mall space which is not used as sales area.
2. Nonresidential Uses In Residential Districts: One off street loading space for buildings containing ten thousand
(10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area plus one additional space for each one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8.9: STACKING SPACES:
A. Applicability: Any development that includes drive-through or drive-up lanes shall include stacking spaces as required
by this section.
B. Number:
1. Sites with drive-through lanes for banks shall include four (4) stacking spaces per drive-through lane;
2. Sites with drive-through lanes for fast food restaurants shall include four (4) stacking spaces per lane;
3. Sites with automatic car washes shall include four (4) stacking spaces per bay;
4. Sites with drive-through lanes for uses other than banks or fast food shall include two (2) stacking spaces per lane.
C. Area, Design, Location:
1. The area required for stacking for drive-through lanes shall not be counted as part of the required parking area;
2. Stacking areas shall be located and designed so that they do not block public sidewalks or driveways providing
access and egress to the site or adjoining sites;
3. The required number of stacking spaces shall be provided on the site and shall not include space in a street, alley
or any portion of a right of way;
4. Alleys or driveways in or abutting areas designed, approved, or developed for residential use shall not be used for
circulation of traffic for drive-up facilities;
5. Drive-in facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and designed to minimize turning movements relative to
driveway access to streets and intersections;
6. Where turns are required in the exit lane, the minimum distance from any drive-up station to the beginning point of
the curve shall be thirty four feet (34'). The minimum inside turning radius shall be twenty five feet (25');
7. Drive-in facilities and stacking lanes shall be located and designed to minimize or avoid complete conflicts between
vehicular traffic and pedestrian areas such as sidewalks, crosswalks, or other pedestrian accessways;
8. A bypass lane shall be provided; and
9. Stacking areas shall be paved to the same standards as parking lots outlined in section 15.4.8.6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.8.10: BICYCLE PARKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 536/923
A. Applicability: Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for all school, multi-family, commercial, recreational and
industrial uses. This section, which regulates bicycle parking, shall extend to all real property located within the
corporate city limits of Carbondale, Illinois, and within one and one-half (11/2) miles thereof as shown on the official
zoning map.
B. Bicycle Parking Facility: A "bicycle parking facility" is defined as a designated area which shall offer a secure space
for bicycle storage. Bicycle parking facilities shall offer either a lockable enclosure in which a bicycle can be stored or
a stationary rack upon which the bicycle can be locked. Bicycle parking spaces should allow the user to securely
attach both the bicycle frame and one tire to the bike rack with the use of a U-frame lock.
C. Number Of Spaces:
1. For uses requiring motor vehicle parking spaces, bicycle parking shall be provided at a rate of one bicycle parking
space for each ten (10) motor vehicle spaces or fraction thereof, with a minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces
being provided.
2. Large commercial and industrial developments shall require a maximum of twenty (20) bicycle parking spaces.
3. For uses in the BPR, primary business, district one space shall be provided for each two thousand (2,000) square
feet of gross commercial floor area, with a minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces being provided.
a. The required bicycle parking should be located on private property whenever possible. If the developer finds that
the bicycle parking cannot be adequately provided on the site, the developer shall purchase and donate to the
city a bicycle rack or racks that will accommodate the required bicycle parking. The city will then install the
bicycle rack(s) on public property within the BPR, primary business, district in an area in proximity to the
development site where bicycle parking is inadequate.
D. Bicycle Parking Incentive: Commercial developments are eligible for a onetime reduction in vehicle parking spaces in
exchange for additional bicycle parking facilities. The number of vehicle parking spaces may be reduced by two (2)
spaces in exchange for five (5) additional bicycle parking spaces.
E. Bicycle Parking Facilities Location: Bicycle parking shall be installed so that it does not interfere with the flow of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic in accordance with the rules outlined below:
1. Distance From Entrances: Bicycle parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use for
which such facilities are required, and shall be a maximum of fifty feet (50') from the public and employee
entrances.
2. Distance From Motor Vehicle Parking: The dispersion and proximity of all bicycle parking facilities required by this
section shall provide for convenient bicycle parking which shall be separated from automobile parking by a physical
barrier or by at least five feet (5').
3. Access: Convenient access to bicycle parking facilities shall be provided and shall minimize travel distances from
adjoining sidewalks and pathways to the bicycle parking facilities. A pedestrian accessible sidewalk must be
provided between the bicycle parking facility and the building entrance.
4. Surfacing: The bicycle rack shall be installed on either asphalt or concrete, and shall be so graded and drained as
to provide for the adequate runoff and disposal of surface water.
F. Bike Rack Types: Each bicycle rack should allow the user to securely attach both the bicycle frame and one tire to the
rack with the use of a U-frame lock.
1. Permitted Bicycle Racks: The following types are examples of permitted bicycle racks: inverted "U", post and loop,
and wave designs. Additional designs may be approved by the development services director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 537/923
2. Prohibited Bicycle Racks: The following types are examples of prohibited bicycle racks: comb, toast, and other
wheel bending racks, which provide no support for the bicycle frame.
G. Bicycle Space Dimension Requirements: Each bicycle rack shall be placed in accordance with the requirements as
described and illustrated in this section.
1. Length Of Bicycle Parking Space: Bicycle parking space shall be at least six feet (6') long.
2. Unobstructed Area Around Bicycle Parking Space: A thirty inch (30") space of unobstructed paved surface shall
surround the bicycle parking loops to allow the wheels of the parked bicycles to rest on the paved surface and
allow for the minimum distance from adjacent walls, structures, and other racks.
3. Aisles Between Racks: A four foot (4') width aisle, measured from tire to tire, shall be maintained between multiple
rows of bike racks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 538/923
H. Lighting: Lighting shall be provided in bicycle parking area so that all facilities are thoroughly illuminated and visible
from adjacent sidewalks and motor vehicle parking lots. Bicycle parking shall at a minimum meet the lighting
standards for motor vehicle parking as outlined in subsection 15.4.8.6K of this chapter.
I. Signage: Where not clearly visible from the public right of way, directional signage shall be provided to direct bicyclists
from the right of way to the bicycle parking facility. (Ord. 2015-15)
15.4.8.11: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND USES:
A. Applicability: This section shall apply to the use of parking lots or paved or other open areas contiguous to parking lots
for outdoor storage or sales where permitted by this zoning ordinance. This section does not allow such uses but
simply provides standards that affect such uses where they are allowed by other sections of this zoning ordinance.
B. Site Plan: Areas to be used for outdoor storage, outdoor sales, or the parking or storage of modular units or trailers for
temporary storage shall be designated on the site plan.
C. Location, Screening: Areas used for outdoor storage, outdoor sales or the parking or storage of modular units or
trailers shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of property in an R-1 or R-2 zoning district.
D. Area, Design:
1. Site area for areas used for any of the outdoor uses enumerated in this section shall be computed separately from
and shall be provided in addition to all required parking and stacking areas;
2. Areas used for any of the outdoor uses enumerated in this section shall be located so that they do not impede the
use of any point of access or egress to the site and do not impede lanes designated for emergency vehicle access;
3. Areas used for any of the outdoor uses enumerated in this section shall meet the construction standards for
parking lots on the site; and
4. Areas used for any of the outdoor uses enumerated in this section shall be considered part of the parking area for
purposes of computing the amount of required landscaping on the site. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.9: SITE CIRCULATION FOR PEDESTRIANS:
15.4.9.1: PLAN REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 539/923
The proposed site plan shall include a pedestrian circulation element that shows how the development of the site will
meet the standards set forth in this section.
A. Standards: The following standards apply to any development except a single-family or two-family dwelling.
Provisions of this section shall comply with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) and the Illinois accessibility code
(IAC) and other applicable federal or state standards and requirements.
1. Connectivity:
a. Pedestrian circulation systems shall be continuous and designed to connect all buildings and parking areas on a
site and to connect adjacent properties to each other via external sidewalks with interconnection to recreational
trails provided where available.
b. Pedestrian access to building entrances from the street shall be integrated with the existing pedestrian network.
2. Materials:
a. Pedestrianways may be constructed of paver blocks, concrete, brick, or other suitable materials and may be
incorporated into required buffers.
b. Pedestrianways that traverse parking areas shall be clearly demarcated by the use of such materials as scored
concrete, paver blocks, bricks, or other suitable materials.
3. Design And Location:
a. Pedestrianways shall be designed and located to minimize the interactions between pedestrians using the
designated ways and automobile traffic.
b. For any parking area with fifty (50) or more parking spaces or for any hard surfaced area serving parking and
other purposes and totaling fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more in area, the site shall include one
protected pedestrianway from the principal building (or from a pedestrian system connecting principal buildings
along the building fronts) to any public trail or sidewalk, existing or planned. The protected pedestrianway shall
not be shared with automobiles and shall not intersect or otherwise cross driveways or other parts of the
vehicular circulation system more than twice between the public trail or sidewalk and the principal building or
connecting sidewalk.
c. Any site with one hundred (100) or more parking spaces or any site with hard surfaced area serving parking and
other purposes and totaling thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more in area, the site shall include pedestrian
amenities. Pedestrian amenities may include well landscaped sitting areas with design components such as
seating elements and/or other amenities in shaded areas. A minimum of four (4) benches, or other similar
amenity, shall be provided at each customer entrance/pedestrian amenity area.
4. Markings: Pedestrianways between the project building entrances and parking areas, public sidewalks, out parcel
buildings, and transit stops shall be clearly indicated through the use of landscaped areas and sidewalks which are
made of materials such as scored concrete, pavers, or bricks. All project building sides with customer entrances
shall include such a sidewalk along the full length of each facade. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.9.2: EXISTING CIRCULATION FOR PEDESTRIANS:
Existing pedestrian circulation elements shall be maintained, repaired, or replaced in accordance with standards set forth
in subsection 15.4.9.1A of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10: SIGNS:
15.4.10.1: APPLICABILITY:
A. This section, which regulates signs, shall extend to all real property located within the corporate city limits of
Carbondale, Illinois, and within one and one-half (11/2) miles thereof as shown on the official zoning map.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 540/923
B. Any sign permitted by this section for any purpose may bear a noncommercial message, regardless of the fact that
the sign may be identified by a name that suggests a specific message; for example, a sign conforming to the
requirements for a "real estate sign" may also or alternatively bear a noncommercial message. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10.2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
These sign regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
A. To preserve, protect and promote the public safety on city streets by limiting the unnecessary distraction of the
motorist caused by signs.
B. To protect the general public from damage and injury which may be caused by the faulty and uncontrolled
construction and use of signs within the city.
C. To create a fair and balanced system of sign regulations recognizing both the needs of the business community and
the desires of the citizenry for a reduction of sign confusion.
D. To preserve and protect the property values of the city's residential neighborhoods by protecting these areas' visual
character from the blighting effects of uncontrolled signs. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10.3: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited:
A. Off premises signs;
B. Pennants, propellers, paddle wheels, streamers, spinners, or other attraction devices designed to be set in motion by
the wind or motorized, except as permitted in section 15.4.10.9, "Special Signs Permitted", of this chapter;
C. Festoon lights;
D. Moving signs except as permitted by section 15.4.10.6, "Nonresidential Regulations", of this chapter;
E. Flashing signs;
F. Signs with bare bulb illumination exceeding the equivalent amount of lumens emitted by a twenty five (25) watt
incandescent bulb;
G. Temporary signs, except as allowed by section 15.4.10.8 of this chapter;
H. Portable signs except as permitted in section 15.4.10.9, "Special Signs Permitted", of this chapter; and
I. Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on public or private property, except for signs meeting the
following conditions:
1. The primary purpose of such vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 541/923
2. Signs painted on or magnetically affixed to vehicles that do not contain changeable letters or copy; and signs
otherwise attached to vehicles that do not contain changeable letters or changeable copy.
3. The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets, and
actively used or available for use in the daily function of the business. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10.4: ILLUMINATION:
All signs except those for one-, two-, three-, and four-unit dwellings and for home occupations may be illuminated
provided that the illuminations conforms to the following restrictions:
A. The light source, including the interior of a building shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light intensity
or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises.
B. The light shall not adversely affect the safe vision of operators of vehicles.
C. Light shall not shine on or into neighboring residential structures. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10.5: RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS:
This section regulates all signs erected in all areas within the city zoned RR, R-1, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, RMH, PUD, NB, PA,
and PAR.
A. Location Of Signs: Signs may be erected on private property subject to the following restrictions:
1. Permanent freestanding signs are not permitted for one-, two-, three-, and four-unit dwellings.
2. Signs for home occupations and vacation rental units must be architectural signs.
3. All freestanding signs must either have twenty feet (20') of setback from the street curb line (extended vertically), or
have at least eight feet (8') of clearance between the base of the sign and the ground.
4. No part of any freestanding or building sign may be erected so as to suspend over or otherwise encroach upon any
public right of way.
5. No sign may be erected on the roof of any structure, or be erected on the building facade so that any portion of the
sign exceeds the height of the facade.
6. See section 15.4.10.8 of this chapter for temporary signs allowed and section 15.4.10.9 of this chapter for special
signs, some of which are allowed in residential districts under specified circumstances.
B. Height Of Signs:
1. For fraternities and sororities, a freestanding sign may be erected to the height of six feet (6') above the ground.
2. Freestanding signs for residential uses containing five (5) or more dwelling units and all other uses may be erected
to the height of twelve feet (12') above the ground.
3. Architectural signs may be erected to a maximum height of twelve feet (12') from the ground or the maximum
height of the building facade to which they are attached, whichever is greater.
C. Sign Area:
1. For lawful home occupations and vacation rental units: Two (2) square feet.
2. For schools, government buildings, churches and public auditoriums: Fifty (50) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 542/923
3. For multi-unit dwelling developments and mobile home parks: One square foot of sign area for each individual
dwelling unit (such sign need not be smaller than 12 square feet) and any one sign shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet.
4. For one-, two-, three- or four-unit dwellings: One square foot of sign area for each individual dwelling unit. Such
signs shall only contain the name and/or address of the structure. These signs shall contain no leasing or
advertising information.
5. For bed and breakfast establishments and inns: Twelve (12) square feet.
6. For fraternities and sororities: Fifty (50) square feet.
7. For home museum: Twelve (12) square feet.
8. Other uses not listed above: One square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage, not to exceed
one hundred fifty (150) square feet. (Ord. 2017-03)
D. Animated Signs: Signs in these zones may not move or be animated in any manner.
E. Number Of Signs:
1. Freestanding Signs When Permitted: One per street frontage except as sited below.
2. Street Frontage: In the circumstance where the street frontage for a business on a street exceeds three hundred
(300) linear feet, a second freestanding sign may be erected on that street frontage provided that the surface area
for the signs complies with the requirements of subsection C of this section and provided further that the two (2)
signs are placed at least fifty feet (50') apart. If the business is located on a corner lot or a through lot and has a
combined street frontage exceeding three hundred (300) linear feet, a second freestanding sign may only be
erected on the second frontage pursuant to this provision.
3. Architectural Signs: There is no limit on the number of architectural signs within the provisions for sign area; see
subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10.6: NONRESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS:
This section regulates all signs erected in all areas within the city zoned BPL, SB, BWA, AG, LI, GI, or PAD. (Ord. 2013-
31)
A. Location Of Signs: Signs may be erected on private property subject to the following restrictions:
1. All freestanding signs must either have twenty feet (20') of setback from the street curb line (extended vertically), or
have at least eight feet (8') of clearance between the base of the sign and the ground;
2. No part of any freestanding or architectural sign may be erected on, or so as to suspend over, or otherwise
encroach upon, any public right of way;
3. No freestanding sign may be erected closer than three feet (3') to any street or alley curb line (projected vertically);
4. No architectural sign may project more than six feet (6') from any building facade except as provided below:
a. Signs painted or mounted flush on a canopy or awning which is located entirely on private property shall not be
subject to the six foot (6') maximum projection restriction.
b. Signs on a canopy or awning which is located entirely on private property, other than painted or flush mounted
signs, shall be mounted parallel to the building facade and shall not project more than six feet (6') from the
building facade or one foot (1') from the outer edge of the awning or canopy on which it is mounted, whichever is
greater.
B. Height Of Signs:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 543/923
1. Freestanding signs may be erected to a maximum height of thirty two feet (32') from the ground.
2. Signs for contract construction services as a special use shall only be erected to a height of six feet (6').
3. Architectural signs may be erected to the maximum height of the building facade to which they are attached.
C. Sign Area:
1. Freestanding signs with one or two (2) sides are permitted a maximum sign area not to exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet per side;
2. Freestanding signs with three (3) or more sides are permitted a maximum sign area not to exceed one hundred
(100) square feet per side;
3. Both freestanding and architectural signs for contract construction services as a special use shall be limited to fifty
(50) square feet each; and
4. Architectural signs may be erected on the building within the following restrictions as determined below:
a. Architectural Sign Schedule:
ARCHITECTURAL SIGN SCHEDULE
Gross Floor Area
Of Individual
Store (Sq. Ft.)
Base Floor
Area Base Sign Area
Rate Of Additional
Sign Area Per 100 Sq. Ft. Additional
Floor Area
0 - 1,000 0 Need not be less than 50 sq. ft. of sign area for businesses less than 1,000
sq. ft.
1,001 - 2,500 1,000 50 1.66
2,501 - 5,000 2,500 75 2.0
5,001 - 15,000 5,000 125 1.0
15,001 - 30,000 15,000 225 0.5
30,001 and
larger
30,000 300 0.25
b. Additional Increase: The total sign area allowed may be increased according to the following rate: two percent
(2%) for each ten feet (10') of distance between the centerline of the nearest street surface to nearest point of
the building to which the sign will be attached.
D. Illumination: Signs may be illuminated provided that they conform to the following restrictions:
1. The light source, including the interior of a building shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light
intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises.
2. The light shall not adversely affect the safe vision of operators of vehicles.
3. Light shall not shine on or into neighboring residential structures.
E. Animated Signs: Animated signs are permitted but are subject to the following provisions: (Ord. 2013-20)
1. Electronic Message Board:
a. Electronic message boards shall not make up more than fifty percent (50%) of the actual sign surface. In no
case shall an electronic message board exceed seventy five (75) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 544/923
b. Electronic message boards shall be limited to the display of messages which take no more than two (2) seconds
to complete. A minimum of six (6) seconds shall be required between the changing of messages. Animation shall
be limited to those incorporated into the changing of a message, but shall not restrict the use of images in the
background of a message (e.g., clouds moving, flames burning, running water, etc.). No flashing, blinking, or
pulsating of lights shall be allowed. Electronic message boards must be equipped to freeze in one position or
discontinue the display in the event that a malfunction occurs.
2. Mechanically Animated: The movement of a sign is limited to an action which takes no less than six (6) seconds to
complete. This shall apply to a rotating, waving, or similar motion that a sign may incorporate.
F. Number Of Signs:
1. One freestanding sign per frontage located only on that street frontage except as provided below.
2. In the circumstance where the street frontage for a business on a street exceeds three hundred (300) linear feet, a
second freestanding sign may be erected on that street frontage provided that the surface area for the signs
complies with the requirements of subsection C of this section and provided further that the two (2) signs are
placed at least fifty feet (50') apart. If the business is located on a corner lot or a through lot and has a combined
street frontage exceeding three hundred (300) linear feet, a second freestanding sign may only be erected on the
second frontage pursuant to this provision.
3. There is no limit on the number of architectural signs provided that the total square footage of all signs does not
exceed the maximum square footage allowed.
G. Businesses Permitted Signs:
1. All businesses are permitted architectural signs.
2. The following establishments are permitted freestanding signs:
a. Individual establishments in individual buildings.
b. Business and noncommercial establishments and shopping centers.
c. Satellite establishments within a shopping center.
d. Movie theaters, auditoriums, and other places of public assembly, in shopping centers and business
developments in accordance with subsection F of this section. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.4.10.7: DOWNTOWN SIGN REGULATIONS:
Downtown signage should be integral to a building's design rather than applied after the fact. As such, all signage should
incorporate complementary materials, colors, and details. The use of banners as permanently mounted signage is
prohibited. This section regulates all signs erected in all areas zoned BPR.
A. Location Of Signs: Freestanding monument signs may be erected on private property subject to the following
restrictions:
1. All freestanding monument signs must have fifteen feet (15') of setback from the street curb line (extended
vertically).
2. No part of any freestanding monument sign may be erected so as to suspend over or otherwise encroach upon
any public right of way.
3. No sign may be erected on the roof of any structure, or be erected on the building facade so that any portion of the
sign exceeds the height of the facade.
4. Any architectural sign that projects or suspends over any sidewalk, public or private, or any public right of way shall
have at least eight feet (8') of clearance between the base of the sign and the ground or sidewalk. The owner of
any sign suspended over public right of way agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 545/923
may arise by reason of the sign being projected or suspended over the public rights of way. The owner shall submit
an insurance certificate listing the city as additionally insured prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
B. Height Of Signs:
1. Freestanding monument signs may be erected to the maximum height of eight feet (8') above the ground.
2. Architectural signs may be erected to the maximum height of the building facade to which they are attached.
C. Sign Area:
1. Freestanding monument signs with one or two (2) sides are permitted a maximum sign area not to exceed fifty (50)
square feet per side.
2. Architectural signs are limited to one and one-fourth (1.25) square feet of sign area for each linear foot of building
frontage or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is larger.
D. Illumination: All signs may be illuminated provided that they conform to the following restrictions:
1. The light source, including the interior of a building shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light
intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises.
2. The light shall not adversely affect the safe vision of operators of vehicles.
3. Light shall not shine on or into neighboring residential structures.
4. The illumination may not flash in any manner.
E. Architectural Signs: Architectural signage that utilizes channel lettering and/or raceways, solid or laser cut metal, etc.,
are examples of approved sign materials. Boxed cabinet signage is permitted provided it does not account for more
than thirty percent (30%) of the total installed signage.
F. Projecting Signs: One projecting sign is permitted per storefront and shall be construed as contributing to the
building's total allotted square footage of architectural signage. Projecting signs are permitted to project a maximum
of four feet (4') from the surface of any structure and must maintain a minimum of eight feet (8') of clearance between
the lowest extent of the sign and the ground or sidewalk. The owner of any sign suspended over public right of way
agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability which may arise by reason of the sign being
projected or suspended over the public rights of way. The owner shall submit an insurance certificate listing the city
as additionally insured prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
G. Architectural Signs:
1. A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the surface of any awning or canopy may be utilized for permanently
affixed copy. Any background colors, graphic striping, color banding or patterns shall not be considered as
contributing to the sign area. Furthermore, this allotment shall not be construed to contribute to the total amount of
architectural signage permitted for any structure in the BPR district.
2. Under canopy signs are permitted and will be considered as contributing to the total square footage of architectural
signage that is permitted. Under canopy signs must maintain at least eight feet (8') of clearance between the
lowest extent of the sign and the ground or sidewalk. The owner of any sign suspended over public right of way
agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability which may arise by reason of the sign being
projected or suspended over the public rights of way. The owner shall submit an insurance certificate listing the city
as additionally insured prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
H. Animated Signs: Animated signs are permitted but are subject to the following provisions:
1. Electronic Message Board:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 546/923
a. Electronic message boards shall not make up more than thirty percent (30%) of the actual sign surface. In no
case shall an electronic message board exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
b. Electronic message boards shall be limited to the display of messages which take no more than two (2) seconds
to complete. A minimum of six (6) seconds shall be required between the changing of messages. Animation shall
be limited to those incorporated into the changing of a message, but shall not restrict the use of images in the
background of a message (e.g., clouds moving, flames burning, running water, etc.). No flashing, blinking, or
pulsating of lights shall be allowed. Electronic message boards must be equipped to freeze in one position or
discontinue the display in the event that a malfunction occurs.
2. Mechanically Animated: The movement of a sign is limited to an action which takes no less than six (6) seconds to
complete. This shall apply to a rotating, waving, or similar motion that a sign may incorporate.
I. Number Of Signs:
1. Freestanding monument signs when permitted: One per street frontage except as sited below.
2. In the circumstance where the street frontage for a business on a street exceeds three hundred (300) linear feet, a
second freestanding monument sign may be erected on that street frontage provided that the surface area for the
signs complies with the requirements of subsection C of this section and provided further that the two (2) signs are
placed at least fifty feet (50') apart. If the business is located on a corner lot or a through lot and has a combined
street frontage exceeding three hundred (300) linear feet, a second freestanding sign may only be erected on the
second frontage pursuant to this provision.
3. There is no limit on the number of architectural signs provided that the total square footage of all signs does not
exceed the maximum square footage allowed.
J. Special Signs Permitted In The BPR District: A-frame signs are permitted in the BPR district with the issuance of an
annual sign permit subject to the following provisions:
1. Signs may not exceed six (6) square feet per side and shall not exceed three feet (3') in height and two feet (2') in
width (2 sided only).
2. Signs must be located within fifteen feet (15') from the front entrance.
3. No sign shall impede the normal and orderly flow of pedestrian traffic, and shall not obstruct any accessible route;
for purposes of this section, the sign should be located so that there is a clear passage of at least three and onehalf
feet (31/2') between the sign and any building, post or obstruction in the sidewalk.
4. Signs shall be removed each day at the close of business.
5. For any sign located on the right of way, the owner shall submit an insurance certificate listing the city as
additionally insured prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
K. Temporary Signs Permitted In The BPR District:
1. Temporary Commercial Banners: Temporary commercial banners are permitted to advertise goods or services for
economic gain:
a. Temporary banners shall be limited to thirty two (32) square feet.
b. Each individual business will be allowed to display a temporary banner, mounted to the building, for a period not
to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. Each business is allowed a total of ninety (90) calendar days to display
temporary banners. A new permit shall be issued each time the temporary banner is to be displayed, unless
authorized under the original permit.
c. Commercial signs prohibited include: signs that are carried, waved or otherwise displayed by persons either on
public rights of way or in a manner visible from public rights of way. This provision is directed toward such
displays intended to draw attention for a commercial purpose, and is not intended to limit the display of banners,
flags or other signage by persons participating in demonstrations, political rallies, and similar events.
d. No temporary banner may be illuminated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 547/923
2. Temporary Noncommercial Signs:
a. Temporary signs shall be limited to thirty two (32) square feet.
b. Each individual 501(c) not for profit organization will be allowed to display a temporary sign for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. Each organization is allowed a total of sixty (60) calendar days to display
temporary signs. A new permit shall be issued each time the temporary sign is to be displayed. Permit fees may
be waived with the approval of the administrative official.
c. Temporary signs need not be located on the site for which the event is to take place.
3. Removal Of Temporary Signs: If a temporary sign relates to an event, such sign shall be removed within five (5)
days after the conclusion of the event. (Ord. 2017-17)
15.4.10.8: TEMPORARY SIGNS PERMITTED (EXCEPT IN THE BPR DISTRICT):
In addition to the signs permitted in each district as established in sections 15.4.10.5, 15.4.10.6, and 15.4.10.7 of this
chapter, the following signs are also permitted subject to the conditions established in this section:
A. General Provisions For All Temporary Signs:
1. No sign may be erected on, suspended over, or encroach upon the public right of way, except as provided for
under section 17-1-5 of this code (dealing with "encroachments"), or be located so as to obstruct the visual
clearance needed for safe vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
2. No sign may be attached to utility poles, trees on private property, trees on public right of way, streetlight poles,
street or traffic signs nor fire hydrants.
3. No temporary sign shall be erected within twenty feet (20') of the curb line of any adjoining street surface except
those located in the BPR district in which case the temporary sign shall be flush mounted to the building. No sign
shall be erected so as to obstruct the visual clearance needed for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
4. If the sign is not communicating a message which is temporary in nature, it shall be required to meet the
requirements of sections 15.4.10.5, 15.4.10.6, and 15.4.10.7 of this chapter, permanent signs.
5. Temporary signs shall be regulated subject to the following:
a. Temporary Commercial Signs: To advertise goods or services for economic gain:
(1) Temporary signs shall be limited to thirty two (32) square feet. (Ord. 2017-17)
(2) Each individual business will be allowed to display a temporary sign for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
consecutive days. Each business is allowed a total of one hundred (100) calendar days to display temporary
signs. A new permit shall be issued each time the temporary sign is to be displayed, unless authorized under
the original permit. (Ord. 2014-50)
(3) Maximum height: Six feet (6'), if freestanding.
(4) Commercial signs prohibited: Includes signs that are carried, waved or otherwise displayed by persons either
on public rights of way or in a manner visible from public rights of way. This provision is directed toward such
displays intended to draw attention for a commercial purpose, and is not intended to limit the display of
banners, flags or other signage by persons participating in demonstrations, political rallies, and similar events.
(Ord. 2013-31)
(5) Pennants and streamers may be displayed for a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) days per calendar year
with a limit of thirty (30) consecutive days per event. (Ord. 2017-08)
(6) No temporary sign may be illuminated.
(7) Banners suspended from a building, with a total square footage of fifty (50) square feet are permitted for
periods up to thirty (30) consecutive days per event, with no limit on the number of events.
b. Temporary Noncommercial Signs:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 548/923
(1) Temporary signs shall be limited to thirty two (32) square feet.
(2) Each individual 501(c) not for profit organization will be allowed to display a temporary sign for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. Each organization is allowed a total of sixty (60) calendar days to display
temporary signs. A new permit shall be issued each time the temporary sign is to be displayed. Permit fees
may be waived with the approval of the administrative official.
(3) Temporary signs need not be located on the site for which the event is to take place.
B. Removal Of Temporary Signs: If a temporary sign relates to an event, such sign shall be removed within five (5) days
after the conclusion of the event. (Ord. 2013-31)
15.4.10.9: SPECIAL SIGNS PERMITTED:
In addition to the signs permitted in each district as established in sections 15.4.10.5 and 15.4.10.6 of this chapter, the
following signs are also permitted subject to the conditions established in this section. Heights of signs permitted in this
section shall not exceed the permitted sign height for the district where the sign is to be erected unless otherwise
specified by this section.
A. General Provisions For All Special Signs:
1. No sign may be erected on, suspended over, or encroach upon the public right of way, except as provided for
under title 17, chapter 1 of this code, or be located so as to obstruct the visual clearance needed for safe vehicle or
pedestrian traffic.
2. No sign may be attached to utility poles, trees on private property, trees on public right of way, streetlight poles,
street or traffic sign nor fire hydrants.
3. No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct the visual clearance needed for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
B. Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs advertising property or buildings for sale, rent, or lease are permitted for the
period of time while the property is available for sale, rent or lease and for no more than fourteen (14) days after the
sale, rental, or leasing of said property or building. The size and number applies to both freestanding and
architectural signs/banners. All real estate signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. Commercial property located in a commercial zoning district:
a. One sign per lot frontage. If frontage exceeds three hundred feet (300') a second sign may be erected.
b. A maximum of thirty two (32) square feet of sign surface area per side, two (2) sides permitted.
c. The sign, if freestanding, shall not obstruct the visual clearance needed for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
2. Property located in a residential zoning district:
a. One sign per lot frontage. If frontage exceeds three hundred feet (300') a second sign may be erected.
b. Maximum of twelve (12) square feet of sign surface area per side, two (2) sides permitted.
c. The sign, if freestanding, shall not obstruct the visual clearance needed for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
C. Temporary Construction Signs For Buildings Or Projects: Signs stating the nature and name of the building or project,
the names of contractors, architects, engineers, or officials, financial information, or any information required by law,
are permitted in various districts subject to the following provisions:
1. Any such temporary signs required by a government for a project shall be permitted.
2. One sign per frontage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 549/923
3. In commercial districts a maximum of thirty two (32) square feet per side, two (2) sides permitted (except where
governmental standards require a larger sign in which case such sign shall be permitted).
4. In a residential district a maximum of six (6) square feet per side, two (2) sides permitted.
5. Signs may be erected no more than thirty (30) days prior to the actual start of construction or project and shall be
removed when the construction is completed. Only those projects that have obtained a building permit may display
a construction sign.
D. Signs Designating Historic Areas Or Buildings: Signs denoting historic buildings or areas may be erected subject to
the following provisions:
1. Freestanding signs designating historic sites, areas, or districts shall be no larger than twelve (12) square feet.
2. Signs designating historic buildings shall be mounted on the building so designated and may be subject to review
by the certificate of appropriateness committee.
E. Minor Directional Signs: Signs for and located within shopping centers, business developments, or individual business
establishments and their parking areas which guide automobile and pedestrian traffic within the parking lot. Such
signs shall:
1. Have maximum height of eight feet (8').
2. Have a maximum surface area of ten (10) square feet per side, two (2) sides permitted.
3. Be located so as not to obstruct the vision of pedestrians or motorists.
4. Bear no advertising matter, except for the name of the establishment.
5. Be permanently affixed to the ground or any permanent building or structure.
6. Be located on the premises of the establishment, shopping center or business development.
7. No sign other than those indicating entrance/exit shall be located within twenty feet (20') of the right of way line.
F. Political Signs: Political signs are permitted in all areas of the city subject to the following provisions:
1. In a residential district no sign shall be larger than six (6) square feet per side, two (2) sides permitted.
2. In commercial districts no sign shall be larger than thirty two (32) square feet per side, two (2) sides permitted.
3. Signs must not be on the public right of way or be located so as to obstruct the visual clearance needed for safe
vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
4. No political sign may be attached to utility poles, trees on public right of way, streetlight poles, street or traffic signs
nor fire hydrants.
G. Temporary Yard Sale Signs: Temporary yard sale signs may be erected subject to the following provisions:
1. Maximum Exposure Time: All such signs shall be erected no more than twenty four (24) hours prior to or remain in
place no more than twelve (12) hours after the yard or garage sale takes place.
2. Placement: No yard sale sign may be erected on or attached to utility poles, trees on public right of way, streetlight
poles, street or traffic signs, or fire hydrants nor be located on the public right of way.
H. Window Promotional Signs: Window promotional signs are permitted for periods of up to sixty (60) consecutive days
in the following districts: AG, PA, BPR, SB, BPL, BWA, NB, PUD, LI, and GI.
I. Subdivision Entrance Or Identification Signs: Each individual subdivision may have entrance or identification signs
subject to the following provisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 550/923
1. Entrance or identification signs shall only identify the name of the subdivision.
2. One pair may be erected per entrance into the subdivisions, but in no case shall two (2) such pairs for the same
subdivision be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') apart.
3. No single sign shall be larger than twenty four (24) square feet per side and shall be limited to a maximum height
of six feet (6').
4. Location of all entrance or identification signs shall be subject to the approval of the administrative official.
J. Directory Signs: Directory signs are permitted for multi-unit dwelling developments and mobile home parks containing
more than five (5) structures or five (5) mobile homes in all districts subject to the following provisions:
1. Only one sign is permitted with a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet.
2. The sign may be freestanding or architectural.
3. The sign may be illuminated.
K. Office Park And Industrial Park Identification Signs: Each office park or industrial park may have identification signs
subject to the following:
1. One sign shall be allowed for each office/industrial park entrance and shall be used only to identify the name and
location of the office/industrial park and/or used as a directory of businesses in the office/industrial park.
2. No single identification sign shall be larger than sixty four (64) square feet per side nor shall exceed a height of
twelve feet (12'). All such signs shall be located in a manner that does not impede the vision of drivers to other
vehicles and pedestrian traffic. The location of such signs shall be subject to the approval of the administrative
official.
L. Off Premises Directional Sign: Off premises directional signs for business districts adversely impacted by highway
construction or permanent rerouting of state or federal highways are permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Height: Have a maximum height of fifteen feet (15').
2. Size: Have a basic maximum of eighty (80) square feet per side which may be increased to a final maximum of
one hundred twenty (120) square feet per side according to the following rate: Five (5) square feet per side for
each ten feet (10') the sign is set back from the centerline of the nearest street surface.
3. Number: A maximum of two (2) off premises directional signs per affected business district are permitted. The
signs shall be available to all affected businesses in the business district.
4. Design: The signs shall be designed in accordance with the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
and shall have a green or blue background with white letters. The lettering shall have a maximum height of ten
inches (10"). The signs shall be installed so as not to obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians.
5. Advertising: The signs shall bear no advertising matter, except for the name of the business district, the names of
the businesses and directional information.
6. Named Businesses: The businesses named on the directional sign shall be limited to those located in the SB, BPL,
BWA, and BPR zoning districts or: a) be existing businesses situated in the city limits and b) be members of the
business association responsible for the construction and maintenance of the off premises directional signs. Only
one such association shall be eligible per highway rerouting.
7. Eligibility For Permanent Signage: The only business districts eligible for permanent off premises directional
signage are those business districts affected by a permanent state or federal highway rerouting such that the
properties are no longer directly accessible from the state or federal highway on which the properties formerly had
frontage. Properties affected by a one-way highway coupling that still have access to at least one traffic direction of
the highway are not eligible for an off premises directional sign under this subsection L.
8. Approval To Erect: Any sign erected on private property must have the written approval of the property owner. If
the sign is to be erected on public right of way, it shall have the formal approval of the controlling government
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 551/923
agency. If the sign is to be located on city of Carbondale right of way it must have an approved encroachment
permit.
9. Costs: The business district requesting the off premises directional sign shall be responsible for all costs related to
leases, construction and maintenance of the sign.
10. Removal: Signs erected in conjunction with a road construction project that does not result in a permanent state
or federal highway rerouting described in subsection L7 of this section shall be removed upon completion of the
road construction project. (Ord. 2013-20)
M. Inflatable Signs: Each business located in a nonresidential district, excluding the BPR, primary business, district, may
display inflatable signs with the issuance of a sign permit and subject to the following:
1. Number: One inflatable sign shall be allowed per parcel.
2. Height: Signs shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height or the height of the nearest building, whichever is
less.
3. Location: Signs shall be located entirely on private property, shall not suspend over public right of way, and shall be
located at least twenty feet (20') from the curb line.
4. Mounting: Signs shall be mounted securely to the ground. Signs shall not be mounted on truck beds, trailers,
rooftops, etc.
5. Display Period: Signs shall be displayed for no more than two (2), consecutive forty eight (48) hour periods or one,
consecutive ninety six (96) hour period per month. (Ord. 2017-08)
15.4.10.10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND REMOVAL:
A. A nonconforming sign is a lawfully existing sign which fails to comply with all applicable sign regulations, such as the
location of the sign, height of the sign or sign area. A nonconforming sign can remain in use, if maintained in
accordance with the definition of "maintenance" contained in chapter 11 of this title.
B. If a nonconforming sign is proposed to be altered in any fashion that would require the issuance of a new permit as
determined in section 15.6.5.1 of this title or if the nonconforming sign advertises a business no longer being
conducted or a product no longer sold on the premises, the sign must be brought into conformity or removed within
thirty (30) days after written notice from the administrative official. The notice to bring the sign into conformity or
remove shall be served on the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the buildings, structure or
premises upon which the sign is found.
C. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the order of the administrative official to
bring into conformity or remove the nonconforming sign shall be in violation of this section. In addition to the penalties
provided for in chapter 10 of this title, the administrative official is hereby authorized to make application to the courts
for an injunction requiring compliance with this code ordering the alteration or removal of the nonconforming sign.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10.11: OBSOLETE SIGNS AND REMOVAL:
A. An "obsolete sign" is a sign which advertises a business no longer being conducted or a product no longer being sold
on the premises upon which the sign is located.
B. An obsolete sign shall be covered or removed within thirty (30) days after written notice from the administrative
official. The notice to cover or remove the sign shall be served on the owner, agent or person having the beneficial
use of the premises upon which the sign is found. If the sign is covered, the covering (which must be an opaque,
durable, weatherproof material) and the method of applying or installing the covering must be approved by the
administrative official.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 552/923
C. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the order of the administrative official to
cover or remove the obsolete sign shall be in violation of this section. In addition to the penalty provided for in chapter
10 of this title, the administrative official is hereby authorized to make application to the courts for an injunction
requiring compliance with this code ordering the covering or removal of the obsolete sign. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.4.10.12: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. The construction and maintenance performance standards for signs contained in the international building code as
adopted in section 4-1-1 of this code shall be the performance standards for the construction and continual
maintenance of signs regulated by this chapter unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
B. All components of a sign shall be kept clean, in good repair and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards,
including, but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose connections, missing or broken panels, etc.
C. Signs and their support structure(s) shall be painted when necessary to prevent corrosion or to replace peeling or
flaking paint.
D. Any sign in violation of the construction and maintenance performance standards shall be repaired or removed within
thirty (30) days after written notice from the administrative official. The notice to repair or remove the sign shall be
served on the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the property upon which the sign is found.
E. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the order of the administrative official to
repair or remove the sign shall be in violation of this section. In addition to the penalties provided for in chapter 10 of
this title, the administrative official is hereby authorized to make application to the courts for an injunction requiring
compliance with this code ordering the repair or removal of the sign. (Ord. 2013-20)
Chapter 5
DECISION MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS
15.5.1: PLANNING COMMISSION:
15.5.1.1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
A. Pursuant to authority granted by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, a Planning Commission is hereby created, and shall
be known as the Carbondale Planning Commission. Said Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members
appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council, and one City Council person serving in an ex
officio capacity without the right to vote. No less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members must reside within the corporate
boundaries. All appointments shall be for a term of four (4) years, and members shall serve until their successors
have been appointed and qualified. Members of the Planning Commission shall also comprise the membership of the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed for cause, by majority vote of
the City Council and after a public hearing.
B. The Chairperson and any other officers created by the bylaws of the Carbondale Planning Commission shall be
elected from the Planning Commission membership and shall serve for the period specified in said bylaws. Vacancies
shall be filled by appointments for the unexpired terms only. The Chairperson is hereby empowered to appoint within
the membership as many committees and subcommittees as he deems necessary to carry out the objects, purposes,
and duties of the Planning Commission. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 2017-45)
15.5.1.2: ORGANIZATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 553/923
The Carbondale Planning Commission may adopt and later change or alter its bylaws consistent with City ordinances
and State laws. The Planning Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall be open at all times
to public inspection. The Planning Commission shall also file an annual report with the Mayor and City Council setting
forth its transactions and recommendations, and such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.5.1.3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Carbondale Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To originate, prepare and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive Plan for its consideration and adoption as
a guide for the future physical and social development of a territory which includes the City and up to one and onehalf
(11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the City. Such Comprehensive Plan shall be periodically reviewed by the
Planning Commission and recommendations made to the City Council for changes as deemed appropriate by the
Planning commission. Such comprehensive plan shall include the following elements which may be recommended to
the city council separately or as in integrated units:
1. Community facilities plan.
2. Land use plan.
3. Thoroughfare plan.
B. To review and make recommendations at the specific request of the city council or the city manager, plans prepared
by the development services department or others, which purport to:
1. Alleviate or solve social problems which confront the citizenry of the city whether as individuals or groups;
2. Provide for the economic development of the city;
3. Provide for the improvement of housing conditions within the city.
C. To review and make recommendations to the city council concerning the continuing capital improvements program for
the city as it relates to the comprehensive plan. Such recommendations shall be made prior to the adoption of such
capital improvements program by the city council, said review to be limited to the applicability of said program to the
comprehensive plan of the city.
D. To promote the comprehensive plan, other plans as they are approved by the city council, and the capital
improvements program and to consult such approved plans as issues arise which have relation thereto as requested
by the city council or city manager.
E. To review and make recommendations to the city council on proposed subdivision as provided in the subdivision
regulations of this title.
F. To arrange for and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding
as requested by the city council or the city manager.
G. To cooperate with other municipal and regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the
local planning program and to promote harmonious and integrated planning for the area as requested by the city
council or the city manager.
H. To originate and recommend to the city council, after public hearing, amendment, change, supplement, or repeal of
the zoning ordinance; conduct public hearings on amendments to the zoning ordinance that may be submitted for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 554/923
consideration; and conduct public hearings and make recommendations on other matters relative to the
developmental aspects of the city.
I. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted hereunder as requested by the city council.
J. To review and comment on the preservation commission recommendations to the city council on preservation district
designations. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.1.4: EXECUTIVE SECRETARY AND STAFF:
A designee of the development services department of the city, who is an employee of the city, shall serve as executive
secretary to the Carbondale planning commission, and the staff of the planning services division shall provide
administrative services to the commission created hereby. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.1.5: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION:
Following the adoption of an official plan in the manner prescribed in this chapter, no map or plat of any subdivision or
resubdivision presented for record, affecting land within the corporate limits of the city, or in contiguous territory outside
of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits and not included in any other municipality,
shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys, and public
grounds in conformity with all requirements applicable thereto of such official plan. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.1.6: DATA AND INFORMATION:
The executive secretary of the planning commission shall furnish the commission with copies of all ordinances and other
data and information relative to carrying out the powers and duties of the commission. The executive secretary shall also
report on a regular basis of activities with which the planning services division is involved. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.2: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
15.5.2.1: COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT, TERMS:
The zoning board of appeals shall consist of the nine (9) members of the planning commission, appointed by the mayor
with the advice and consent of city council, to serve the same terms as designated for their planning commission
positions. The chairman of the board shall be the same as that of the planning commission as elected by the commission
membership. Any member of the board may be removed for cause, by majority vote of those council members present
and after a public hearing. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.2.2: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The board of appeals shall have the following jurisdiction and authority:
A. To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
administrative official charged with enforcement of this title.
B. To hear and pass upon applications for variance from strict application of the terms of this title; provided, however,
said board shall have no jurisdiction over variances in flood fringe (FF) or floodway (FW) districts. (For variance
procedures in FF or FW districts, see sections 15.2.6 and 15.2.7 of this title.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 555/923
C. To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.2.3: MEETINGS:
A. All meetings of the board shall be held at such times as the board may determine.
B. The administrative official shall act as clerk for the board and shall make and keep records of all meetings, hearings,
and official acts. The minutes of the proceedings shall show the vote of each member upon question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicate such fact.
C. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination
of the board shall be filed immediately in the office of the administrative official and shall be a public record.
D. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this title or with the applicable Illinois statutes, a
copy of which shall be filed in the office of the administrative official. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.3: DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE:
15.5.3.1: ESTABLISHMENT:
A development assistance committee (DAC) shall be established by the city manager. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.3.2: COMPOSITION:
The development assistance committee will serve with the development services director acting as the chairperson and
a designee of the following departments: public works, police, fire, planning services, and building and neighborhood
services. When appropriate, other city administrative officials such as the finance director and city attorney may be
requested to offer advice and assistance to the committee and to persons proposing developments. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.3.3: FUNCTIONS:
The development assistance committee shall have the following functions:
A. To assist persons proposing developments in Carbondale to achieve their development goals in a manner consistent
with city council policies and also to facilitate the development process.
B. To review site plans pursuant to section 15.6.10 of this title to assure compliance with the city's codes. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.4: ENGINEERING ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
15.5.4.1: ESTABLISHMENT:
An engineering advisory committee (EAC) shall be established by the city manager. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.4.2: COMPOSITION:
The engineering advisory committee shall consist of the following officials or their duly authorized representatives: the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 556/923
development services director (chairperson), the public Works Director, the Fire Chief, a planning services designee, a
building and neighborhood services designee, and such other persons as may be designated by the City Manager.
Appropriate County and Township government officials and water district officials shall be consulted as individual
subdivision circumstances necessitate. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.4.3: FUNCTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the EAC to examine and review all proposed street dedications or abandonments, tentative plat
maps of subdivision, and to make recommendations to the Planning Commission, City Manager, and City Council. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.5.5: CARBONDALE PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
15.5.5.1: CREATION AND COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created the Carbondale Preservation Commission which shall consist of nine (9) voting members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. No less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members must reside
within the corporate boundaries. Every reasonable attempt shall be made to make appointments with the following
qualifications: one of the members shall be an attorney, one an architect, one a real estate broker/agent, and one an
active member of a historic preservation organization in Carbondale. The remaining five (5) commission members shall
be appointed on the basis of expertise, experience or interest in such areas as architectural history, historical and
architectural preservation, building construction or engineering, finance, planning, neighborhood organizing, or real
estate. The initial members shall serve staggered terms of three (3) persons for three (3) years, three (3) persons for two
(2) years and three (3) persons for one year. As each initial term expires, appointments shall be made for full terms of
three (3) years and members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointments for the unexpired terms only. Members may serve for more than one term and shall serve without
compensation. Any member of the commission may be removed therefrom by the Mayor, subject to ratification of the
City Council for good cause shown. (Ord. 2017-45)
15.5.5.2: OFFICERS AND MEETINGS:
A. Officers: The commission shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson who shall serve for
terms of one year and shall be eligible for reelection. The Chairperson shall preside over meetings. In the absence of
the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the Chairperson. The commission may provide for
additional officers in its bylaws.
B. Meetings: Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by motion of the commission at the
beginning of each calendar year, at any time upon the call of the Chairperson, or upon a written request signed by
three (3) commission members. There shall be a minimum of four (4) meetings per year. A quorum shall consist of a
majority of the voting members. All decisions or actions of the commission shall be made by a majority vote of those
members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists. All meetings of the commission shall be open to
the public and conform to the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act. No commissioner shall vote on any
matter which may directly affect the property, income or business of that commissioner. No action shall be taken by
the commission on a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic hardship which could in any manner
deprive or restrict the owner of a property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition or demolition until such
owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at public meetings of the commission, as provided herein. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.5.5.3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To adopt its own procedural regulations and bylaws consistent with applicable law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 557/923
B. To conduct an ongoing survey to identify properties, improvements and areas that have historic, architectural, or
community interest.
C. To investigate, hold public hearings and recommend to the City Council the adoption of ordinances designating
certain properties, improvements and areas having special historic, architectural or community value as historic
districts, landmarks and neighborhood preservation districts. The recommendation shall also include specific design
standards for the proposed historic district, landmark, or neighborhood preservation district that have been developed
after consultation with owners and occupants of the proposed designated district.
D. To keep a register of all property and improvements which have been designated for preservation under this title,
including all information required for each designation.
E. To review applications for alteration, construction, and demolition affecting property(ies) formally under consideration
for designation or designated historic districts, landmarks and neighborhood preservation districts; and to issue, deny
or modify certificates of appropriateness, for such actions. Applicants may be required to submit plans, drawings,
elevations, specifications and other information as may be necessary.
F. To consider applications for certificates of economic hardship that would allow the performance of work for which a
certificate of appropriateness has been denied.
G. To advise and assist owners of property or structures within designated districts on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, and/or procedures for inclusion on the state and/or the national
register of historic places.
H. To recommend to the city council the nomination of landmarks and historic districts to state and national registers.
I. To determine an appropriate system of markers for designated landmarks and buildings or structures within districts
consistent with other provisions of this code.
J. To inform and educate the citizens of Carbondale concerning the historic and architectural heritage of the city.
K. To call upon city staff members as well as other experts for technical advice. Outside specialists may be retained for
fees upon approval through the city's normal purchasing system.
L. To review proposed zoning map amendments, applications for special uses or application for zoning variances that
affect designated districts. The executive secretary shall send notice to all preservation commission members, in the
same manner as nearby property owners are notified, of hearings before the planning commission or zoning board of
appeals.
M. To testify before all city boards and commissions, including the planning commission, zoning board of appeals and
building code board of appeals on matters affecting any designated district and on matters affecting historically or
architecturally significant property, structures or areas.
N. To periodically review the city zoning ordinance and to recommend to the planning commission and the city council
any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of property or structures within designated
districts.
O. To advise the city council on the use of such gifts, grants, property interest or money as may be designated by the
grantor for the purposes of preservation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 558/923
P. To confer recognition upon the owners of property or structures within designated districts by means of certificates,
plaques, markers or other means.
Q. To undertake such other action or activity relative to preservation in the community as may be authorized by the city
council. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.5.4: EXECUTIVE SECRETARY AND STAFF:
The executive secretary for the commission shall be a representative of the development services department of the city.
The staff of the development services department shall provide administrative services to the commission. The executive
secretary and development services department staff shall:
A. Provide for the taking of minutes of each commission meeting, originals of which shall be kept in the development
services department;
B. Provide administrative and technical assistance to the commission to assist it in making the decisions and findings as
provided herein;
C. Publish and distribute to the commission, and to such persons who may for each meeting so request in writing, copies
of the minutes, reports and decision of the commission;
D. Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings conducted by the commission;
E. Report on behalf of the commission to the planning commission and city council on matters requiring planning
commission and/or city council consideration as provided herein;
F. Advise the mayor of vacancies on the commission and expiring terms of commissioners;
G. Notify commission members of hearings or other matters before other city boards and commissions which affect
designated districts or historically or architecturally significant property, structures or areas. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.5.6: CITY MANAGER:
A. The city manager shall designate an administrative official of the city, as provided in section 1-3A-5 of this code, to
administer the provisions of this title (development services director); and an administrative official of the city, as
provided in section 1-3A-5 of this code, to enforce the provisions of this title (building and neighborhood services
division).
B. If the official charged with the administration of this title finds that any of the provisions here are being violated he shall
notify the official charged with the enforcement of this title who shall take appropriate action, as provided in this title
and elsewhere in this code to assure conformity to the laws of the city. (Ord. 2013-20)
Chapter 6
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
15.6.1: COMMON PROCEDURES:
15.6.1.1: FEE SCHEDULE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 559/923
The city council shall establish fees and charges for building permits, zoning certificates, appeals, and other matters
pertaining to this title. A schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the planning services division of the city and may
be altered or amended by resolution of the city council. Until all applicable fees and charges have been paid in full, no
action shall be taken on any application or appeal. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.2: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
15.6.2.1: GENERAL:
A. It shall be unlawful after the effective date hereof to permit any building or premises hereafter to be erected, changed,
converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a zoning certificate shall have been issued
therefor stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title.
B. It shall be unlawful to change the use of a building, structure or land from one use to another until a zoning certificate
has been issued stating that the proposed use conforms to the applicable provisions of this title.
C. It shall be unlawful to install or expand a driveway or parking area until a zoning certificate has been issued, stating
that the proposed installation or expansion conforms to the applicable provisions of this title.
D. It shall be unlawful to install or expand a fence until a zoning certificate has been issued stating that the proposed
installation or expansion conforms to the applicable provisions of this title.
E. A record of all zoning certificates shall be maintained by the planning services division and such record shall be
available for public inspection.
F. Zoning certificates shall be issued by the planning services division only after it is determined that the proposed
structure and/or use is in compliance with the provisions of this title.
G. Zoning certificates shall state specifically whether the certificate is for a permitted use, variance, and/or special use.
H. No building permit for the erection, alteration, or moving of any building within the city shall be issued until a zoning
certificate has been applied for and issued.
I. A zoning certificate is required prior to the construction, alteration or moving of any structure or use of land in the area
lying outside of but within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the city as designated on the official
zoning map.
J. The issuance of a zoning certificate for any new construction will require the property to be brought into compliance
with this code. This includes, but is not limited to, existing driveways and curb cuts. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.2.2: IMPLEMENTATION:
Zoning certificates are issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official (or zoning
board of appeals or city council where required by this chapter) and authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Any other use, arrangement, or construction shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.2.3: EXPIRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 560/923
The work or use authorized by any zoning certificate must be commenced within twelve (12) months of the date of
issuance of such certificate; otherwise, the same shall be lapsed and become null and void. All work so authorized shall
be completed within eighteen (18) months from the issuance of the zoning certificate therefor, except that for good cause
shown, the administrative official may extend the work completion time. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.3: BUILDING PERMITS:
15.6.3.1: GENERAL:
It shall be unlawful within the city limits to construct, add to, alter, remove or demolish, or to commence the construction,
addition, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or structure or install equipment for the operation of a building or
structure without a building permit. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.3.2: EXPIRATION:
Building permits shall be valid for a period of time as provided in section 4-1-2 of this code. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.4: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
15.6.4.1: GENERAL:
No building or structure or land shall be occupied or used in whole or in part within the jurisdiction of this title until an
occupancy permit shall have been issued by the administrative official charged with the enforcement of this title.
A. An occupancy permit issued within the corporate limits of the city shall state that all applicable building, housing,
electrical and plumbing codes and ordinances of the city and the provisions of this title have been complied with.
B. An occupancy permit issued in the area outside of but within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of
the city as designated on the official zoning map shall state that the provisions of this title have been complied with.
C. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued during alteration or for occupancy of a building pending its completion.
A temporary occupancy permit may include conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the safety of the
occupants and the public.
D. An administrative occupancy permit shall be issued to the operator of a group home demonstrating:
1. That the home is licensed by an agency of the state;
2. That the building in which the group home is located is more than eight hundred feet (800') from any other building
containing a group home; and
3. That the group home meets the criteria established above for the issuance of occupancy permits. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.4.2: BUILDING PERMIT AND ZONING CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE:
No building permit or zoning certificate shall be issued by the governing official for the construction of any building,
structure, or improvement to the land or any lot within a "subdivision" as defined herein which has been approved for
platting or replatting until all requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 561/923
15.6.5: SIGN PERMITS:
15.6.5.1: PERMIT REQUIRED, CONDITIONS:
Before a sign is erected, altered, or relocated, a permit must be obtained:
A. If it is a new sign.
B. If an existing sign is being moved to a new location.
C. If an existing sign is being enlarged in any manner.
D. If an existing sign is being replaced with a similar sign of a new material.
E. If the sign is repainted or panel inserts replaced which constitute fifty percent (50%) or more of the surface area of any
side of an existing sign.
F. If there is any alteration of a sign that results from a change in the business name, ownership, nature of business or
product.
G. If it is a temporary sign or banner as permitted by section 15.4.10.8 of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.5.2: RESPONSIBILITY TO OBTAIN PERMIT:
It is the responsibility of the owner of the sign to secure the appropriate permit. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.5.3: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
The permit shall be on display on the premises at the time of erection and the following seven (7) days. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.5.4: SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT:
The following signs do not require a permit, but these signs must meet all requirements of section 15.4.10.7 of this title:
A. The maintenance of existing sign areas as defined in section 15.4.10.12 of this title;
B. Construction signs (erected after construction has commenced) and temporary real estate signs;
C. Window promotional signs, except electrically operated window promotional signs which are considered to be
architectural signs;
D. Yard sale signs;
E. Signs for historic places and buildings;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 562/923
F. Political signs. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.6: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
15.6.6.1: APPLICABILITY:
A. It shall be unlawful after the effective date hereof to permit any development within the FF flood fringe and FW
floodway zoning districts until a floodplain development permit (FDP) has been issued therefor stating that the
proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of this title. A record of all floodplain development permits
shall be maintained by the planning services division and such record shall be made available for public inspection.
B. A floodplain development permit shall be issued by the planning services division only after a determination has been
made that the proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of this title.
C. A floodplain development permit is required prior to development of the floodplain in the area lying within the city limits
and outside but within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the city as designated on the official
zoning map. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.6.2: IMPLEMENTATION:
Floodplain development permits are issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official
(or zoning board of appeals or city council where required by this title) and authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Any other use, arrangement, or construction shall be
deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.6.3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to the start of new construction for any new construction, substantial improvement or development, including
structures, fill, obstructions, storage, or other use, a floodplain development permit shall be secured from the city. This
permit is issued in addition to all other permits required by the city. This permit shall not be issued if the provisions of this
section are not satisfied, or if a permit required by Illinois or federal laws has been denied. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.6.4: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 563/923
A. An applicant for an FDP shall submit a plan containing the following information certified to the planning services
division for transmittal to the development services director:
1. Existing and proposed changes in terrain and proposed site grading at one foot (1') North American vertical datum
of 1988 (NAVD 88) contour intervals.
2. Proposed use of the land, and including elevation (NAVD 88) of the lowest habitable floor, including cellar or
basement of any structure, elevation (NAVD 88) of all mechanical and utility equipment, and in the case of
floodproofed structures, the elevation to which it will be floodproofed.
3. Final dimensions and locations of proposed structures.
4. If property is located in the FF flood fringe district, certification from a registered professional engineer that the
proposed fill, structure, or other development is not in the floodway.
5. Certification from a registered professional engineer that the plan is accurate, and that the design and construction
methods, including floodproofing where permitted, are adequate to withstand flood heights, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces, and all other factors associated with the base (100-year) flood. Within thirty (30) days of
the completion, an elevation certification prepared by an Illinois registered professional engineer or an Illinois
registered land surveyor shall be submitted which states the specific as built elevation (NAVD 88) of the lowest
floor including basements or cellars. In the case of floodproofed nonresidential structures or facilities, such as
mechanical and utility equipment, a floodproofing certification prepared by an Illinois registered professional
engineer or an Illinois registered architect shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of completion which states the
specific elevation (NAVD 88) to which the structure or facilities are floodproofed. Such elevation shall be certified
by an Illinois registered professional engineer or an Illinois registered land surveyor.
6. Location of the floodway boundary as shown by the plan view on the flood insurance rate map along with the flood
insurance study, Carbondale, Illinois, dated May 2, 2008; location of flood fringe boundary as calculated from
floodplain profiles as determined in the flood insurance study, Carbondale, Illinois, dated May 2, 2008; and location
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 564/923
of the special flood hazard area as shown on the flood insurance rate map for Jackson County, Illinois, dated May
2, 2008. To determine the base flood elevation for Plum Creek and Mud Creek, or any other that are shown as
zone A on the flood insurance rate map, Carbondale, Illinois, dated May 2, 2008, the city shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source.
7. Information pertaining to receipt of all other applicable permits and licenses.
B. Upon findings by the development services director that the requirements of this section are met, an FDP may be
issued.
C. The limits of the site grading, structures, and uses shown on the approved plan shall be binding on the applicant, his
successors and assigns unless amended through the permit procedure outlined above. It shall be unlawful for
anyone to vary any development from specifications permitted in the FDP. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.7: TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
15.6.7.1: GENERAL HEARING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 565/923
A. Regulation imposed and the districts created by this title may be amended from time to time by ordinance, but no such
amendments shall be made without public hearing before the planning commission of the city, with the exception of
amendments under section 15.2.5, "P Preservation District", of this title wherein said public hearing shall be held
before the preservation commission of the city. Notice shall be given of the time, date, and the place of the hearing,
not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least
once in one or more newspapers in general circulation in the city. As a result of the hearing, the planning commission
or preservation commission shall make findings of fact and shall submit a recommendation concerning proposed
amendments to the city council.
B. The administrative official shall cause to be posted, not less than seven (7) or more than fifteen (15) days prior to the
scheduled hearing, on any property proposed to be changed from one district to another, a notice containing the
following: date, time, place, existing zoning and proposed zoning, along with a district statement of intent. Provided,
however, that in case of a change in district involving more than one lot or parcel, such notice need only be posted at
the corners of the area to be changed in a district where said corners adjoin a public way.
C. The administrative official shall, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than ten (10) days before the hearing, serve
written notice, either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the owners as appears from authentic
tax records of such county, of all property within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for which
a zoning district change is requested; provided the number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys, and
other public ways shall be excluded in computing the two hundred fifty foot (250') requirement. For properties zoned
LI, GI, or RR the notification boundary shall be expanded to five hundred feet (500') in each direction of the location
for which a zoning district change is requested. For properties zoned AG or F, the notification boundary shall be
expanded to one thousand feet (1,000') in each direction of the location for which a zoning district change is
requested. The notice herein required shall contain the address and legal description of the location for which the
zoning district change is requested; the proposed zoning district and the district statement of intent; the name and
address of the applicant, the name and address of the owner(s) of the property sought to be changed (including
beneficiaries of land trusts); the date, time, and place of the hearing; and the present zoning district and statement of
intent. After an unsuccessful bona fide effort to determine the owner and the owner's address from the county tax
records, the notice required herein may be sent to the entity to which the real estate tax bills are sent. If the mailed
notice is returned, the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed to have been met. If ownership of a
property has changed, but has not been properly recorded, notice to person(s) shown on the county tax records shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 566/923
be deemed to meet the requirements of this section. The administrative official's notification responsibilities shall be
limited to that information available to the city from the appropriate county records. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.7.2: INITIATION:
Request for zoning change may be initiated in the following ways:
A. Any person with proprietary interest desiring a change in zoning of property shall make application with the
administrative official.
B. Any person without proprietary interest desiring a change in zoning of property may request the city council to direct
the administrative official to accept such application.
C. The planning commission may initiate a zoning change. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.7.3: PROTESTS:
In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, classification or
reclassification of property, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to
be classified or reclassified or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or directly
opposite, or across the alley therefrom, is filed with the city clerk, the proposed amendment shall not be passed except
by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those council members present, but at least four (4) votes are required.
A. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestors on the applicant for the proposed
amendment and a copy upon the applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and
attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
B. In the case when a written protest is filed with the city clerk, and evidence is furnished that a copy of the written
protest has been served on the applicant and the applicant's attorney, the city council shall acknowledge any written
protest, and rule on the validity of every such protest to determine if the two-thirds (2/3) vote of all of the city council
shall apply. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.7.4: EXPANSION OF ZONING BOUNDARIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 567/923
A. Five Or More Parcels:
1. When action is taken by the city to expand the city's zoning boundaries within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
city limits which incorporates five (5) or more parcels of property within such expansion, the provisions of this
section shall be followed. Action to expand the city's zoning boundaries may be initiated by any of the ways
described in section 15.6.7.2 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 568/923
2. A report on the proposed zoning boundary expansion including a map of the proposed zoning districts shall be
submitted to the planning commission for review and consideration. The report shall contain an adequate legal
description and map of areas affected by such expansion and proposed zoning districts created by the expansion.
3. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall afford persons interested an opportunity to
be heard. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least once not more than thirty (30) or less than fifteen (15)
days before the hearing, in a local newspaper of general circulation. The notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing, and the place where copies of the proposed zoning boundary expansion report may be reviewed for
examination by interested persons.
4. Owners of property within the expanded zoning boundaries shall be sent written notice of the public hearing by
regular mail not more than thirty (30) days, or less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Ownership shall be
determined from the tax records of the county in which the property is located and if, after a bona fide effort the
mailed notice is returned, the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed to have been met.
5. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a recommendation on the proposed zoning
districts in the boundary expansion area to the city council.
6. During a regular or special city council meeting, the city council may take action to enact an ordinance expanding
the city's zoning boundaries with or without change or refer it back to the commission for further consideration.
B. Less Than Five Parcels: When action is taken to expand the city's zoning boundaries within one and one-half (11/2)
miles of the city limits which incorporates less than five (5) parcels of property within such expansion, the provisions
of sections 15.6.7.1 through 15.6.7.3 of this chapter shall be followed. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.8: SPECIAL USE REVIEW:
15.6.8.1: INTENT:
The special use permit is established to provide for those uses which may have a unique, special, or unusual impact
upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property, and to provide for those public and quasi-public uses affected with
the public interest. Where a use exists on the effective date hereof and it is classified as a special use by this title, it shall
be considered to be a lawful special use. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.6.8.2: PROCEDURES:
A. Application: Any person having a proprietary interest in the premises may file for a special use with the administrative
official. The application shall be in three (3) copies and contain information required by this title. The administrative
official shall process such application and forward it to the planning commission with any recommendations deemed
appropriate. A schematic development plan shall be included with an application for a special use, and shall contain
the following information:
1. Legal description of property included in the special use.
2. All adjoining streets within two hundred fifty feet (250') of property proposed for special uses.
3. Proposed land use for the property including building locations and number of stories for each, a tabulation of total
land area and percentage thereof designated for various uses, including land use intensity requirements, if any.
4. Schematic landscaping (trees, shrubs, grass).
5. Direction of stormwater flow.
6. Location of ingress, egress, parking areas and evidence that minimum parking requirements will be met. Specific
design of parking layout and interior circulation is not required.
7. Delineation of development staging and estimated timetable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 569/923
8. Location and apparent use of all buildings on adjacent lands which are within one hundred feet (100') of the
property line of the property proposed for special use.
Certain plan requirements may be waived by the administrative official if it is determined that they are inappropriate
for the specific case because of the size, location or nature of the special use.
B. Special Use Performance Standards:
1. The special use shall meet all of the minimum performance standards and requirements of the district in which the
special use is located and any additional requirements established for the individual special use under the
provisions of this chapter.
2. In addition, the special use shall meet any requirements established by the city council.
C. Hearing:
1. A special use may be permitted by the city council only after a public hearing before the planning commission. The
planning commission shall make findings of fact; and if the planning commission finds that:
a. The proposed special use will permit and encourage an environment of sustained desirability and stability, and
that it will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood;
b. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, or general welfare;
c. The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the
purposes already permitted nor substantially diminish and impair property value within the neighborhood;
d. The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
e. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
f. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion in the public streets; and
g. The special use will be located in a district where such use may be permitted, and shall conform to all
requirements of this title.
2. In addition to the factors listed in subsection C1 of this section, the planning commission shall consider the
following criteria when reviewing a request for a special use permit for property located in the NB, neighborhood
business district:
a. Protected traffic volumes and type of traffic (vehicle type);
b. Typical hours of operation;
c. The presence of harmful toxins, emissions, or odors;
d. The impact of outdoor lighting on adjacent properties;
e. Expected crowd levels and crowd control; and
f. The presence of elevated, excessive and/or continuous noise.
3. The planning commission shall recommend that the city council approve the issuance of the zoning certificate for
such special use. Otherwise, the planning commission shall recommend that the city council direct the
administrative official to deny the application. The findings of fact and the recommendation of the planning
commission shall be in writing. The city council decision shall be written to the applicant by the administrative
official.
D. Notice Of Hearing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 570/923
1. Notice shall be given of the nature, time, date, and place of the hearing not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers in
general circulation in the city.
2. The administrative official shall cause to be posted, not less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to
the scheduled hearing, on any property for which a special use is requested, a notice containing the following:
date, time and place of hearing; existing zoning; special use requested; and district statement of intent.
3. The procedure specified in subsection 15.6.7.1C of this chapter for notifying adjoining property owners shall be
followed; provided, however, that the notice shall include the nature of the special use, rather than reference to a
zoning district change.
E. Expiration Of Special Use Approval: The applicant shall have twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of the
zoning certificate which certifies the approval of the special use to commence the work or use authorized by the
special use; otherwise the special use shall be lapsed and become null and void. All work so authorized shall be
completed within eighteen (18) months from the date of issuance of the zoning certificate certifying approval of the
special use therefor, except that for good cause shown, the administrative official may extend the work completion
time; otherwise the special use shall be lapsed and be and become null and void. In the event such authorized
special use shall be discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, or for at least eighteen
(18) intermittent months of any consecutive thirty six (36) month period, the same shall not, after the expiration of
such applicable period, be permitted to continue as a special use, and the special use shall be lapsed and become
null and void. (Ord. 2014-48)
15.6.9: VARIANCE AND APPEAL:
15.6.9.1: APPEALS AND VARIANCES:
A. Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a ruling of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of this title, or by
an officer, department, board, or bureau of the city concerning the interpretation of this title, may take an appeal to
the zoning board of appeals. The appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days of the action complained of by filing,
with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the zoning board of appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof.
B. Variances:
1. A variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals after a public hearing upon the following conditions:
a. That the party seeking a variance makes written application to the board demonstrating:
(1) That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved
and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
(2) That literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed
by other properties in the same district under the terms of this title.
(3) That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. (Ord. 2014-48)
(4) That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by
this title to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
b. That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title and will not
be injurious to the neighborhood, or detrimental to the public welfare. A variance shall not be granted merely to
serve as a convenience to the applicant, but only if it is necessary to alleviate some demonstrable hardship or
difficulty. Under no circumstances shall the zoning board of appeals grant a variance to allow a use not expressly
permissible under the terms of this title in the district involved. (Ord. 2013-20)
2. In granting a variance, the zoning board of appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the variance is granted, shall be punishable under chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 2013-31)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 571/923
3. No nonconforming use of neighborhood lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance
of a variance.
4. The applicant shall have twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of the zoning certificate which certifies the
approval of the variance to commence the work authorized by the variance; otherwise the variance shall be lapsed
and be and become null and void.
C. Procedures For Appeals And Variances:
1. An appeal or application for variance shall be filed with the administrative official. The appeal or application shall
be in such form and shall contain such information as the zoning board of appeals shall prescribe by general rule.
Upon receiving an appeal or application for variance, the zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a
public hearing thereon, provided however, such time shall be within thirty one (31) days from the date the appeal or
application for variance is so filed, and give public notice of such hearing. Such notice shall be published at least
once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers of
general circulation.
2. The notice shall designate the location of the premises and contain a brief statement of the appeal or application
for variance, provided, however, such notice may be supplemented by such additional form of information as the
board by rule may provide. The administrative official shall cause to be posted, not less than seven (7) nor more
than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled hearing, on any property to be affected by such appeal or variance, a
notice indicating the date, time, place, existing zoning and proposed variance or nature of the appeal. Furthermore,
the procedure specified in subsection 15.6.7.1C of this chapter for notifying adjoining property owners shall be
followed; provided, however, that the notice shall include the nature of the variance or appeal, rather than reference
to a zoning district change.
3. All hearings conducted by the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the public and may be continued from time
to time for good cause shown. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing, either in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses.
4. Within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of a hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall file its decision in
writing, accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reason or reasons for such decision.
5. The affirmative vote of five (5) members of the board shall be required to reverse or modify, in whole or in part, any
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative official or to grant, wholly or in part, any request
for variance application.
6. In the case of an appeal, such appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the administrative official certifies to the zoning board of appeals after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property; in
which case, the proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order which may be granted to the zoning board
of appeals by a court of record on application, with notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken.
7. In the case of an appeal, the zoning board of appeals, in exercising its powers, may, upon the concurring vote of
five (5) members reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, so long as
such action is in conformity with the terms of this title. To this end, the zoning boards of appeals shall have the
powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
8. In the case of an application for variance, the zoning board of appeals shall determine and may make variance to
the regulations of this title in harmony with their general purpose and intent, only in the specific instances as
provided herein, where the board makes a finding of fact based upon the standards prescribed herein, that there
are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this
title.
9. The zoning board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a
variance as may be necessary to prevent injurious effects therefrom upon other property in the neighborhood, and
better to carry out the general intent of this title.
10. All decisions and findings of the zoning board of appeals shall be final administrative determinations and shall be
subject to review by the courts as provided by law. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 572/923
15.6.10: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
15.6.10.1: APPLICABILITY:
Site plan requirements shall be applied to land development within the Carbondale city limits and subject to the rules and
regulations of this title.
A. No person shall:
1. Construct or place on land a new building or other structure, or substantially change, convert, or reconstruct an
existing building, or other structure, private or public, other than one single-unit dwelling or one two-unit dwelling on
any one "lot", parcel, or tract of land as defined in chapter 11 of this title, or amendments thereto without first
securing approval of a site plan from the director of the development services department.
2. Develop other than a temporary use of land different from its existing state, without first securing approval of a site
plan from the director of the development services department. Development of a use of land includes, but is not
limited to, use for recreation, parking of vehicles on surface parking lots, parking of vehicles within "parking
structures" as defined in chapter 11 of this title, or storage of materials and areas on which sales of personal
property are to be conducted.
B. No building permit shall be issued prior to approval of the site plan except as follows: A partial building permit (such as
for footings and foundations) may be issued at the direction of the development services director after the site plan
has been reviewed by the development assistance committee and there is agreement that the proposed location and
elevation of the building are acceptable and that some work can begin on the building while the remaining details of
the site plan approval (such as parking lot layout, landscaping, lighting, etc.) are finalized.
C. If existing entrances, parking lots, utilities, etc., are intended to serve an area requiring a site plan, the existing
conditions shall be improved in accordance with current standards and practices. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.10.2: DEFINITION OF SITE PLAN:
A "site plan" is a plan for the use of land, including a plan for the use of the interior of a parking structure, reduced to a
drawing and writing and including the basic information required by section 15.6.10.3 of this chapter. Unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, the terms in this chapter shall have the same meanings as the definitions in chapter 11 of this
title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.10.3: BASIC INFORMATION REQUIRED:
A site plan shall consist of the following basic information as is pertinent to the proposed use of the land; provided,
however, that the development services director upon concurrence of the appropriate development assistance
committee members may waive or lessen items of required information when it is clear that the nature of the proposed
development does not necessitate provision of the information with the site plan:
A. Legal description of the property, address if applicable, and permanent parcel number.
B. Name and address of the developer and property owner(s).
C. Signature, registration number and address of the professional engineer, surveyor and architect who assisted in the
development of the site plan in accordance with the respective licensing requirements under Illinois statutes.
D. Survey information including distances with angles or bearings, north points, and land area in square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 573/923
E. Plan scale not exceeding: One inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') on twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36")
sheets. Special approval may be granted for using one inch equals thirty feet (1" = 30') and/or thirty inch by forty two
inch (30" x 42") sheets for large scale developments.
F. Zoning classification of the site plan land.
G. Existing and proposed contours or spot grades at no more than two foot (2') intervals. All elevations shall be
expressed in feet above mean sea level.
H. Provide spot grades for all accessible stalls, ramps, and access routes.
I. Location, dimensions and area in square feet of existing buildings not to be razed.
J. Proposed buildings with location, dimensions, area in square feet, number of stories, and type of construction.
K. Distance in feet on all sides between buildings and property lines and between buildings.
L. Building use including number of employees or apartments or family units.
M. Drainage design for roof areas, parking lots and driveways, showing area for or method of disposal of surface runoff
waters. Surface gradient shall be shown. A drainage certificate certifying the drainage design, including stormwater
retention hydrographs and calculations, shall be submitted.
N. Location and use of all buildings on adjacent lands that are within twenty five feet (25') of the property line of the site
plan land.
O. Limits and location of proposed or existing streets, sidewalks, easements, right of way, street curb cut radii, and street
curb cut width.
P. Location, size, appurtenances, type of materials and elevation (MSL) where appropriate, of all public and private
utilities serving the site. Applications for any proposed water and sewer taps should be submitted along with the site
plan. If water and sewer main extensions are required, a separate drawing for each shall be submitted.
Q. Location and approximate diameter of proposed or existing trees and other woody stemmed plantings together with
the common names of the plantings. A landscape plan shall be submitted and approved prior to planting.
R. Limits and location of required buffer yards designed to screen vehicle lights preventing illumination of adjoining
property.
S. Limits, location and size of retaining walls and type of material to be used in construction.
T. Limits and location of parking lots, driveways, parking bays, outside storage, rubbish, recycling, and garbage areas,
loading and unloading areas and surfacing and screening thereof shall be shown on the site plan.
U. Directions of vehicular traffic flow to, from and within the area, together with traffic control signs and markings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 574/923
V. A photometric plan verifying the location, height, and candlepower of all outside lighting. The plan should also include
street lighting and sign lighting.
W. Locations of outside signs.
X. An erosion control plan and a completed IEPA notice of intent form may be required.
Y. Such other or different information as may be required by the design standards set forth hereinafter or as required
elsewhere in this code.
Z. A site plan shall be comprised at a minimum of the following sheets:
1. Topographic survey.
2. Site plan.
3. Site utility plan (water, sewer, storm sewer, gas, electric, etc.).
4. Site grading/elevation plan.
5. Erosion control plan (if applicable).
6. Photometric and lighting plan.
7. Detail sheet(s). (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.10.4: REVIEW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 575/923
A. An application for site plan review shall be secured from and filed with the planning services division and/or the
development services department.
B. Eight (8) copies of the site plan shall be filed with the application. Upon approval of the site plan a digital copy of the
plan shall be submitted to the planning services division as a scalable PDF.
C. Within two (2) days of receipt of the application, the development services director or their designee shall submit the
site plan to the development assistance committee members for review and a meeting shall be scheduled with the
developer.
D. The development assistance committee shall review the application and recommend modifications if necessary. All
necessary modifications will be put in writing and forwarded to the owner/developer within fourteen (14) days of
submittal. After all the necessary items have been completed, an approval letter and eight (8) stamped approved
copies of the plan will be prepared for the owner/developer's signature. Under certain zoning designations, city
council approval of the final approved plan will be required.
E. Upon approval the owner/developer may then apply for all necessary zoning and building permits. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.10.5: FEES:
Each initial application shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 576/923
15.6.10.6: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
A. It shall be the duty of the building and neighborhood services division to ensure that the approved site plan complies
with all provisions of this code and state law, and that the approved site plan is followed by the owner or developer.
B. No substantial departure from the approved site plan shall be permitted without the express written permission of the
development services director.
C. The building and neighborhood services division shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until he has been satisfied
that the construction and development has substantially complied with the site plan.
D. The building and neighborhood services division may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy with the written
permission of the development services director, where the approved site plan has been substantially complied with
but the owner or developer is prevented from complete compliance by reason of occurrences beyond his control.
Prior to issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the owner or developer shall file with the finance director
a corporate performance bond payable to the city and for the use of the city, in a sum deemed sufficient by the
development services director to cover the cost of completion of the unfinished items required by the approved site
plan. The bond shall be executed by the owner or developer and shall be approved by the city attorney. The condition
of the bond shall be that if the owner or developer shall comply with the approved site plan and provide the unfinished
items, and shall fully indemnify and save the city harmless from all cost and damage which it may suffer by reason of
failure of the owner or developer to do so, and shall fully reimburse and repay the city all outlay and expense which it
may incur in making good any default of the owner or developer, and shall pay all persons who have contracts
directly with the owner or developer for labor, equipment or materials, and shall indemnify and save harmless the city
from any and all costs, damage, and expense occasioned by or arising directly or indirectly out of supplying all labor,
equipment or materials necessary for compliance and provisions of the unfinished items, and from all cost or charge
that may accrue through the enforcing of the terms of the bond if action is brought on the bond, including reasonable
attorney fees in any case where such action is successfully maintained, and will appear in and defend and pay and
satisfy any final judgment, if any is obtained, in any suits or actions arising out of, supply all labor, equipment or
materials necessary for compliance and provision of the unfinished items, or occasioned by any act or omission on
the part of the owner or developer, their subcontractors, agents, employees and servants, then the obligation shall be
null and void.
1. A further condition of the bond shall be that the penalty shall attach and the surety shall be liable if the owner or
developer shall not have complied with the condition of the bond within six (6) months after the date of its
execution.
2. In lieu of the performance bond heretofore described, the owner or developer may provide alternative forms of
security satisfactory to the finance director, city attorney, and development services director. Said alternative form
of security may include one of the following:
a. A deposit of noninterest bearing cash with the city refundable once the work is completed or to be used by the
city to complete the work in the event the owner/developer fails to do it.
b. A restricted account in a financial institution in which account there are sufficient funds to complete the project.
The restrictions on the account would require the city's prior concurrence that each disbursement of funds from
the account is for the purpose of completing the site plan, or in the event the owner/developer fails to perform the
work that the financial institution will disburse the funds to the city for the purpose of completing the work.
E. The land areas of a site developed pursuant to an approved site plan shall not thereafter be reduced in size, and no
substantial change shall thereafter be made in the site plan or structures thereon without the express written
permission of the development services director. The procedure for review and approval shall be the same as for the
initial application, and a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.10.7: APPEALS AND VARIANCES:
A. Appeals Of Site Plan: Any party who is denied approval of a site plan by the development services director may
appeal the denial to the city manager. Likewise, any party who believes the development services director has
improperly interpreted or applied the site plan requirements may appeal such decision to the city manager. The city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 577/923
manager shall hear the appeal within ten (10) days of receiving a written request from the affected party. The written
request must clearly describe the items being appealed. No later than two (2) working days before the hearing the
person requesting the appeal shall file a written statement with the city manager setting forth the reasons why the
development services director's action should be reversed or modified. At the hearing the person making the appeal,
persons invited by the applicant to assist in the presentation, the development services director, and appropriate
members of the development assistance committee (including those upon whose recommendation the denial was
made) shall be given an opportunity to present information to the city manager. The city manager shall submit his
written determination on the appeal to the person submitting the appeal and to the development services director
within three (3) working days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing. The development services director shall
thereafter be directed by the city manager's decision. Upon application to the city council by any party who is denied
approval by the development services director and subsequently by the city manager as provided for above for his
site plan, the city council may review the application. If the city council finds that the proposed plan meets
substantially with all the provisions of this chapter or that if modified, it would meet with the provisions of this chapter,
it may recommend modification, or approve the plan. If the city council finds that the provisions of this chapter are not
substantially met, it may disapprove the plan. The city council will direct, by motion, the city manager to comply with
and to carry out the city council's findings.
B. Variance Of Site Plan: Upon application, the council may also grant a variance from the provisions of this chapter,
where, owing to special conditions pertaining to a specific piece of property, a literal enforcement of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter will result in practical difficulty or hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
1. A request for a variance or for an appeal shall be submitted in writing through the city manager to the city council.
The city council shall take action on the variance within thirty (30) days after its receipt by the city manager. The
city manager shall present any appeal submitted for city council review to the city council at the first regularly
scheduled city council meeting following the receipt of the appeal request provided the appeal is requested at least
twenty four (24) hours prior to the distribution of the agenda materials to the city council. The city council shall take
action on the appeal no later than the next regular council meeting after the city council meeting at which the
appeal is initially heard. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.10.8: EFFECT OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
Approval of a site plan shall eliminate the need for a zoning certificate fee required by section 15.6.2 of this chapter or
amendments thereto. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.11: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (TOWN SQUARE AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS):
15.6.11.1: APPLICATION:
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed with the planning services division on a form provided by
the commission and shall be accompanied by such information, plans, elevations, specifications and other documents as
may be required by the preservation commission. Any applicant may request a meeting with the preservation
commission before submitting an application and may consult with the commission during the review of the application.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.11.2: REVIEW AND DETERMINATION BY THE PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 578/923
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 579/923
A. The preservation commission shall review an application for a certificate of appropriateness at its next regularly
scheduled meeting or within forty five (45) days of the date the application is filed, whichever comes first. In the case
of a demolition permit application, a sixty (60) day stay of demolition may be granted, during which time the
application must be reviewed by the certificate of appropriateness committee. In reviewing the application the
preservation commission shall solely determine if the proposed work is in accordance with the design standards
established for the district in which the property is located. The preservation commission shall approve the application
as submitted, approve the application with modifications, deny the application, or table the application. If the applicant
does not agree with the preservation commission's decision to modify an application, the application shall be denied.
B. The preservation commission can table an application to a subsequent meeting which shall be held within thirty (30)
days and direct the planning services division to notify appropriate property owners and historic or neighborhood
organizations of the pending application and the time of the meeting.
C. Written notice of the preservation commission's action shall be provided to the applicant within seven (7) days
following the commission's determination and shall be accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness in the case of
an approval. A denial of the application shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for denial that shall
include recommendations concerning amendments to the application that would cause the commission to reconsider
its denial. An application that has been denied may be resubmitted with amendments within thirty (30) days for
reconsideration by the preservation commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.11.3: REVIEW AND DETERMINATION OF ROUTINE APPLICATIONS:
A. The preservation commission may establish guidelines for the planning services division to determine applications for
certificates of appropriateness that are clearly in accordance with the applicable design standards for the district in
which the property is located and that are considered routine in nature.
B. The preservation commission may establish a subcommittee of three (3) members to review routine applications. The
planning services division shall refer applications to the subcommittee based upon guidelines adopted by the
commission for determining if an application qualifies as being routine. The subcommittee shall meet as soon as a
convenient time can be arranged at which all three (3) members and the applicant can be present. The subcommittee
meeting shall be open to the public and conform to the requirements of the Illinois open meetings act.
C. The subcommittee may approve an application as submitted or approve an application with modifications upon the
unanimous vote of all three (3) members. Written notice of the subcommittee's action shall be provided the applicant
within seven (7) days of the determination and shall be accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness. A copy of
the notice shall also be sent to all preservation commission members with their next regularly scheduled agenda. An
application not receiving the unanimous approval of the subcommittee shall be forwarded to the commission for
review at the next regularly scheduled meeting or within forty five (45) days of the date the application is filed,
whichever comes first. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.11.4: APPEAL OF DENIED APPLICATION:
A. An applicant whose application for a certificate of appropriateness is denied by the preservation commission may
appeal the preservation commission's decision in writing to the city council. Within thirty (30) days after receiving at a
city council meeting the written appeal, the city council shall take action.
B. The city council may affirm or modify the decision after due consideration of the facts contained in the record
submitted by the preservation commission and the denied application. The city council may receive comments on the
content of the record, but no new matter may be considered by the city council, and its decision shall be based solely
on a determination as to whether the proposed work is in accordance with the design standards established for the
district in which the property is located. If the city council approves the application as submitted, or approves the
application with modifications, the executive secretary shall notify the applicant of the approval in writing within seven
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 580/923
(7) days following the city council's determination. The preservation commission shall receive a copy of the written
notice and the executive secretary shall issue the applicant a certificate of appropriateness. If the city council concurs
with the decision of the preservation commission to deny the application the city council's decision shall be final. The
executive secretary shall notify the applicant and the preservation commission of the denial in writing within seven (7)
days following the city council's determination. Any further appeal shall be to the courts as provided by law. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.6.11.5: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
A. An applicant whose application for a certificate of appropriateness has been denied may apply for a certificate of
economic hardship within sixty (60) days of the denial. An application for a certificate of economic hardship shall
include the information on the proposed work contained in the denied application for a certificate of appropriateness
and shall be on a form provided by the commission. The preservation commission shall schedule a public hearing
concerning the application and provide notice in the same manner as provided in subsection 15.2.5.2E of this title,
except that only property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property subject to the application shall
receive written notice. The public hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as specified in subsection
15.2.5.2E of this title, except that the preservation commission shall make findings of fact on the information
submitted to determine economic hardship.
B. The preservation commission may solicit testimony or require that the applicant submit any or all of the following
information before the preservation commission makes a determination on the application for economic hardship:
1. Estimate of cost of the proposed alteration, construction or demolition and an estimate of any additional cost that
would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the preservation commission for changes necessary for
the approval of a certificate of appropriateness.
2. Reports from professionals with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of the structures and
their suitability for rehabilitation; and in the case of a proposed demolition, the economic feasibility of rehabilitation
or other use of the structure.
3. Estimated market value of property in current condition and after completion of proposed work, including any
appraisals obtained by the applicant or owner in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the
property.
4. If the property is income producing, the annual gross income of the property for the previous two (2) years,
itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years, and depreciation deduction and
annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same time period.
5. Any real estate sales or rental listing or advertisement for sale or rent of the property, price asked and offers
received, if any.
6. Any other information that the preservation commission considers necessary to determine if the property owner or
owner's agent will experience an economic hardship by not being issued a certificate of appropriateness for work
specified in the application.
7. Any plans, ideas or other considerations of the owner or owner's agent as to alternative uses of the property or
alternative alterations, construction or scope of demolition work.
C. Within thirty (30) days after the public hearing the preservation commission shall take one of the two (2) following
actions on the application and direct the planning services division to notify the applicant in writing of its decision. The
commission shall either:
1. Deny the application; or
2. Delay final action for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days to investigate possible alternative plans for the
property.
D. If the application is denied as indicated in the preceding paragraph, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city
council in the same manner that is specified in section 15.6.11.4 of this chapter; provided, however, that the city
council shall determine either that it concurs with the preservation commission's decision to deny the application for a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 581/923
certificate of economic hardship, or that the application be delayed for ninety (90) days and sent back to the
preservation commission to investigate possible alternative plans for the property.
E. If the application is delayed the preservation commission shall investigate alternatives with the applicant that would
not require a certificate of economic hardship and allow for a reasonably beneficial use of or reasonable economic
return from the property, or to otherwise preserve the property. Such alternatives may include, but are not limited to:
relaxing provisions of the design standards for the district in which the property is located, seeking financial
assistance, recommending amending the zoning regulations, and modifying the work proposed in the application for
a certificate of appropriateness. If by the end of the ninety (90) day period the preservation commission and applicant
agree on an alternate plan for the property, appropriate action should be taken to implement the plan, which may
include the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. If by the end of the ninety (90) day period the commission
determines that alternative plans exist that would allow for a reasonably beneficial use or reasonable economic
return, but an agreement with the applicant for implementing these plans cannot be reached, then the preservation
commission shall deny the application for a certificate of economic hardship.
F. If the application is denied as indicated in the preceding paragraph, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city
council in the same manner that is specified in section 15.6.11.4 of this chapter; provided, however, that the city
council shall either concur with the preservation commission's decision to deny the application, agree on an
alternative plan with the applicant, or direct the planning services division to issue a certificate of economic hardship
in accordance with the following paragraph.
G. If by the end of the ninety (90) day period the commission finds that:
1. No alternate plan will allow for a reasonably beneficial use of or a reasonable economic return from the property,
and
2. The work proposed in the application will not alter the essential character of the area, and
3. The hardship is the result of the application of the ordinance and is not the result of any act or omission of the
applicant.
The commission shall direct the planning services division to issue a certificate of economic hardship. In granting
the certificate of economic hardship, the preservation commission shall prescribe any conditions that it deems
necessary.
H. It shall be unlawful to deviate from the plans, including modifications made thereto in the certificate of economic
hardship. Any relief granted by the preservation commission in issuance of the certificate of economic hardship shall
be in conformance with the objectives of this section and shall be limited to the minimum requirement to affect
substantial justice and shall be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this section. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.11.6: FEES:
Any fees associated with carrying out the intent of this section shall be established by resolution of the city council after
consultation with the preservation commission. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.12: INTERPRETATIONS:
15.6.12.1: APPLICABILITY:
Any person with any direct or indirect interest in a piece of property in the jurisdiction may apply for an interpretation of
any provision of this title as applied to that property. For purposes of this section, "indirect interest" shall be broadly
construed to include tenants, contract purchasers, mortgage holders, easement holders, and owners of other property
located within five hundred feet (500') of the property for which the interpretation is sought. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.12.2: SCOPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 582/923
The scope of an interpretation may include, but is not limited to:
A. Determination of whether a use not listed in this title is so similar to a listed use that it may be allowed where the listed
use is allowed;
B. Determination of how to apply the dimensional standards of this title to a particular piece of property;
C. Determination of what part of a lot is the front yard;
D. Interpretation of the location of a district boundary line on the zoning map;
E. Definition of a word or clarification of the definition of a word. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.12.3: PROCEDURE:
A. Application: An application for interpretation may be filed on a form provided by the planning services division or by
letter addressed to the development services director.
B. Review: Within five (5) business days of the receipt of a request for interpretation, development services director shall
do one of the following:
1. If the request is unclear, return it to the applicant with a specific request for additional information.
2. If the request is clear,
a. Provide to the applicant and, if not the applicant, to the record owner of the property, a written interpretation; or
b. Refer the matter to the zoning board of appeals, where it should be considered as an administrative appeal
under subsection 15.6.9.1A of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.12.4: EFFECT:
Unless overturned on appeal, an interpretation shall be considered definitive and binding as to the specific issue and the
specific piece of property. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.12.5: APPEALS:
A person aggrieved by an interpretation under this section may appeal it in accordance with subsection 15.6.9.1A of this
chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.6.13: NEIGHBORHOOD NOTIFICATION PROGRAM:
15.6.13.1: APPLICABILITY:
Any community organization or person may register for notifications through the neighborhood notification program.
Registered contacts will receive notification of all upcoming public hearings and development related items that will be
considered before the planning commission, zoning board of appeals, preservation commission, or the city council.
Notification shall be given within five (5) days of the receipt of any application or submittal that requires public review.
Each notification shall include the date, time, and location of any public meeting for which an item will be considered.
Persons desiring to register for the program must contact the planning services division. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 583/923
Chapter 7
NONCONFORMITIES
15.7.1: NONCONFORMING STATUS:
15.7.1.1: GENERAL:
A. Within the districts established by this title there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, use of structures,
and signs which were lawful, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this title. It is
the intent hereof to provide for the elimination of certain nonconformities, to permit some nonconformities to
conditionally continue, and to ensure that nonconformities shall not be horizontally or vertically enlarged, increased,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
B. Nonconforming uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A
nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be enlarged, increased, expanded or extended by
the addition of other uses prohibited generally in the district involved.
C. Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun but not completed prior to the effective date hereof and upon which
actual building construction has been carried on diligently. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation
or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.1.2: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER; EFFECT OF 1974 AND UPDATED ZONING
ORDINANCES:
A. Any lot, structure, use, sign or combination thereof which was lawfully established prior to the adoption of
Carbondale's zoning ordinance in 1974 which does not conform with any aspect of this title as adopted in 2013 shall
remain a lawful nonconforming lot, structure, use, sign or combination thereof.
B. Any lot, structure, use, sign or combination thereof which was lawfully established prior to the adoption of
Carbondale's zoning ordinance in 1974 and which did not conform with any aspect of that ordinance but that now
fully conforms with all aspects of this title shall be considered a lawful lot, structure, use, sign or combination thereof
and shall not be subject to this chapter.
C. Any lot, structure, use, sign or combination thereof which was lawfully established after the adoption of Carbondale's
zoning ordinance in 1974 but which does not conform with any aspects of this title as adopted in 2013 shall remain a
lawful nonconforming lot, structure, use, sign or combination thereof. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.1.3: SPECIAL AND NONCONFORMING USES DISTINGUISHED:
Special uses and nonconforming uses are distinguishable. A "nonconforming use" means the use of a building or
premises that does not comply with the regulations and restrictions of the district in which it is located. A "special use" is
one which is controlled and conditionally permissible in a given zone. It is granted by the city council only after a public
hearing, upon a finding that conditions of the zoning provisions of this code are satisfied. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.2: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF LAND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 584/923
15.7.2.1: LOTS OF RECORD:
A. The minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall not apply to any lot legally recorded in the form of a deed or plat
existing on the effective date hereof, providing such lot is in separate ownership and not of contiguous frontage with
other lots in the same ownership. Further provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying
to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of such other yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the zoning board of appeals.
B. In any district, if two (2) or more unimproved lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in
single ownership are of record in the form of a deed or plat on the effective date hereof, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an
undivided parcel for the purpose of this title, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which
creates noncompliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any voluntary division
of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below requirements stated in this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a structure exists on the effective date hereof, that could not be built under the provisions hereof by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, it
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. Alteration: No such nonconforming structure may be horizontally or vertically enlarged or altered in a way which
increases the nonconforming floor area, or moved in a way which increases its nonconformity.
B. Remodeling Or Addition: A nonconforming structure may be remodeled or added to, provided that the remodeling or
addition or the use thereof, will not create a violation of any provisions of this title.
C. Reconstruction: In the event more than fifty percent (50%) of such nonconforming structure shall be rendered
unusable, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this title or with action taken by the
zoning board of appeals.
D. Exception; R-1 District: Structures located within the R-1 low density residential district which existed in 1974 may be
reconstructed utilizing the existing footprint. The structure may not be reconstructed if it was built over a property line
when originally constructed or is not in compliance with the permitted uses allowed within the R-1 low density
residential district. Any reconstructed structure shall comply with all current building codes adopted by the city.
E. Exception; Location: Structures that were previously located in land outside of the city's zoning jurisdiction, but were
later zoned as part of the zoning expansion in 1998, or as part of a future expansion, may be reconstructed utilizing
the existing footprint. The structure may not be reconstructed if it was built over a property line when originally
constructed or is not in compliance with the permitted uses allowed within the existing zoning district. Any
reconstructed structure shall comply with all current building codes adopted by the city. (Ord. 2014-09)
15.7.4: NONCONFORMING USES:
Where a use of land exists on the effective date hereof that would not be permitted under the provisions hereof, such
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased, expanded or extended to occupy a greater area of land
than was occupied on the effective date hereof.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that
occupied by such use at the effective date hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 585/923
C. In the event any such nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, the same shall
not thereafter be permitted to continue as a nonconforming use, and any subsequent use of such land shall conform
to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which such land is located.
D. No additional structures or facilities which fail to conform to the requirements of this title shall be erected in connection
with such nonconforming use of land. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.5: USES OF STRUCTURES OR STRUCTURES AND LAND IN COMBINATION:
Where a use of a structure or of structures and land in combination exists on the effective date hereof, that would not be
permitted under the provisions hereof, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use of a structure, or of structures and land in combination, shall be horizontally or vertically
enlarged, increased, expanded or extended to occupy or use a greater area of land or a greater portion of a structure
than was so occupied or used on the effective date hereof.
B. Nonconforming home occupations may be continued only so long as the ownership thereof shall not be changed.
C. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a structure or premises may be changed to another
nonconforming use after a hearing before the planning commission and approval by the city council. The planning
commission, in making a positive recommendation to the council, must find that the new nonconforming use is more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such changes, the city council may
establish and require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this title.
D. In the event that any such nonconforming use shall be superseded for any period of time by a permitted use, or in the
event the same shall be discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, or for at least
eighteen (18) intermittent months of any consecutive thirty six (36) month period, the same shall not, after the
expiration of such applicable period, be permitted to continue as a nonconforming use, and any subsequent use shall
conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which the structure or land is situated.
E. Normal repairs or maintenance of nonconforming structures or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use
may be done. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.6: SPECIFIC USES:
15.7.6.1: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
For the purposes of this title, a mobile home park existing on the effective date hereof that would not be permitted under
the provisions hereof, shall be construed as a nonconforming use of land, and the provisions of section 15.7.4 of this
chapter shall be applicable to and control such nonconforming mobile home park use.
A. Provided, however, no mobile home shall hereafter be placed in any mobile home park in a manner which decreases
the distance between such mobile home and any other mobile home or structure to less than fifteen feet (15'), unless
at the effective date hereof such distance is less than fifteen feet (15'), in which case such distance shall not be
diminished further.
B. Provided further, no mobile home shall hereafter be placed in any mobile home park in a manner which decreases the
required setbacks between such mobile home and any public road or internal private road, unless at the effective
date hereof such setback is less than the required setback, in which case such setback shall not be diminished
further. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 586/923
15.7.6.2: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Notwithstanding anything in this title to the contrary, where a sign exists on the effective date hereof that would not be
permitted under the provisions hereof pertaining to signs, such signs may be maintained and continued only for such
periods of time as hereinafter provided and subject to the following provisions:
A. The abandonment of a nonconforming sign shall immediately, at the time of such abandonment, terminate the right to
maintain and continue the same.
B. The violation of any provision of this title pertaining to signs shall immediately, at the time such violation occurs,
terminate the right to maintain and continue that nonconforming sign connected with or involved in such violation.
C. In the event a nonconforming sign shall become substandard under any applicable ordinance of the city, to the extent
the same shall become hazardous or perilous, the right to maintain and continue such sign shall immediately
terminate.
D. In the event a nonconforming sign shall be removed, destroyed, or damaged by any means to the extent that the
same shall be rendered unusable, the right to maintain and continue such sign shall immediately terminate at the
time of such removal, destruction, or damage. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.6.3: SIGNS FOR NONCONFORMING USES:
Any sign situated on premises on which a nonconforming use of structure, use of land, or use of structure and land in
combination, exists on the effective date hereof, shall be deemed to be a nonconforming sign, only to the extent such
sign fails to meet the most restrictive sign regulations of this title that are applicable to the district or districts in which
such use is a permitted use. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.7.6.4: FLOOD FRINGE (FF) AND FLOODWAY (FW) DISTRICTS:
A. Where a structure, use of land, use of a structure, or use of structures and land in combination exists in the flood
fringe district or floodway district on the effective date hereof that would not otherwise be permitted under the
provisions hereof, such structure or use may be continued so long as it remains lawful, subject to the provisions of
sections 15.7.3, 15.7.4 and 15.7.5 of this chapter.
B. A structure that is nonconforming solely due to its location in the flood fringe district or floodway district may be
repaired or rebuilt if destroyed fifty percent (50%) or more in accordance with the provisions of section 15.2.6 or
15.2.7 of this title, whichever is appropriate. (Ord. 2013-20)
Chapter 8
SUBDIVISIONS
15.8.1: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations, and standards to guide land subdivision within the
jurisdiction of the city in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the
municipality. It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development; the conservation, protection, and
proper use of land; and adequate provision for traffic circulation, utilities, and service.
B. It is also the purpose of this chapter to avoid hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from flooding and
to comply with the NFIP rules and regulations as promulgated by the United States department of housing and urban
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 587/923
development, federal insurance administration, as provided in the rules and regulations of the "Federal Register",
volume 41, no. 207, Tuesday, October 26, 1976, as amended, and which are hereby adopted by reference and filed
in triplicate in the office of the city clerk, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-30-2. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.2: JURISDICTION:
Whenever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be made within the incorporated limits of the city or within the
unincorporated area contiguous thereto, that is, within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of said city,
the subdivider thereof, or his agent, shall submit both a preliminary plat and a final plat of the subdivision to the
development services director of the city. Said plans and plats, proposed improvements, and all procedure relating
thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter, the zoning district map,
the official map, and the comprehensive plan of the city. All lands to be dedicated to the city for use as streets, highways,
alleys, parks, and other public use areas, shall be referred to the city planning commission for review and
recommendation before being accepted by the city council or by any other governing authority. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.3: APPROVALS AND INTERPRETATIONS; COUNCIL ACTION:
Except as hereinafter provided, no land shall, after the adoption of these regulations, be subdivided and filed for record,
nor any street laid out, nor any improvement made to the land, until the plat or plans of the subdivision or street
improvements shall have been certified to and approved by action of the city council. The approval shall be in writing and
placed on the document to be recorded according to the procedure outlined herein. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.3.1: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
No lot, tract or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be offered for sale, nor shall any sale or contract for sale
be given until such subdivision plans have been properly reviewed by the city planning commission and officially
approved by the city council. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.3.2: IMPROVEMENTS:
No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply facilities, stormwater drainage facilities, sewerage facilities, gas
services, electric service or lighting, or grading, paving, or surfacing of any street shall hereafter be made within any
such subdivision by any owner or owners or his or their agent, or by any public service corporation at the request of such
owner or owners, or by his or their agent until the plats for the subdivision and also the plans for the improvement thereto
have been properly reviewed by the city planning commission and officially approved by the city council. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.3.3: ROUGH GRADING OF SITE:
Following approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission, the subdivider may, at his option and risk,
proceed with the general rough grading of the site with the understanding that the requirements of the final plat may
require adjustment of such rough grading. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.3.4: SUBDIVIDING IN STAGES:
Where a tract of land is proposed to be subdivided in several stages over a period of years, and the subdivider requests
approval in parts, he shall, at the time of submission of the first part, submit a plan of the entire tract to be eventually
developed with appropriate sectioning to demonstrate to the planning commission that the total design as proposed for
the entire subdivision is feasible. The planning commission may give preliminary approval to the overall plan and final
approval on the parts as submitted from time to time. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.3.5: EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 588/923
The provisions of this chapter do not apply in the following instances, which instances are exceptions to the
requirements of this chapter:
A. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size which does not involve any
new streets or easements of access.
B. The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets
or easements of access.
C. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land.
D. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right of way for railroads or other public utility
facilities and other pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access.
E. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or
easements of access.
F. The conveyance of land for highway or other purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for
public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
G. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.3.6: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
Any property proposed to be subdivided which is identified on the official zoning map as flood fringe or floodway as
provided in sections 15.2.6 and 15.2.7 of this title shall be subject to the permit requirements of the flood fringe district or
floodway district as is provided in sections 15.2.6 and 15.2.7 of this title, whichever is appropriate. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4: MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE:
15.8.4.1: PREAPPLICATION CONSIDERATIONS:
A. In order to make the most of opportunities related to the subdivision and to conserve time, effort and expense, the
owner or subdivider shall consult with the administrative officer and other public officials prior to the preparation of the
preliminary plat for the subdivision. The comprehensive plan of the city shall be reviewed by the subdivider to
determine how his proposed plan will fit into the comprehensive plan. Requirements for major and minor streets,
school and recreation sites, community facilities, shopping centers, sanitation, water supply and drainage, and the
relationship to other developments, existing and proposed, in the vicinity shall be determined in advance of the
preparation of the preliminary plat. A thorough assessment of the situation will result in sound decisions with respect
to the form, character, and extent of the proposed subdivision.
B. Previous to the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the
administrative official and the engineering advisory committee (EAC) plans and data as specified in this section. This
step does not require formal application, fee, or filing of plat with the planning commission. A dated cover letter shall
be submitted indicating the date of submission. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.2: PLANS AND DATA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 589/923
A. General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development as necessary to supplement the drawings required below. This information shall include data on existing
covenants on land proposed, land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, and information
describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, business areas,
playgrounds, park areas and other public areas, proposed protective covenants, proposed utilities, and street
improvements.
B. Location map shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or
influence it. It shall include development name and location of the main traffic arteries, public transportation lines,
shopping centers, elementary and high schools, parks, and playgrounds, principal places of employment, other
community features such as railroad stations, airports, hospitals, and churches within at least one thousand feet
(1,000') of the boundaries of the property, title of subdivision, scale, north arrow, and date.
C. Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other
features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on a print of
the topographic survey. The sketch plan shall include either the existing topographic data or such data as the EAC
determines is necessary for its consideration of the proposed sketch plan. Within ten (10) days of receipt of required
data, the EAC shall inform the subdivider in writing of the adequacy of, or modification required in the plans and data
submitted. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.3: APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Based on the EAC recommendations at the preapplication stage regarding his general program and objectives, the
subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as
specified.
B. Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material shall be submitted to the planning commission with
a written and dated application for approval at least ten (10) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which
it is to be considered for review by the EAC. A written recommendation from the EAC shall be forwarded to the
planning commission as to the adequacy of recommended modification of the plans submitted. A copy of such
recommendations shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the planning commission meeting. If the subdivider
disagrees with the recommendation of the EAC, an appeal in writing of such decision can be made to the planning
commission for final decision.
C. Following a review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations, the
planning commission shall express its approval of the preliminary plat and state the conditions of such approval, if
any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
D. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and
attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the
planning commission.
E. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of
approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be
submitted for approval of the planning commission and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations and the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, if any. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a three (3) month period from the date of approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary approval is given will not be changed.
2. That the said applicant may submit on or before the expiration date the whole, part, or parts of said plat for final
approval. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.4: PLATS AND DATA FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 590/923
Topographic data required as a basis of the preliminary plat shall include existing conditions as follows, except when
otherwise specified by the planning commission:
A. Boundary Lines: Bearings and distances.
B. Easements: Location, width, and purpose.
C. Streets On And Adjacent To Tract: Name and right of way; width and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing;
any walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.
D. Utilities On And Adjacent To Tract: Location, size and invert elevation of sanitary, storm, and combined sewer;
location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles, and streetlights. If
water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction, distance to, and size of nearest
ones, showing invert elevation of sewers.
E. Ground Elevations On Tract: Based on mean sea level datum plane for land that slopes less than approximately two
percent (2%) show spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected
points not more than one hundred feet (100') apart in all directions. For land that slopes more than approximately two
percent (2%) either show contours with an interval of not more than five feet (5') of ground slope which is regular and
such information is sufficient for planning purposes, or show contour with an interval of not more than two feet (2') if
necessary because of irregular land or need for more detailed data for preparing plans and construction drawings.
F. Subsurface Conditions On Tract: Location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewerage disposal systems
are proposed. Plans for septic tanks or private disposal systems shall be approved by the Jackson County health
department and state department of public health.
G. Other Conditions On The Tract: Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees, one
foot (1') or more in diameter, houses, barns, shacks, and other significant features.
H. Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments
or retaining walls; character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby nonresidential
land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land. For adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat
by name, recordation date, and number, and show approximate percent build up, average lot size, and dwelling type.
This information shall be indicated for that adjoining land no less than one-fourth (1/4) mile from boundaries of
proposed subdivision.
I. Photographs If Required By EAC: Camera location, directions of views and key numbers.
J. Zoning: On and adjacent to the tract.
K. Proposed Public Improvements: Highways or other major improvements planned by public authorities for future
construction on or near the tract.
L. Key Map: Showing location of the tract in relation to other well known geographical features.
M. Title And Certificate: Present tract designation according to official records in office of appropriate recorder; title under
which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with name and addresses of owners stating acreage, scale, north
arrow, certification of registered land surveyor, and date of survey.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 591/923
N. Preliminary Plat: Shall be at a scale of two hundred feet to one inch (200':1") or larger (preferred scale of 100 feet to 1
inch). It shall show all existing conditions required in subsection 15.8.4.2A of this chapter, topographic data, and shall
show all proposals including the following:
1. Streets: Names; right of way and roadway widths; approximate grades and gradients; and similar data for alleys, if
any.
2. Other rights of way or easements: location, width, and purpose.
3. Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
4. Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers.
5. Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, or other public uses.
6. Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry, or other nonpublic uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings.
7. Minimum building setback lines.
8. Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size, and acres in parks, etc.
9. Title, scale, north arrow, and date. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.5: OTHER PRELIMINARY PLANS:
When required by the EAC, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground surface and
proposed street grades, including extension for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision.
Typical cross sections of the proposed sanitary and stormwater sewers with grades and sizes shall be indicated. All
elevations shall be based on mean sea level datum plane. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.6: DRAFT OF PROTECTIVE COVENANTS:
If protective covenants are part of the plan whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision, a
draft shall be submitted to the commission and EAC or city attorney for review. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.7: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
A. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however,
that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
B. Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the administrative official at least ten (10) days
prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered, for review by the EAC with a written recommendation to the
planning commission.
C. Four (4) copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified and shall be
submitted to the administrative officer within three (3) months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, such
approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning
commission. All documents shall bear the approving signature of the administrative officer and the transmittal to
council shall include a letter from the EAC on the merits or problems of the development.
D. Unless the preliminary plat has been approved without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all changes and
modifications required by the preliminary approval. To ensure such compliance, the administrative officer shall upon
receipt of the final plat submission, forward one copy of all documents submitted for final approval to the EAC for their
final review and comment before planning commission shall express its approval or disapproval of such plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 592/923
E. The city council shall act upon the final plat submission within thirty (30) days after planning commission approval of
the required documents, unless it has been mutually agreed to extend the period. The copy of the final plat shall be
filed in the office of the city clerk.
F. The approval of the final plat by the city council shall be indicated on the document to be filed for the record by the
affixing of the signature of the city clerk after the subdivider has posted the performance guarantee and executed the
subdivision agreement as set forth. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.8: PLATS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL:
Final plat shall be drawn in ink on acceptable, stable, and durable material on sheets twenty four inches (24") wide by
thirty six inches (36") long and shall be at a scale of one hundred feet to one inch (1" = 100') or larger (preferred scale of
100 feet to 1 inch) where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the
entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous
sections satisfactory to the planning commission.
A. The final plat shall show the following:
1. Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings,
and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
2. Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements, and other rights of way and property lines of
residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions, deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all
curbs.
3. Name and right of way width of each street or other right of way.
4. Location, dimension, and purpose of any easements.
5. Number to identify each lot or site, and including number of square feet in each lot.
6. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.
7. Minimum building setback line on all lots.
8. Location and description of monuments.
9. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
10. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number.
11. Certification by registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of survey and plat.
12. Certification by applicant that he is the landowner.
13. Statement by owner dedicating streets, right of way, and any site for public uses.
14. Title, scale, north arrow, and date.
15. Certificate of approval by city council.
16. For any proposed subdivision or new development greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the
lesser, the applicant shall show the base flood elevation data for each lot or plat or parcel; provided that if the base
flood elevation data is not available, the applicant shall compute and provide this information for each lot or plat or
parcel of the subdivision or new development proposal which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser. (For definition of "base flood elevation", see section 15.11.4 of this title.)
17. Cross sections and profiles of streets showing grades and elevations shall be subject to the approval of the city
engineer. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 593/923
15.8.4.9: INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All public improvements made under the provisions of this chapter shall be constructed under the supervision of the city
engineer. The inspecting engineer may be one of the city staff or a consultant of the firm preparing the plans for the
project. Written reports shall be submitted to the director of public works, indicating the date of inspection, items
inspected, and location of such inspections. These reports shall be made in sufficient number to ensure the proper
construction of all facilities. A core drilling of all streets by a qualified testing company under the direction of the public
works director shall be required, prior to the acceptance of the streets or utilities being turned on. All fees for such
inspection and in reviewing such plans and specifications for improvements shall be paid for by the subdivider. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.8.4.10: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE BOND:
A performance guarantee bond shall be required from the subdivider, the penalty of which said bond or bonds shall be at
least equal to one and one-half (1.5) times the amount of the estimate of cost of the proposed improvements approved
by the administrative officer. If individuals act as sureties, a certified check shall be deposited with the city clerk. Such
personal bonds shall not be accepted for more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). If the surety is given by a surety
company authorized to transact business in this state, the bond shall run to the city and be with good and sufficient
surety satisfactory to the council, conditioned upon the installation of the required improvements within two (2) years
after the approval of the final plat. Filing of the actual bond or other security shall be received at the time of submission of
the final plat for approval. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.11: SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT:
At the time of submission of the final plat for approval, the subdivider shall be required to sign a standard subdivision
agreement contract prepared by the city, and approved by the city council, in which he agrees to make and install the
improvements provided for in accordance with the plans and specifications accompanying the final plat. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.12: GRADING:
Any grading that is commenced prior to the approval of the subdivision plat shall be undertaken at the owner's risk and in
no way obligates the planning commission in its consideration of the proposed plat. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.13: PROTECTIVE COVENANTS:
Shall be in form for recording at the time of submission to the planning commission for final approval. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.4.14: OTHER DATA:
Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or deductions as may be required by the planning commission in the
enforcement of these regulations. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.5: MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE:
This procedure is available where no more than four (4) lots are being created and not requiring the extension of public
utilities if such development does not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel and is not in
conflict with any provisions or portion of the comprehensive plan, official map, zoning ordinance, or this chapter. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.8.5.1: PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 594/923
A. In order to conserve time, effort, and expense, the owner or subdivider should consult the comprehensive plan of the
city to determine how his plan will fit into the comprehensive plan. Requirements for sanitation, water supply and
drainage, and the relationship to other developments, existing and proposed in the vicinity, should be determined in
advance of the preparation of the preapplication plan. A thorough assessment of the situation will result in sound
decisions with respect to the form, character, and extent of the proposed subdivision.
B. Previous to the filing of an application for approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the administrative
official and EAC, plans and data as specified in section 15.8.5.2 of this chapter. This step does not require formal
application, fee, or filing of plat with the planning commission. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.5.2: PLANS AND DATA:
A. General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development as necessary to supplement the drawings required below. This information may include data on existing
covenants on land proposed for development, land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, and
information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth,
business areas, playgrounds, park areas, and other public areas, proposed protective covenants, proposed utilities,
and street improvements.
B. Location map shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or
influence it; include development name, title of subdivision, scale, north arrow, and date.
C. Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other
features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on a print of
the topographic survey. The sketch plan shall include either the existing topographic data or such data as the EAC
determines is necessary for its consideration of the proposed sketch plan. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.5.3: APPROVAL OF PREAPPLICATION:
Within ten (10) days of the applicant's submission of required materials, the EAC shall inform the subdivider in writing as
to their recommendation. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.5.4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the administrative officer at least ten (10) days
prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered for review by the EAC with a written recommendation to the city
council.
A. Four (4) copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified and shall be
submitted to the EAC within three (3) months after approval of the preapplication; otherwise, such approval shall
become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the EAC.
B. All documents shall bear the approving signature of the administrative officer, and the transmittal to council shall
include a letter from the EAC describing the merits or problems of the development.
C. Unless the preapplication plat has been approved without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all changes
and modifications required by the preapplication approval. To ensure such compliance, the administrative officer shall
upon receipt of the final plat submission, forward one copy of all documents submitted for final approval to the EAC.
D. The city council shall act upon the final plat submission within thirty (30) days after EAC approval of the required
documents, unless it has been mutually agreed to extend the period. A copy of the final plat shall be filed in the office
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 595/923
of the city clerk.
E. The approval of the final plat by the city council shall be indicated on the document to be filed for the record by the
affixing of the signature of the city clerk after the subdivider has posted the performance guarantee and executed the
subdivision agreement as set forth. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.5.5: PLATS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL:
For requirements see section 15.8.4.7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
15.8.6.1: MONUMENTS:
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets, and at intermediate points as
specified as follows:
A. At extreme corners of the subdivision such monuments shall be concrete cylinders, cut stone or rectangular prisms or
other material approved by the planning commission not less than four inches (4") in diameter or square, and forty
eight inches (48") long.
B. At all street corners, at all points where street boundary lines intersect the plat boundary lines and at all angle points
and points of curve in each street, such markers shall be steel rods not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter
and forty eight inches (48") long.
C. At all lot corners, markers shall be any standard commercially manufactured cap bearing the registration number of
the land surveyor responsible for its placement, said cap to be placed on a steel rod of not less than one-half inch
(1/2") in diameter, and thirty inches (30") in length. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.2: STREETS:
Subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and cost of all streets except primary and arterial where the city shall
participate on a cost sharing basis within the limits of the land to be subdivided. On streets where cost sharing occurs,
the developer is responsible for costs not less than would be incurred for a secondary class street. All streets and
thoroughfares shall be provided with right of way and surface widths in accordance with the thoroughfare plan of the city
and the standards for street construction established by ordinance. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.3: CURB AND GUTTERS:
Curb and gutters shall be constructed in conjunction with the street in conjunction with the street paving, and shall
comply with the standards of the city established by ordinance. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.4: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be provided by the subdivider within the right of way to be dedicated in accordance with the standards of
the city established by ordinance. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.5: ALLEYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 596/923
All alleys, where constructed, shall meet the standards of street construction established by ordinance. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.6: PUBLIC WATER:
A. Source: The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a source of water approved by the Illinois department of
public health. If an approved public source is within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property being developed, the
developer shall extend such service to the proposed development at his expense as the water supply source. The
water supply system shall be so designed that it shall be eventually incorporated into a comprehensive water system.
B. Mains: The developer shall install water mains of sufficient size to serve the needs of the proposed development. If, in
the opinion of the city engineer, additional size is required to serve potential or existing developments beyond that
proposed, the city shall pay for such additional costs. Water mains shall be located within dedicated street right of
way but not under pavements whenever possible. If it is agreed to by the city that it is not feasible to locate said
mains within a street right of way, the developer shall dedicate to the city a minimum of a twenty foot (20') wide
permanent easement (10 feet on each side of the main) for the repair and maintenance thereof. An easement greater
than twenty feet (20') shall be required if in the opinion of the city engineer, soil conditions location and depth, or
other site conditions are such that a wider easement is needed for repair and maintenance. All plans and
specifications for the water supply system shall be prepared for the subdivider by a registered engineer, and shall be
approved by the state environmental protection agency, the city engineer, Jackson County health department, and
the planning commission where applicable before final plat approval.
C. Fire Hydrants:
1. Fire hydrants shall be of simple rugged construction, must operate freely and positively in all its parts, including
facilities for drainage of the barrel to prevent freezing. Hydrants shall be capable of delivering two hundred fifty
gallons per minute (250 gpm) from each two and one-half inch (21/2") outlet, with a pressure loss of not more than
one and three-fourths (13/4) pounds for two-way, two and one-fourth (21/4) pounds for three-way, and four (4)
pounds for four-way hydrants, and a total loss of five (5) pounds between the street main and the outlet. In addition
to two and one-half inch (21/2") outlets, hydrants shall also have five and one-half inch (51/2") suction connection.
Hydrants must be of such design that if the hydrant barrel is broken off, the hydrant will remain closed. Street
connections must be not less than six inches (6") in diameter. All hydrant outlets shall be National Standard thread.
2. Gate valves shall be so installed on each hydrant installation whereby each hydrant can be isolated from the main
water system so as not to interfere with the operations of the remainder of the system.
3. Hydrant spacing shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') apart in residential areas or exceed three hundred feet
(300') apart in commercial areas.
4. Hydrants shall be installed on all weather access fire lanes or streets not to exceed ten feet (10') from curb lines.
5. Installation of hydrants shall be perpendicular, with pumper outlets always fronting the streets, and at proper grade
of fifteen inches (15") from center of lowest nozzle to the ground. The base of the hydrant shall set on a solid
concrete foundation and be braced against the water pressures, so that joints will not blow. Complete drainage of
barrel is essential; therefore, a gravel drainage pit of not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") gravel and with twice the
water capacity of the hydrant barrel shall be installed around the drainage valve.
6. All fire hydrants will be free from obstructions such as trees, shrubs, parking, etc.
7. Upon completion and testing of fire hydrants, installer will inform the fire and public works departments as to date
they can be put into service. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.7: SANITARY SEWER:
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a means of sanitary sewage disposal. This may be done in one of the
following ways:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 597/923
A. Public Collection System: In all cases where such facility is within one thousand feet (1,000') of the public collection
system, the subdivider shall construct a sanitary sewer system which shall connect to the sewerage system of the
city and provide a connection to each lot.
B. Local Collection And Treatment Facilities: Where it is not practical to connect the subdivision sanitary system to a
public sewer, the subdivider may construct a local collection and treatment system consisting of the necessary house
laterals, local sewers, and trunk sewers required to conduct the sanitary sewage from subdivision to specially
constructed treatment facility.
C. Private Disposal System: The intention of this chapter is to discourage the installation of private individual sewage
disposal facilities which will, if permitted, work to the disadvantage of an orderly expansion of a public sanitary sewer
system. If it can be demonstrated that individual sewage disposal facilities are in the public interest, they may be
permitted. However, the system shall be so designed that it shall be eventually incorporated into the comprehensive
sewage system.
D. Sewer Mains: The developer shall install sewer mains of sufficient size to serve his development. If, in the opinion of
the city engineer, additional size is required to serve potential or existing developments beyond that proposed, the
city shall pay for such additional costs. Sewer mains shall be located within dedicated street right of way whenever
possible. If it is agreed to by the city that it is not feasible to locate said mains within a street right of way, the
developer shall dedicate to the city a minimum of a twenty foot (20') wide permanent easement (10 feet on each side
of the main) for the repair and maintenance. All plans and specifications for the sanitary sewer system shall be
prepared for the developer by a registered engineer and shall be approved by the state environmental protection
agency, Jackson County health department, Carbondale city engineer, and planning commission where applicable
before final plat approval.
E. As Built Drawing: The developer's engineer shall provide an as built drawing of the sewage system including the
location, size, and depth of both mains and laterals to each property within the subdivision. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.8: STORM DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWER:
A. Adequate surface and subsurface drainageways for the removal of stormwater shall be provided by the subdivider.
The extent to which storm drainage facilities shall be required will be based upon an analysis of need prepared for
the subdivider by a registered professional engineer, and shall be so designed that it may be incorporated into a
comprehensive drainage system. The analysis shall be based upon the rational method of computing stormwater
runoff using the 1-hour rainfall to be expected at a twenty (20) year frequency. Times of concentration, soil infiltration,
soil infiltration rates, and other variable factors to be used in the analysis shall be discussed with and approved by the
EAC and planning commission prior to final plat approval.
B. The stormwater sewer system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system. Surface inlets shall
be provided by the subdivider where evidence indicates such a system is necessary. Open ditches are prohibited as
a means of providing for storm drainage; or shall meet the conditions of subsection 15.8.7.5B of this chapter.
C. Materials required for storm sewer construction shall satisfy the current requirements of the standard specifications for
road and bridge construction for the state. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.9: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. Street Lighting: The proposed subdivision shall be served by street lighting facilities furnished and installed by the
subdivider (or at his direction by the appropriate utility company) in accordance with the following standards:
1. Locations at street intersections.
2. Locations on streets where crosswalks are located in interior of a block.
3. Locations in cul-de-sac.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 598/923
4. Distance between streetlight standards shall be appropriate for the subdivision anticipated pedestrian and
vehicular traffic with consideration given to foot-candle intensity of each streetlight. On nonlocal (collector) streets
in the thoroughfare plan and on the official map, where additional illumination is required, and where the interests
of the city will be served, appropriate financial participation will be considered by the city. In the event of city
participation, a written agreement shall be entered into and become a part of the plat to be recorded.
5. Design of poles shall be approved by the planning commission.
6. There shall be no exposed overhead wiring.
7. All such streetlights shall be indicated on the as built drawing.
B. Electrical Power, Telephone, And Cable Antenna Television (CATV): Electrical, telephone, and CATV service lines
shall be placed underground throughout the subdivision. The conduit or cables shall be located within easements of
public rights of way in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services. All transformers and terminal
boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. The location of such services within any
public right of way shall be approved by the city engineer.
C. Natural Gas: A system of utility easements shall be provided for the entire subdivision. Gas mains shall be located
within easements for public rights of way so as not to conflict with other utilities. The location of such service lines
within any public right of way shall be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.10: LANDSCAPE DEVELOPMENT:
A. All unpaved or otherwise unimproved areas within the public rights of way or public use areas shall be graded and
seeded in an approved manner.
B. Trees shall be provided by the subdivider along all streets where trees do not exist, except that no trees shall be
planted in the street right of way. The trees shall be of a species suitable for local soil and climatic conditions,
adapted to street use, and of at least one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper measured at four and one-half feet (41/2')
from ground level. At street corners, the trees shall be located a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the
intersection of the street right of way lines; otherwise, they shall be located so as not to interfere with utilities or
sidewalks with a minimum of two (2) trees per lot.
C. In informal types of street patterns, informal planting of trees in accordance with an approved landscape development
plan may be permitted.
D. Where the zoning ordinance designates a screen planting, the subdivider shall provide a continuous planting of
evergreen or deciduous shrubs, and for each one hundred feet (100') of such planting screen, he shall provide one
deciduous tree and two (2) flowering trees arranged in accordance with a landscape development plan.
E. All trees shall be from a competent source and guaranteed healthy for a period of one year after planting. To ensure
growth, the developer shall plant the required trees between October 1 and April 1 and shall have a maximum of
eighteen (18) months from the issuance of the building permit to provide the landscaping. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.11: STREET SIGNS:
Appropriate street signs shall be installed by the city with reimbursement for such costs by the subdivider. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.6.12: PRIVATELY DEVELOPED FACILITIES:
Where the subdivision is to contain streets, sewers, sewage treatment facilities, water supply system, park area, or other
physical facilities which will not be maintained by existing public agencies, provision shall be made by trust agreement,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 599/923
which is a part of the deed restrictions and which is acceptable to the proper public agencies for jurisdiction over the
continuous maintenance, supervision, operation, and reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.7: DESIGN STANDARDS:
The subdivider shall conform to the following principles and standards of land subdivision in the design of each
subdivision or portion thereof. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.7.1: GENERAL:
The subdivision plan shall conform to design standards that will encourage good development patterns and particularly
to the principles and standards of the model from the Institute Of Traffic Engineers and the comprehensive plan. The
streets, drainage rights of way, school sites, public parks, playgrounds, and other public facilities shown on the officially
adopted comprehensive plan or official map shall be considered in the approval of subdivision plats. The dedication or
reservation of the above may be required of the subdivider by the city. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.7.2: STREETS:
The street and alley layout shall provide access to all lots and parcels of land within the subdivision.
A. Minimum street standards shall be:
Street
Designation
Right Of
Way Pavement Width
Median
Arterial 100 feet 4 12-foot lanes 16 feet
Frontage
road
40 feet 20 feet (no parking); pavement 28 feet (parking on 1 side) None
Industrial 60 feet 40 (parking on 1 side) None
Local 50 feet 30 (11 feet lanes, 8 feet parking on 1 side); 22 (no on street parking, 4 off
street parking per lot required)
None
Primary 80 feet 4 12-foot lanes None
Secondary 60 feet 32 (parking on 1 side) None
Note: No street surface shall be less than 20 feet inside of curb to inside of curb.
B. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be avoided. Cul-de-sacs shall
not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length, unless necessitated by extreme topography.
C. Neighborhood streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic.
D. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable
gradient.
E. Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to the boundary of the tract to be subdivided so as to
provide for normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 600/923
F. Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the
remainder of the street or alley shall be platted to the prescribed width within the proposed subdivision.
G. Reserve strips controlling the continuation of streets, utilities, etc., shall be prohibited except where their control is
definitely placed in the city council.
H. Widths of all streets shall conform to the widths recommended by the engineering advisory committee and planning
commission and approved by the city council.
I. Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular right of way with a minimum diameter of one hundred feet (100').
J. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to the required widths shall dedicate additional
width along either or both sides of said street. If the subdivision is along one side only, one-half (1/2) of the required
extra width shall be dedicated.
K. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other
at an angle less than sixty five degrees (65°).
L. At the intersection of other streets, the property line corners shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than twenty
five feet (25'), or chords of such arcs.
M. At intersections of streets and alleys, the property line corners shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than ten
feet (10') or chords of such arcs.
N. Intersection of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided.
O. Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the commission may apply special standards to be followed
in the design of such parkways or streets.
P. Whenever the subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right of way or a highway designated as a "limited
access highway" by the appropriate highway authorities, provision shall be made for a marginal access street or a
parallel street at a distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the highway or railroad and such
streets.
Q. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the name of an existing
street unless the proposed street is an extension of an existing street, in which case the duplication shall be
mandatory.
R. Alleys shall be discouraged in residential areas but should be included in commercial and industrial areas where
needed for loading and unloading or access purposes, and where platted, shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width.
S. Dead end alleys shall be avoided.
T. Parking provisions on neighborhood streets:
1. On streets less than twenty eight feet (28') in width, there shall be no parking.
2. On streets of twenty eight feet (28') to thirty five feet (35') in width, parking on one side shall be permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 601/923
3. On streets of thirty six feet (36') or more in width, parking shall be permitted on both sides of the street. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.8.7.3: BLOCKS:
A. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
3. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic.
4. Limitations and opportunities of topography.
B. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') and not be less than eight hundred feet (800').
Exceptions to the minimum and maximum lengths may be permitted if these limitations prove impractical due to
terrain.
C. Super blocks of greater length or width than normal may be permitted if used in conjunction with an open space plan
or planned unit development.
D. Pedestrian accessway of not less than ten feet (10') in width shall be required where deemed essential to provide
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.8.7.4: LOTS:
A. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
B. Individual lots with a depth of more than four (4) times their frontage shall be discouraged except under unusual
circumstances.
C. Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, and
1. Lot sizes where not served by public sewerage system or a central community sewerage system shall be as
determined by Jackson County health department standards and based upon percolation tests or other criteria
necessary for the installation of effective private sewerage disposal systems.
2. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to
provide for the off street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
D. Corner lots for residential use shall have sufficient width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to
both streets.
E. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access
to an existing public street.
F. Double frontage or through lots will not be permitted except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting
screen easement of at least ten feet (10'), and across which there shall be no right of access, or fence of uniform
design, and approved by the planning commission shall be installed by the subdivider along the line of lots abutting
such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use of topography and orientation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 602/923
G. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. Some variation from this rule is permissible;
however, very irregular lots shall be avoided.
H. Wherever possible, unit shopping centers based on sound development standards should be designed in contrast to
the platting of lots for individual commercial use.
I. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot for its intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions, or similar circumstances, the commission may withhold approval of such lots. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.7.5: EASEMENTS:
A. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities (water, drainage, disposal,
storm sewer, sanitary sewer, etc.) where necessary and shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide.
B. Where a subdivision, lying within the city limits or area designated in the comprehensive plan as substantial
residential (3 lots per net acre or more), is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream within a
subdivision, such watercourses shall be enclosed if the flow is capable of being carried in one 60-inch pipe. If such
flow exceeds the capacity of a single sixty inch (60") pipe, an adequate width shall be dedicated by the subdivider for
cleaning and maintenance of such watercourse in no case shall such dedication be less than fifty feet (50'). For those
areas not designated as substantial residential (3 lots per net acre or more) the following criteria shall be used to
permit open ditches or closed drainage systems. Flow can be accommodated with any of the following means:
1. Thirty inch (30") pipe or twenty foot (20') easement.
2. Forty eight inch (48") pipe or thirty foot (30') easement.
3. Sixty inch (60") pipe or fifty foot (50') easement.
The method to be used shall be approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.7.6: PUBLIC USE AREAS:
A. Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds, or other public use areas as shown in the comprehensive plan or official
map are located within the subdivision area, the council shall require that such areas be so designated on the final
plat. The subdivider shall dedicate or reserve a public recreational area on a ratio of ten (10) acres per one thousand
(1,000) residents in a central location within each development. If a major recreation facility or school site is required,
the authority having jurisdiction shall acquire the designated land. If proceedings to acquire such designated public
areas have not commenced within one year after approval of final plat, the owner may make any other permitted use
of the site.
B. In the subdividing of any land within the jurisdiction, due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as trees,
watercourses, historical sites, or other similar conditions which if preserved, will add attractiveness to the proposed
development. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.7.7: SIDEWALKS:
A. Sidewalks eight feet (8') in width shall be required along all business streets.
B. Sidewalks four feet (4') in width shall be required on both sides of all residential streets when either of the following
are present:
1. Street with lot frontages of seventy feet (70') or less, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 603/923
2. On any street where population densities will be equal to or exceed two (2) families per gross acre.
C. Sidewalks four feet (4') in width shall be required on one side only of each residential street where the following
conditions are present: population densities will be less than two (2) families per gross acre and the lots or building
sites in general have street frontages of one hundred feet (100') or more.
D. Sidewalks of a width acceptable to the planning commission may also be required through the center of long blocks to
connect cul-de-sac streets and to provide access to school, park and playground areas, and to river or lake
frontages.
E. Sidewalks may be eliminated on one or both sides of streets where the EAC finds that the slope of the grounds make
them impracticable and where approved by planning commission. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.8: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. When a subdivider can show that a provision of this chapter would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to,
and when, in the opinion of the EAC, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, a departure
may be made without destroying the intent of such provision, and with the commission's approval, a recommendation
for a variance or modification may be made to the city council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for such variance
or modification. Any variance thus recommended is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the commission
and the reasoning on which the departure was justified shall be set forth. Any variance or modification authorized by
the council shall be made by resolution and a copy thereof shall be attached to and made a part of the final plat.
B. Action by the council shall take place at its next stated meeting. Approval of the council shall be indicated on the
original drawing by the affixing of the signature of the city clerk, and the plat will be returned to the applicant to be
filed for record in the miscellaneous records of the county recorder. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.8.9: RECORD OF PLATS:
All of such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted and approved as provided in this chapter, shall be
filed in a book of plats of said city and shall be filed and kept by the city among the records of the city. (Ord. 2013-20)
Chapter 9
REDEVELOPMENT
15.9.1: LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared that there exist certain areas within the city where improved and vacant lands
because of the presence of one or more of the following factors are detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and
welfare: dilapidation; obsolescence; deterioration; illegal or nonconforming use of existing structures; excessive
vacancies; overcrowding of structures and community facilities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
inadequate utilities; excessive land coverage; deleterious land use or layout; depreciation of physical maintenance;
obsolete platting of land; diversity of ownership of land; and deterioration of structures or site improvements in
neighboring areas adjacent to vacant lands. As a result of the existence of these conditions, these areas result in a
disproportionate expenditure of public funds, inadequate public and private investment, marketability of property, growth
in delinquencies and crime, ordinance violations, abnormal exodus of families and businesses so that the decline of
these areas impairs the value of private investments, threatens the sound growth and the tax base of the city, increases
unemployment, and threatens the public health, safety, morals and welfare. These conditions need to be eradicated,
conservation measures instituted and the development and redevelopment of such areas undertaken. The eradication
and the elimination of these conditions in such areas and the construction and redevelopment and development projects
in areas by private capital with financial assistance from the city is hereby declared to be a public use essential to the
public interest. (Ord. 2013-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 604/923
15.9.2: DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS:
A. Any person may propose that an area be designated as a redevelopment or development district or propose that an
amendment be made to existing district boundaries by first submitting a proposal for the same to the city manager for
study and review.
B. After review by the city manager, the proposal shall be submitted to the planning commission. The planning
commission shall conduct at least one public hearing concerning the proposal. Notice shall be given of the date, time
and place of the public hearing not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing
before the planning commission by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers in general
circulation in the city.
C. The city manager or the city manager's designee shall, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the public hearing before the planning commission, serve written notice either in person or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, on the owners as appears from authentic tax records of the county or counties in which the
district is proposed to be located, of all property located within the proposed redevelopment or development district,
or if an amendment to existing boundaries is proposed, of all property located within the area proposed to be added
or deleted. The notice herein required shall state the nature of the proposal, a general description of the boundaries
or a general description of the proposed amendment to existing boundaries, the date, time and place of the public
hearing if, after a bona fide effort to determine property owner addresses, the owners of the property upon which
notice is to be served cannot be found at the last known address, or the mailed notice is returned because the owner
cannot be found at the last known address, the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed to have been
met. Furthermore, if ownership of a property has been changed, but has not been properly recorded on the tax
records of the county or counties, notice to the person(s) recorded on the county tax records as owner shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of this section.
D. As a result of the public hearing, the planning commission shall make findings of fact and a recommendation
concerning the proposal to the city council.
E. The city council may adopt, decrease in size or reject the proposal by resolution of the city council.
F. The city council shall establish fees and charges for applications to amend the district boundaries and other matters
pertaining to this chapter. A schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the director of development services of
the city and may be altered or amended by resolution by the city council. Until all applicable fees and charges have
been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.9.3: DESIGNATION OF PROJECTS:
A. Any person may propose a redevelopment or development project. Each such proposal shall be submitted to the city
manager for study and review and shall contain at a minimum the following information: a statement concerning the
manner in which the project will lead to redevelopment or development of the project area, a statement concerning
the specific manner in which the purposes of this chapter will be served, the estimated itemized total project cost, the
proposed method of financing the project, including any proposed expenditures by the city which the project may
require and any proposed use of the city's corporate powers which the project may require.
B. After study and review by the city manager, the proposal shall be submitted to the city council. The city council may
reject or designate in whole or in part any such project as a redevelopment or development project. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.9.4: SOLICITATION OF PROJECTS:
15.9.4.1: GENERALLY:
The city council may designate a particular area within a redevelopment or development district as a targeted project
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 605/923
area and authorize the city manager to solicit redevelopment or development project proposals for said targeted project
area. The city council may establish a deadline for submission to the city manager of redevelopment or development
proposals for targeted project areas. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.9.4.2: SUBMISSION OF MORE THAN ONE PROJECT FOR AN AREA:
A. If more than one proposal is submitted to the city manager for redevelopment or development of a targeted project
area, the city council before taking action shall consider each proposal submitted and may reject all proposals or
designate in whole or in part any such project as a redevelopment or development project.
B. If more than one proposal is submitted to the city manager for the same or partially the same project area that is not
included in a targeted project area for which a deadline for submission of proposals has been established, the city
council may consider and act upon each proposal in order of submission or may consider all proposals submitted and
may reject all proposals, or designate in whole or in part any such project as a redevelopment or development
project. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.9.5: REDEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT POWERS:
A. The city council may exercise, in connection with any redevelopment or development project, any of the powers
granted to it hereafter by the laws and the constitution of the state, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Acquire, manage, convey or otherwise dispose of real and personal property acquired pursuant to the provisions of
a redevelopment or development project;
2. Apply for and accept grants and loans from the United States and the state of Illinois, or any instrumentality of the
United States or the state, for redevelopment or development purposes;
3. Borrow funds as it may be deemed necessary for the purpose of redevelopment or development and in this
connection issue such obligation or revenue bonds as it shall be deemed necessary;
4. Enter into contracts with any public or private agency or person;
5. Sell, lease, trade or improve such real property as may be acquired in connection with a redevelopment or
development project;
6. Employ all such persons as may be necessary for the planning, administration and implementation of
redevelopment or development projects;
7. Exercise the use of eminent domain for the acquisition of real and personal property for the purpose of
redevelopment or development projects;
8. Expend such public funds as may be necessary for the planning, execution and implementation of redevelopment
or development projects;
9. Install, repair, construct, reconstruct or relocate streets, utilities and site improvements essential to the
redevelopment or development district for use in accordance with a redevelopment or development project.
B. The powers specifically listed in this chapter are in addition and supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this
chapter shall not affect, the powers conferred, authorized or granted by any law, ordinance or constitution of the
state. Projects may be acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped, extended and
financed, and bonds may be issued under this chapter for such purposes, notwithstanding that any law or any other
ordinance may provide for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping,
betterment, extension, and financing of a like project, or the issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to
the requirements, restrictions, limitations or other provisions contained in any law or any other ordinance. (Ord. 2013-
20)
15.9.6: EXEMPTION FROM BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 606/923
The designation of redevelopment or development projects and the disposition of real or personal property by the city in
connection with a designated redevelopment or development project shall not be subject to any requirements relating to
public buildings, structures, grounds, works, or improvements imposed by the Illinois Compiled Statutes or any other
ordinance, or any other similar requirement which may be lawfully waived; and any requirement for competitive bidding
or restriction imposed on the procedure for award of contracts for such purposes or the lease, sale or other disposition of
property by the city is not applicable to any action taken under authority of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
Chapter 10
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
15.10.1: VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly allowed by another provision of this code or Illinois law, any violation of this title, including,
but not limited to, the following, will be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter:
A. To use land or buildings in any way not consistent with the requirements of this title;
B. To engage in development activity in any way not consistent with the requirements of this title;
C. To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the requirements of this title;
D. To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of a sign, or other development activity requiring one
or more permits or approvals under this title without obtaining all such required permits or approvals;
E. To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of a sign, or other development activity requiring one
or more permits under this title in any way inconsistent with any such permit or approval or any conditions imposed
thereon;
F. To operate any business or other use subject to specific use or operating conditions under this title except in
accordance with such use or operating conditions or restrictions;
G. To construct a building or other structure or to develop land within a floodplain, except in accordance with the
requirements of this title;
H. To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this title or any condition imposed on such permit or
approval;
I. To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or otherwise given under this title; or
J. To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity acting under this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.1.1: SUBDIVISION/PLAN VIOLATION, PENALTY:
A. Any person, which constructs any public improvement or portion thereof in violation of the provisions of chapter 8 of
this title shall be, upon conviction, fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 607/923
B. Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, lease or offer for lease, while chapter 8 of this title is in effect, any lot or lots, block
or blocks, within the incorporated limits of the city, or any additions thereto, or any resubdivision of any lot or block
therein, or within contiguous territory and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the incorporated
boundary of said city before all of the requirements of chapter 8 of this title have been complied with, shall be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) or not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each lot, block, or
part thereof so disposed of, offered for sale, or leased. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.2: RESPONSIBILITY:
The owner, tenant or occupant of any land or structure, shall be presumed to know of activity occurring on such land or
in such structure and thus may be charged with a violation of this title for any violation found on any premises subject to
this title. Where an architect, contractor, builder, agent or other person appears to have participated directly in a violation
of this code, the building and neighborhood services division may also charge such person with a violation of this title.
The presumption established by this section shall be rebuttable as part of the enforcement proceeding. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3: REMEDIES:
The building and neighborhood services division may use any of the following remedies and enforcement powers or any
combination of such remedies and enforcement powers: (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3.1: REFERRAL TO OTHER AGENCIES:
Where a violation of this code may also constitute a violation of state or federal law, the building and neighborhood
services division may, without effect on the city's enforcement efforts, refer the matter to the Illinois environmental
protection agency, the state's attorney's office, the Illinois attorney general, the U.S. army corps of engineers or other
appropriate federal, state or regional agency. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3.2: WITHHOLD PERMITS AND APPROVALS:
The building and neighborhood services division may deny or withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of
authorization on any land, or structure or improvements thereon:
A. Upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this title or of a condition or qualification of a
development order, permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the city; and
B. Owned or being developed by a person who owns, developed or otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this title or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously
granted by the city. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3.3: APPROVAL OF PERMITS AND APPROVALS WITH CONDITIONS:
Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization, the building and neighborhood services division
designee, or other city official with authority to approve the permit or authorization, may grant such authorization only if
adequate assurances are in place to ensure correction of the violation and provided that granting the permit or
authorization will not compromise the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3.4: REVOKE PERMITS AND APPROVALS:
Any permit or other form of authorization required under this title may be revoked by the city manager or by any city
official with authority to issue such permit when the responsible city official determines: a) that there is a clear and
material departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit, b) that the permit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 608/923
was procured by materially false representation or was issued by mistake, or c) that any of the provisions of this title are
being materially violated and, after reasonable notice, such violations have not been corrected.
A. Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person
responsible at the site of the building or structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a prominent
location, and thereafter construction shall stop.
B. A revocation under this section may be appealed to the zoning board by following the appeals provisions of
subsection 15.6.9.1A of this title.
C. Upon revocation of a permit or approval, any use or activity on the land which depended on the permit or approval
shall cease immediately; this shall have no effect on any separate, lawful use on the property. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3.5: NO RECORDING OF PLAT:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the county recorder's office or have any validity until it has
been approved in the manner prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3.6: STOP WORK:
Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation of this title, the
building and neighborhood services division may order the work to be immediately stopped.
A. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work.
B. The stop work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the
conditions under which the work may be resumed.
C. Violation of a stop work order constitutes a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.3.7: LEGAL OR EQUITABLE RELIEF:
A. The city may commence a civil action or proceeding in circuit court to stop any violation of this title or of a permit,
certificate or other form of authorization granted hereunder, to remove a violation, or to restore the premises in
question to the condition in which they existed prior to violation. The relief sought may include:
1. An injunction or other equitable relief;
2. A mandatory injunction requiring specific performance of the requirements of a site plan, landscaping plan,
environmental remediation plan or any development order, approval or permit requiring specific site improvements
as a remedy under this title or as a condition of approval of such development order, approval or permit;
3. An order in the nature of mandamus or abatement;
4. A civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages to property including
animal, plant, and aquatic life, caused by any violation;
5. A judgment or order enforcing any requirement of, or under, this title to pay a fee or reimburse or compensate the
city, including when the city is required or authorized to take specified action at the expense of the landowner; or
6. Any other judgment or order available under Illinois law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 609/923
B. It shall not be a defense to, or ground for dismissal of, these judicial remedies for damages and civil penalties that the
city has failed to exhaust its administrative remedies, or has failed to hold an administrative hearing prior to the
institution of a civil action.
C. In addition to other remedies provided by law, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
restrain, abate or correct a violation of this title, including, but not limited to, requiring the restoration of property and
improvements to their appearance prior to the violation. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.4: GENERAL PENALTIES:
A person convicted of violating the provisions of this title or of failing to comply with its requirements, shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. Fines resulting from violations of this title are not intended to conflict with the
provisions for fines elsewhere in this code. Such other provisions include, but are not limited to, building, plumbing,
electrical, housing and fire prevention codes adopted by the city. In addition, nothing stated herein shall prohibit the city
from exercising any other legal remedy provided under law. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.5: OCCUPANCY VIOLATIONS:
15.10.5.1: PRESUMPTION:
All persons, occupying a principal residential structure or a dwelling unit in a zoning district in which the maximum
occupancy regulation makes reference to a family, shall be presumed unrelated when such persons' surnames are
different; and any person claiming relation to another person with a different surname shall be held bound to prove the
same. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.5.2: LIABILITY OF OWNER:
A. No owner of a dwelling unit shall permit persons to occupy that dwelling unit in a manner which exceeds the specified
maximum occupancy regulation for the zoning district in which the dwelling unit is located.
B. Whenever persons have surnames which are different and such persons occupy a dwelling unit in a zoning district in
which the maximum occupancy regulations make reference to a family, and the number of persons with different
surnames indicates noncompliance with the specified maximum occupancy regulations for that dwelling unit, the
owner of the dwelling unit shall be presumed to have permitted the occupancy of the dwelling unit by persons in
violation of the maximum occupancy regulations.
C. For purposes of this section, "owner" is defined as the legal, equitable or beneficial owner of the dwelling unit or a
capacity to manage the subject structure pursuant to an agreement or court order. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.10.6: CITIZEN COMPLAINTS:
Whenever a zoning violation occurs, any person may file a written complaint with the administrative official in charge of
enforcing the provisions of this title. Such complaint shall be on a form provided by the city. The administrative official
enforcing this title shall record the complaint, immediately investigate and take such action thereon as may be provided
herein. (Ord. 2013-20)
Chapter 11
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 610/923
15.11.1: GENERAL RULES:
A. All words shall be given their common, ordinary meanings unless the context otherwise requires.
B. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular, as the context may suggest.
C. Words of one gender include other genders as applicable.
D. References to persons or people shall also include partnerships, corporations, trusts, and similar entities.
E. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "will" is directory but not mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. (Ord.
2013-20)
15.11.2: ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATION:
Upon application of any property owner or resident of the jurisdiction, the planning services division shall either issue an
interpretation of the meaning of any part of this title that may be unclear or shall refer the matter to the zoning board of
appeals for interpretation; any interpretation by the planning services division may be appealed to the zoning board of
appeals in accordance with subsection 15.6.9.1A of this title. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.11.3: MEASUREMENTS:
For the purposes of this title the following illustrations and the definitions contained therein shall be deemed to be part of
the definitions. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.11.3.1: HEIGHT:
A. Building: The height of a building shall be measured from the finished grade to the highest point on the building.
B. Lighting Fixture: The height of a lighting fixture shall be measured from the finished grade to the highest point on the
fixture.
C. Sign: The height of a sign shall be measured from the finished grade to the highest point on the sign.
D. Wireless Communication Facility: Height of a WCF shall be measured from finished grade at the base of the tower to
the highest point on the WCF, excluding the antenna array. (Ord. 2013-20)
15.11.3.2: GRADE, HEIGHT AND STORY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 611/923
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.11.3.3: YARD MEASUREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 612/923
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 613/923
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.11.3.4: MISCELLANEOUS SIGN MEASUREMENTS:
A. Signs, Number Of: An individual sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing
elements organized to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of
elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to
be a single sign.
B. Signs, Surface Area Of: The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area of a regular
geometric form or combination of regular geometric forms within which the sign shape may be inscribed and
comprising all the display area and frame (or border) of the sign surface area and including all of the elements of the
matter displayed. Structural member not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in the computation of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 614/923
surface area.
(Ord. 2013-20)
15.11.4: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED SIGN: See definition of Sign, Abandoned.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure, not expressly prohibited, the use of which is incidental to the principal
structure and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure.
ACCESSORY USE: A use, not expressly prohibited, customarily incidental to the principal use and so necessary or
commonly to be expected that it cannot be reasonably assumed to be prohibited.
ACTIVE SOLAR COLLECTOR DEVICE: An assembly, structure, equipment or elements used for gathering,
concentrating, or absorbing direct or indirect solar energy, and then storing, distributing, or transforming said energy in
the form of gases, solids, liquids, electricity, or combinations thereof for subsequent use where the application of energy
from an external source of conventional supply is necessary to move the solar derived energy, such as with a pump or
fan. Said device does not include distribution equipment that is equally usable in a conventional energy system except
for such components as are necessary for meeting the requirements of efficient solar energy utilization.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL: The development services director with the approval of the city manager shall designate
and authorize an administrative official of the city as provided in section 1-3A-5 of this code (the planning services
manager) to administer the provisions of this title.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER: Day care centers which provide care for less than twenty four (24) hours a day to more
than four (4) adults who are not residents of the facility and which provide services and programs designed to meet the
individual needs of the persons served.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 615/923
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers,
characterized by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas.
ALLEY: Any public or private way twenty feet (20') or less in width which is set aside as a permanent right of way for
public vehicular travel and which serves as a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any act or process which changes one or more of the exterior features and/or interior features of a
property and/or improvements on the property which is subject to the design standards for the district in which the
property is located.
ANTENNA ARRAY: One or more rods, panels, disks or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio
frequency signals, which may include omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna
(disk). The antenna array does not include the "support structure" defined herein.
ARCHITECTURAL SIGNS: See definition of Sign, Architectural.
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNITY FACILITY (ATTACHED WCF): An antenna array that is attached to an existing
building or structure, which structures shall include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs, or water towers, with any
accompanying pole or device which attaches the antenna array to the structure, and associated connection cables and
an equipment facility.
AUTOMOBILE RENTAL SERVICES: Rental of cars, vans, light trucks and other motor vehicles weighing less than two
(2) tons.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: Any place outside a building where two (2) or more vehicles in operating condition are
offered for sale or are displayed for sale or advertising purposes.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles, trailers, or farm machinery, or the
storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BANNER: A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics is displayed.
BANNER SIGN: See definition of Sign, Banner.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base
flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood. For the purpose of
this title, the elevations listed in the flood insurance study, which study is adopted herein, shall be determinative of the
base flood elevation at the points listed in said study. For points lying between the points listed in said study, the base
flood elevation shall be determined by prorating the difference between the base flood elevation at consecutive points as
shown in said study.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building partially underground, but having less than half its clear floor to ceiling height
below grade (see definition of Cellar).
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to
the public with no more than five (5) guestrooms for rent. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and
breakfast establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Off Premises.
BLOCK: A unit of property entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, railroad rights of way, waterways, or other
barriers, or a combination thereof.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of Rooming House.
BUILDING: A roofed structure enclosed within exterior walls which may contain a breezeway or carport, built, erected,
and framed of component structural parts, designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of individuals,
animals, or property of any kind. For structure definition, refer to Structure.
BUILDING FACADE: The walls of a building or any other near vertical structural element below the roof surface area(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 616/923
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The length in feet of the ground floor level of a building front and/or sides abutting a public right
of way which have a public customer entrance.
BUILDING LINES: The lines nearest and parallel with the lot lines establishing the minimum yards to be provided
between the building or structure and the lot lines. For purposes of establishing minimum yards, projections from a
building or structure which are not designed for occupancy either above, below or within the projection shall not be
considered part of the building or structure. No structural supports of said projections may originate in any required
minimum yard. Provided, however, that no part of an active solar collector device shall be allowed to project into any
minimum yard. See section 15.3.4.1 of this title.
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT: Two (2) or more contiguous lots containing two (2) or more businesses with unifying
elements, such as shared parking or access, and a common commercial zoning classification. The area of the
development shall be a minimum of five (5) acres. For the purpose of the sign regulations a business development must
include lots that do not have frontage on a state or federal highway and the business development shall be limited to one
freestanding sign.
CABIN: A facility that is leased on a temporary basis for recreational purposes which may be fully plumbed, served with
electrical power, and/or contain a kitchen and bathroom. This may also include a lodge or similar type of facility.
CAREGIVER: A person, whether paid or unpaid, who provides a senior citizen with live-in assistance in meeting daily
living needs.
CELLAR: That portion of a building partially underground, but having half or more of its clear floor to ceiling height below
grade (see definition of Basement).
CENTERS OR WORKSHOPS FOR MENTALLY OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED: Day care centers which provide
care for less than twenty four (24) hours a day to mentally or physically handicapped persons who are not residents of
the facility and which provide services and programs to meet the person's needs for care, protection and training.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the preservation commission indicating its approval of
plans for alteration, construction or demolition on property or improvements in a designated district.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: A certificate issued by the preservation commission authorizing an
alteration, construction or demolition of property or improvements even though a certificate of appropriateness has
previously been denied.
CHILD CARE CENTERS: Day care centers which receive preschool or school age children, or both, for short term or
extended hours of care, or out of school hours of care, or out of school hours, and which provide essential personal care,
protection, supervision, training and programs to meet the needs of the children served.
CITY: The city of Carbondale, Illinois.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois.
COLLOCATION/SITE SHARING: Use of a common WCF, or common site by more than one wireless communication
license holder, or by one wireless communication license holder for more than one type of communications technology
and/or placement of an antenna array on a structure.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION: This term shall mean the same as "actual start" as defined in the definition of
"start of construction".
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN/CATERING: An establishment in which the principal use is to engage in the preparation and
production of prepared food items for off premises consumption and/or sale. The byproducts of which will not result in
obnoxious emissions or odors. Typical uses include catering, fruit and vegetable canning, wholesale bakeries,
commissary kitchens, and/or specialty food packaging.
COMMISSION: The Carbondale planning commission.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The complete plan, or any of its parts, for the development of the city and adjacent
jurisdictional areas prepared by the commission and adopted by the council in accordance with the authority conferred
by the Illinois municipal code, as amended.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 617/923
CONDOMINIUM: Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land and certain parts of a building thereon, which
would normally be used by all the occupants, including yards, foundations, basements, floors, walls, hallways, stairways,
elevators and all other related common elements, together with individual ownership in fee of a particular unit or
apartment in such building. It is not confined to ownership of a residential unit such as an apartment, but its use also
extends to offices and other types of space in commercial buildings.
CONSTRUCTION: Any act or process which adds an addition onto an existing structure or erects a new principal or
accessory structure on a lot which is subject to the design standards for the district in which the property is located.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail establishment having a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less
which primarily sells food, beverages, and convenience items. The establishment may or may not be in conjunction with
other uses such as a gasoline service station or restaurant. The gross floor area of a convenience store shall include
area occupied by restrooms, seating areas, video games and vending machines but shall not include areas for
restaurant purposes. When a convenience store is in conjunction with a gasoline service station, the principal use shall
be considered a gasoline service station for the purpose of determining permitted zoning district.
CORNER LOT: See definition of Lot Types.
COUNTY: The counties of Jackson or Williamson, Illinois.
CROSSWALK: A strip of land dedicated to public use, which is reserved across a block to provide pedestrian access to
adjacent areas.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by an adequate vehicular
turnaround.
DAY CARE CENTER: A facility at which an agency, organization or individual, licensed by the state, provides care for
less than twenty four (24) hours per day to more than three (3) persons in a facility other than a family day care home or
day care home. The term "day care center" includes facilities commonly called: "child care centers", "day nurseries",
"nursery schools", "kindergartens", "playgroups", and "centers/workshops for the mentally/physically handicapped with or
without stated educational purposes". The term does not include: a) public or private elementary school systems or
secondary level school units or institutions of higher learning; b) facilities operated in connection with a shopping center
or service, or other similar facility, where transient children are cared for temporarily while parents or custodians of the
children are on the premises, or are in the immediate vicinity and readily available; c) any type of day care center that is
conducted on federal government premises; d) special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instruction, and
similar activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic, charitable, and governmental organizations, or
e) family day care homes, and day care homes I, II and III.
DAY CARE HOME I: A residential structure occupied by the care provider's family and licensed by the state which
provides care for more than three (3) up to a maximum of six (6) children for less than twenty four (24) hours per day.
The maximum number of six (6) children includes the family's natural, foster or adopted children twelve (12) years of age
or under.
DAY CARE HOME II: A residential structure occupied by the care provider's family and licensed by the state which
provides care for more than six (6) up to a maximum of twelve (12) children for less than twenty four (24) hours per day.
The maximum number of twelve (12) children includes the family's natural, foster or adopted children twelve (12) years
of age or under.
DAY CARE HOME III: A residential structure occupied by the care provider's family and licensed by the state which
provides care for more than twelve (12) up to a maximum of sixteen (16) children for less than twenty four (24) hours per
day. The maximum number of sixteen (16) children includes the family's natural, foster or adopted children twelve (12)
years of age or under.
DAY NURSERIES: Day care centers which receive preschool age children for short term or extended hours of care and
which provide essential personal care, protection, supervision, training and programs to meet the needs of the individual
children served.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process which destroys or removes, in whole or in part, a feature of a property and/or
improvement on the property which is subject to the design standards for the district in which the property is located.
DESIGN STANDARDS: The guidelines that regulate alteration, construction and demolition in a designated district.
DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale that has been
approved by ordinance of the city council as a landmark, historic district or neighborhood preservation district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 618/923
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
construction of or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR: A department head for the city responsible for planning, building and
neighborhood services, housing programs, and development services or such person's designee. If at some time the title
does not exist and this definition is not sufficient to identify a similar office, the term shall be construed to mean "city
manager or his or her designee".
DORMITORY: A building, not open to transients, where lodging is provided for ten (10) or more nonfamily persons, and
no kitchen facilities other than one central kitchen facility are provided any dwelling unit occupied by persons other than
management personnel.
DRAINAGE RIGHT OF WAY: The lands required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches. They are
required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to
safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any establishment serving food or beverages to customers who remain in or leave and return
to their cars for consumption of such food or beverages. Drive-in restaurants include self-service restaurants for takeout
food.
DRIVEWAY AREA: For one-, two-, three-, or four-unit dwellings, an off street area (paved with bituminous concrete,
portland cement concrete, type A-3 surfacing, stabilized rock, gravel or crushed stone, or the equivalent thereof),
provided for use by motor vehicles in gaining access to public streets or as a parking area for four (4) spaces or less.
See also subsection 15.4.8.5B of this title.
DWELLING UNIT: One room, or more than one connected rooms, designed as a separate independent housekeeping
establishment and containing cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by the public or a person for specified purposes.
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: Circumstances affecting a property owner wherein the owner cannot in accordance with the
design standards of a designated district maintain, construct, alter, or demolish property without experiencing substantial
financial harm or loss of reasonable use of the property. The absence of current or potential profit in the sale, lease or
other use of the property without acquisition of a certificate of appropriateness is not, in itself, considered economic
hardship.
ECOTOURISM: Offering experiences for visitors through natural and cultural attractions within a rural setting. Typically,
enterprises in this category are independently owned and serve as a regional destination.
EMPLOYEE(S): In regard to off street parking requirements, employees means all who work in the enterprise including
owners (other than purely stockholders), partners, management, and office personnel.
ENGINEERING ADVISORY COMMITTEE (EAC): An administrative body to act in a technical capacity for the
commission, the city manager, and the city council. Said committee shall consist of the following officials or their duly
authorized representatives: the development services director (chairperson), the public works director, the fire chief, a
planning services designee, a building and neighborhood services designee, and such other persons as may be
designated by the city manager. Appropriate county and township government officials and water district officials shall be
consulted as individual subdivision circumstances necessitate. It shall be the duty of the EAC to examine and review all
proposed street dedications or abandonments, tentative plat maps of subdivision, and to make recommendations to the
planning commission, city manager, and city council.
EQUIPMENT FACILITY: Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a WCF which includes cabinets, shelters,
a build out of an existing structure, pedestals and other similar structures.
EXTENDED STAY UNIT: A hotel or motel unit with accommodations which meets the following requirements:
A. A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a minimum of not less than two hundred twenty
(220) square feet. A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a minimum of not less than three hundred
twenty (320) square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections B and C of
this definition;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 619/923
B. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each have a clear
working space of not less than thirty inches (30") in front. Light and ventilation conforming to the requirements of
this code; and
C. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
EXTERIOR FEATURES: The architectural character, general composition and/or general appearance of an
improvement, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of building materials, the type, design and character
of windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, fences and appurtenant elements.
FAA: Federal aviation administration.
FCC: Federal communications commission.
FTA: Federal telecommunications act of 1996.
FAMILY: One or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage or adoption and maintaining a common
household. The service dependent population of a group home and the resident staff shall be considered a family plus
one person not related to the family.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME: A residential structure occupied by the care provider's family that provides care for three (3)
or fewer children for less than twenty four (24) hours per day not including the family's natural, foster or adopted children.
Family day care homes do not need a license from the state and are permitted in all residential zoning districts and most
districts in which residential uses are permitted.
FEEDLOT: Any parcel of land, structure, pen or corral wherein cattle, fowl, horses, sheep, goats, or swine are
maintained in close quarters for the purpose of fattening.
FESTOON LIGHTS: A group of two (2) or more light bulbs hung or strung overhead which are exposed to persons on a
public right of way and which are not shaded, shielded, or hooded to prevent the direct rays of light from being visible
from the right of way.
FINAL PLAT: The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is presented to the commission for final approval in
accordance with these regulations, and which, if approved by the city council, shall be entitled to be filed with the proper
county recorder office.
FLOOD FRINGE: That area of the floodplain which is not in the floodway.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow of inland waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN: That area including the channel of a watercourse and adjacent land areas below the base flood
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That area of floodplain which contains the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved from certain obstructions to discharge the base flood without raising the base flood elevation more than onetenth
foot (0.1') in accordance with state of Illinois regulations. For the purpose of this title the location of the floodway is
as shown by the plan view of the flood insurance rate map along with the flood insurance study, Carbondale, Illinois,
dated May 2, 2008, which study is adopted herein.
FLOOR AREA (FA): The sum of the areas for residential use on the several floors of a building or buildings, measured
from the faces of the exterior walls including, but not limited to:
A. Halls, lobbies, stairways, elevators, utility rooms and residential service rooms; and
B. Basement or lowest story to extent used for residential purposes and for access to residential use; and
C. Relatively closed exterior balconies and other covered open spaces which are ineligible for inclusion in covered
open space and therefore are counted as floor area, unless exempted in the next paragraph.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 620/923
The floor area does not, however, include:
A. Relatively open exterior balconies and other covered open spaces which are eligible for inclusion in covered
opened space;
B. Any terrace, patio, atrium, porch or balcony which is not covered;
C. Any area for special purpose for common use of all occupants, such as recreation, library or infirmary;
D. Any garage or carport;
E. Any area used for major mechanical equipment; or
F. Any area used for commercial or other nonresidential purposes.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The square foot amount of total floor area (all stories) permitted for each square foot of
land area. (FAR = FA/LA or FAR x LA = FA)
FOUR-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing four (4) dwelling units.
FREESTANDING SIGN: See definition of Sign, Freestanding.
FRONT LOT LINE: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, a line
located adjacent to the front entrance to the principal structure that separates the lot from the street.
FRONT YARD: See definition of Yard, Front.
GRADE: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case building walls are
parallel to and within five feet (5') of a public sidewalk, said ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. See section
15.11.3.2 of this chapter.
GROSS ACRES: The total land area of the parcel of land to be subdivided.
GROUP HOME: A single dwelling unit where supervision, food, lodging or other services are provided to a "service
dependent population" as herein defined, living and cooking together in a single housekeeping unit, consisting of: a) a
basic group of members of a service dependent population; b) additional staff persons provided by a sponsoring agency,
either living with the residents on a twenty four (24) hour basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are
present at the dwelling.
GROUP HOME I: A group home with a basic group limited to not more than eight (8) service dependent individuals plus
a maximum of two (2) resident (live-in) staff at any given time, subject to a higher number of staff, if required, to meet
state or federal regulations. Said home is intended for permanent placements, and shall not be for crises or short term,
transitional placements.
GROUP HOME II: A group home with no limits placed on the number of service dependent individuals in the basic
group. Two (2) or more resident (live-in) staff or twenty four (24) hour adult supervision is required. Transitional
placements are permitted in this category of group home.
GUESTROOM: A sleeping room in a bed and breakfast establishment or inn intended to serve no more than two (2)
transient guests per night.
HEIGHT: Permitted building height measured from grade. See section 15.11.3.2 of this chapter.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area designated by ordinance of the city council, according to criteria and pursuant to
procedures prescribed in section 15.2.5 of this title, which contains within definable geographic boundaries properties or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 621/923
structures, which may or may not be landmarks, which contribute to the overall historic characteristics of the designated
area.
HOME MUSEUM: A residential structure that is itself of historic significance and contains exhibits of historic, artistic, or
scientific interest and that is open to public visit. The principal use of the structure shall be limited to single-family
residence and the viewing of the historic structures, exhibits and grounds by visitors during specified hours of operation.
A home museum may include accessory uses such as an office connected to administering the museum activities,
meeting room(s), gift shop and overnight boarding accommodations of no more than five (5) consecutive days per guest.
Parking accommodations for the museum shall be determined on a case by case basis and approved as part of the
special use process.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation other than a home office conducted in one or more dwelling units or one or more
accessory buildings located on the same lot with one or more dwelling units or partly in one or more dwellings and partly
in one or more accessory buildings, as allowed in accordance with section 15.3.4.2 of this title.
HOME OFFICE: A room or other part of a dwelling unit used as an office related to an occupation where the only
business related activities conducted on the premises are office activities, as allowed in accordance with section 15.3.4.2
of this title.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: See definition of Sign, Illuminated.
IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, landscaping, work of art, parking facility, fence, gate, wall or other object
constituting a physical addition to real property, or any part of such addition.
INN: An operator occupied establishment which is usually residential in character which provides accommodations,
meals and beverages for a charge to the public. An inn shall have no more than twelve (12) guestrooms for rent. Inns
shall not include bed and breakfast establishments.
INTENSIVE CARE HOME: See definition of Nursing Home.
INTERIOR FEATURES: The architectural character, general composition and/or general appearance within an
improvement, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of building materials, the type, design and character
of windows, doors, light fixtures, ornamental plasterwork, moldings, ceiling and wall materials, flooring, stairways and
appurtenant elements.
INTERIOR LOT: See definition of Lot Types.
JUNKYARDS: The use of more than seven hundred fifty (750) cubic feet of open storage on any lot, portion of a lot or
tract of land for the sale, storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, scrap metals or salvageable materials, or for the
abandonment, dismantling, or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles, machines or parts thereof.
JURISDICTION: The corporate area of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the unincorporated area contiguous thereto
that is within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits, as described on the official zoning map of the city.
KENNEL: Any lot, structure or premises where four (4) or more dogs over four (4) months of age or four (4) or more cats
over four (4) months of age are kept. In residential structures, this formula shall be applied to each dwelling unit within
the structure, rather than the entire lot.
KINDERGARTENS: Day care centers which receive children between the ages of four (4) and six (6) years and which
are established and professionally operated primarily to conduct educational programs for early childhood development.
LAND AREA: A. The site for residential use within the property lines.
Land area, however, shall not include:
A. Area not beneficial to the residential use due to its location or character; or
B. Area used for commercial or other nonresidential uses including required parking areas for such uses.
LANDMARK: A property or structure designated by ordinance of the city council, according to criteria and pursuant to
procedures prescribed in section 15.2.5 of this title, which is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and preservation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 622/923
because of its historic and/or architectural significance to the city.
LOT: A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum applicable zoning requirements for use, coverage and
area, and to provide required yards and other required open spaces, and having frontage on an improved public street or
an improved private street, and may consist of: a) a single lot of record; b) a combination of complete lots of record or of
complete lots of record and portions of lots of record or a combination of portions of lots of record; c) a parcel of land
described by metes and bounds, provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be
created which does not meet the applicable requirements of this title.
LOT FRONTAGE: Any portion, piece, division or parcel of land which abuts a public right of way.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot shown as part of a subdivision by a plat of such subdivision recorded in the appropriate
county's recorder's office.
LOT TYPES:
Corner Lot: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets which streets have an angle of intersection
of not more than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
Flag Lot: An interior lot adjacent to a corner lot, the side line of which is contiguous with the rear lot line of the
corner lot.
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.
Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street; through lots abutting two (2)
streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of a structure is the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or
cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an
area other than a basement or cellar area, is not considered a structure's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title.
MAINTENANCE OF SIGN: Any action, involving the painting or repair of a sign that alters less than fifty percent (50%) of
any sign surface area and does not otherwise alter the wording, shape, area, material, height or any other element of a
sign existing prior to the painting and/or repair of the sign. All other actions, which result in change in the sign surface or
elements shall be considered as an erection of a new sign.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT: A site situated in a manufactured home park and designated for the exclusive use of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 623/923
occupants of a manufactured home. The term "mobile home lot" as used in this title shall be defined as a "manufactured
home lot".
MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME: A. Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet when erected on site and which is built on a chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities
and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. The term shall include:
1. Units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed, or telescoped when being towed and that may be
expanded to provide additional cubic capacity, and
2. Units composed of two (2) or more separately towable components designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of being separated again into the components for repeated towing, and
3. Units commonly called "tip outs" and/or "pullouts" which are specifically designed and manufactured to be
assembled with that particular manufactured home, and
4. Units designed for residential use as specified above regardless of modifications that change their intended use,
such as through conversion to a storage unit, or modifications that alter their exterior appearance, including, but
not limited to, adding siding, or a framed roof.
B. Mobile Home: As used in this title shall be defined as those manufactured homes described in subsection A of this
definition.
1. In addition, the term "manufactured home" also includes panelized, sectional or modular units known as
"manufactured housing units" which are regulated by the Illinois department of public health. These units are
defined as "a building assembly or system of building subassemblies, designed for habitation as a dwelling for
one or more persons, including the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other service
systems, which is of closed or open construction and which is made or assembled by a manufacturer, on or off
the building site, for installation, or assembly and installation on the building site with a permanent foundation".
2. For floodplain management purposes only, as required in sections 15.2.6 and 15.2.7 of this title, the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes and other
similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For flood insurance
purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A parcel (or contiguous parcels of land) which has been so designed and improved
that it contains three (3) or more manufactured home lots available to the general public for the placement thereon of
manufactured homes for occupancy. The term "mobile home park" as used in this title shall be defined as a
"manufactured home park".
MANUFACTURING, LOW IMPACT: The process or fabrication of certain materials or products within enclosed structures
where no process involved will produce noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb
or endanger neighboring properties.
MINIWAREHOUSE: A building or group of buildings that contain separate, individual, controlled access compartments,
stalls or lockers, which may be of various sizes, for the dead storage of customer's goods or wares. Miniwarehouses do
not include the conduct of business activities, other than rental of the storage units themselves by the miniwarehouse
management, nor do miniwarehouses include any storage and transfer business where the use of large vehicles on a
frequent basis is part of such business.
MOBILE HOME LOT: See definition of Manufactured Home Lot.
MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE USE: Including, but not limited to, go-cart tracks, water bumper boat facilities,
etc., such recreational vehicles shall be limited to engines not exceeding ten (10) horsepower and noise levels not
exceeding fifty (50) decibels at any property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 624/923
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing more than one dwelling unit.
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION DISTRICT: An area designated by ordinance of the city council, according to
criteria and pursuant to procedures prescribed in section 15.2.5 of this title, which contains within definable geographic
boundaries properties or structures which may not necessarily be of historic and/or architectural significance, but which
may be considered traditional in character and which may be threatened by inappropriate development that could detract
or have a blighting effect on the quality of life in the area.
NET ACRE: The amount of land in the subdivision, exclusive of public rights of way and other public ownership such as
schools and parks.
NOMINATION: Property(ies) and/or structure(s) for which an application for a proposed designation as a landmark,
historic district or neighborhood preservation district has been filed.
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS: A lawfully existing building which fails to comply with all applicable zoning regulations.
NONCONFORMING USE: A lawfully existing use which fails to comply with all applicable zoning regulations.
NURSERY SCHOOLS: Day care centers which receive children between the ages of two (2) and six (6) years and which
are established and professionally operated primarily for educational purposes to meet the developmental needs of the
children.
NURSING HOME: A building or portion thereof for the aged and infirm, chronically ill, or incurable persons in which three
(3) or more persons not of the immediate family are provided food and shelter care for compensation, but not including
hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: See definition of Sign, Off Premises.
OFF STREET LOADING SPACE: Adequate space (paved with asphaltic concrete, concrete, or the equivalent thereof)
situated so as to be accessible at all times to pick up and delivery vehicles and reasonably expected to be used.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: An off street space (paved with bituminous concrete, portland cement concrete, type
A-3 surfacing, stabilized rock, gravel or crushed stone, or the equivalent thereof) provided for a motor vehicle, having an
area not less than the minimum parking stall dimensions established by subsection 15.4.8.6A of this title with access to
public streets. See also subsections 15.4.8.5B1 and B2 of this title.
OFFICIAL MAP: An official policy guide adopted by the city government on the location of streets, recreation areas,
schools, parks, and other municipal facilities.
OPERATOR OF BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT OR INN: The owner of a bed and breakfast establishment
or inn, or the owner's agent. The operator is required to reside in the bed and breakfast establishment or inn, or on
contiguous property.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person, corporation or other legal entity listed as the owner on the records of the county
recorder of deeds.
PARCEL OF LAND: A distinct piece of real property which is assigned a separate tax identification number (permanent
parcel number).
PARKING STRUCTURE: Any partially or wholly roofed or partially or wholly enclosed structure containing more than four
(4) spaces used to park or store motor vehicles including, but not limited to, enclosed, basement, underground and
multitier open parking structures except any structure designed and used as an accessory structure to a single- or twounit
dwelling containing four (4) spaces or less.
PERMANENT SIGN: See definition of Sign, Permanent.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation (including public utilities), association,
joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, state agency, or any other legal entity, its legal representative,
agent or assign.
PLAN: A generalized sketch or map of a tract of land used for preliminary study and discussion.
PLAT: A detailed map prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor suitable for filing with the county recorder
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 625/923
describing a parcel of land.
PLAYGROUPS: Day care centers which receive preschool or school age children, or both, for relatively short periods of
time, not to exceed three (3) hours per day for any child or group of children, and which provide services and programs
designed to meet the recreational, physical, emotional, and developmental needs of the individual children served.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The drawings and documents described in section 15.8.4.4 of this title, indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the planning commission for consideration and tentative approval.
PRESERVATION COMMISSION: The Carbondale preservation commission, Jackson County, Illinois.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building in which a principal use is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main purpose or function that a lot serves or is intended to serve.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of a member of a recognized profession maintained for the conduct of business in
any of the following related categories: architectural, engineering, planning, law, interior design, accounting, insurance,
real estate, travel, medical, dental, optical or any similar type of profession.
PROJECTING SIGN: See definition of Sign, Projecting.
PROPRIETARY INTEREST: The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or any land proposed to be included in a zoning
amendment, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase or lease such land.
PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION: A sewage lift station or an area where facilities are provided for the distribution of
telephone, radio-television communications, water, gas, or electricity.
REAR LOT LINE: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or
triangular shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel with and at the maximum distance from the front
lot line.
REAR YARD: See definition of Yard, Rear.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES: See subsection 15.3.4.3A of this title.
REDEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT: An area or areas designated by the city council which has the
following characteristics: a) said area shall be not less than two (2) contiguous acres, not including, for purposes of
measurement of area only, public streets, public roads and public alleys and public rights of way adjacent to said streets,
roads and alleys; b) said area shall consist in whole or part of locations where improved or vacant lands because of the
presence of one or more of the following factors are detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and welfare:
dilapidation; obsolescence; deterioration; illegal or nonconforming use of existing structures; excessive vacancies;
overcrowding of structures and community facilities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; inadequate
utilities; excessive land coverage; deleterious land use or layout; depreciation of physical maintenance; obsolete platting
of land; diversity of ownership of land; and deterioration of structures or site improvements in neighboring areas adjacent
to vacant lands.
REDEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any development project encompassing a redevelopment or
development project area which is designated by the city council as a project which project furthers the purposes of
chapter 9 of this title.
REDEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: An area of not less than one-half (1/2) contiguous acre, not
including for purposes of measurement of area only, public streets, public roads, public alleys and public rights of way
adjacent to said streets, roads and alleys and located wholly within a redevelopment or development district.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building, together with its accessory buildings and use, where persons regularly assemble
for religious purposes and related social events and which building together with its accessory buildings and uses, is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes.
RIDING STABLE: Any place at which horses, ponies, donkeys, or mules are kept for hire.
RIGHT OF WAY: An area dedicated or purchased by the city for the purpose of providing both vehicular and pedestrian
travelways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 626/923
ROOMING HOUSE: For the purposes of this title:
A. A single-unit dwelling occupied by a permanent resident family and two (2) or more other persons not members of
said family; or
B. A single-unit dwelling occupied by more than two (2) persons who are not related to each other in a family; or
C. A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, one or more of which units is occupied by a permanent
resident family and two (2) or more persons who are not related to the family; or
D. A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, at least one of which is occupied by more than two (2)
persons who are not related to each other in a family; or
E. Residential buildings when a lot contains two (2) or more residential buildings, no more than one of which contains
a "dwelling unit" or "units" as defined in this section and the buildings are occupied in sum by a permanent resident
family and two (2) or more persons who are not members of said family; or
F. Residential buildings when a lot contains two (2) or more residential buildings no more than one of which contains
a "dwelling unit" or "units" as defined in this section and the buildings are occupied in sum by more than two (2) not
related to each other in a family; or
G. Any portion of a building other than as referred to elsewhere in this definition which is occupied by a permanent
family and two (2) or more persons who are not members of the family; or
H. Any portion of a building other than as referred to elsewhere in this definition which is occupied by more than two
(2) persons who are not related to each other in a family.
However, a dormitory, a motel, or hotel shall not be deemed to be a rooming house. For the purposes of this
definition, "to occupy" means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of the premises referred
to and "to occupy" includes "to propose to occupy"; and "permanent resident" means any person or persons who
occupy or have the right to occupy any portion of a dwelling for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
SATELLITE BUSINESS: A business which is part of a business development or shopping center but is located in a
building separate from the main building.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: The signal receiving component of a satellite receiver system, characteristically shaped
like a saucer or dish, designed to receive television broadcasts or other signals from satellites in earth's orbit and other
extraterrestrial sources.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SENIOR CITIZEN: Any person sixty (60) years or older.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING CONVERSION DEVELOPMENT: A residential building or portion of a nonresidential
building which is converted to two (2) or more senior citizen housing conversion units after approval of special use.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING CONVERSION UNIT: A dwelling unit within a senior citizen housing conversion
development which is designed for and occupied by a senior citizen(s).
SERVICE DEPENDENT POPULATION: Those persons, who by reason of mental or physical disability, require
supervision in a quasi-parental relationship but do not require medical or nursing care on site. A service dependent
population shall not include persons for whom such services are a requirement of a sentence upon conviction of a
criminal offense or whose need for such service arises during or immediately following a sentence of incarceration of a
criminal offense nor for the treatment or rehabilitation of drug or alcohol addiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 627/923
SERVICE STATION: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and automobile accessories
may be supplied and dispensed at retail. Unless permitted in a particular zoning district, uses permissible at a service
station do not include major mechanical work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not
in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater
than normally found in service stations. A service station is neither a repair garage nor a body shop. "Major mechanical
work" is defined as any repair requiring the removal of the engine head, the replacement of the transmission, or work
involving the interior of the transmission. Storage of automobiles shall be construed as keeping an automobile on the
premises for in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
SHOPPING CENTER: A grouping of two (2) or more business establishments which: a) share a common on site parking
lot, and b) occupy a single building or occupy separate buildings which are physically attached.
SIDE LOT LINE: Any lot boundary not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
SIDE YARD: See definition of Yard, Side.
SIGN: An object, graphic display or device or part thereof situated outdoors or directly visible from outdoors which is
used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event, or location by any means including words, letters, figures, logos, trademarks, designs, symbols, fixtures,
colors, motion, illumination or projected images. The following shall not be considered to be signs:
A. Flags of nations, an organization of nations, states, cities, fraternal, religious, and civic organizations.
B. Merchandise, pictures, models or products, or services incorporated in a window display.
C. Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers, names
of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations.
D. Legal notices, informational, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies.
E. National, state, religious, fraternal, professional, and civic symbols or crests.
F. Decorations, clearly incidental and customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious
holiday displayed for a period of not more than sixty (60) consecutive days nor more than sixty (60) days in any
one year.
G. Signs painted on or magnetically affixed to vehicles that do not contain changeable letters or copy; and signs
otherwise attached to vehicles that do not contain changeable letters or changeable copy.
SIGN, ABANDONED: A sign which advertises a business no longer being conducted or a product no longer being sold
on the premises upon which the sign is located. An abandoned sign is also an obsolete sign.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion including the following:
Electronic Message Board: Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of electronic, electrical or
electromechanical input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
A. Flashing: A sign which in total or in part has illumination which changes or intermittently flashes on and off, or
gives the appearance of changing, blinking or flashing.
B. Dynamic Display: Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change. This
includes a display that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image
without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This includes displays
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 628/923
that incorporate LED, "digital ink", or any other method of technology that allows the sign face to present a
series of images or displays.
Mechanically Activated: Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a
mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
SIGN, ARCHITECTURAL: An architectural sign shall include all signs which are mounted on, attached to, or painted on
the exterior of a building and have no other supporting members other than those attached to the building. An
architectural sign is not a freestanding sign.
SIGN, BANNER: A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface. A banner sign is also a temporary sign.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the lights either blink on and off randomly or in sequence or have
intermittent variation in intensity or color.
SIGN, FLUSH WALL: A sign mounted on, attached to, or painted on the exterior of a building where the plane of the sign
surface is parallel to and no more than one foot (1') distance from the plane of the building to which it is attached. A flush
wall sign is an "architectural sign".
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground; or a
sign supported by a structure independent of the building, erected primarily for the display and support of the sign. A
freestanding sign is not an architectural sign.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign which has a light source as an integral part of the sign or which has light directed on the
sign from an external position.
SIGN, INFLATABLE: A sign or display which uses air contained within a balloon type device used for the purpose of
drawing attention or advertising a product. Inflatable signs are also considered those signs designed to be set into
motion with the use of a fan or other device moving air through a fabric tube.
SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL: A sign that does not direct attention to a business or to a service or commodity for sale, and
is of a political, religious, or not for profit nature.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A sign not related in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products,
accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. However, for businesses which no longer exist, signs on the
premises which would otherwise conform to the provisions of this title shall not be construed to be off premises signs. Off
premises signs include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry, such as billboards.
SIGN, PERMANENT: A sign assembled or built on site. A banner shall not be considered a permanent sign. (Permanent
signs include those signs advertising the name of a business, a subdivision, an address, etc.)
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign which is not listed below shall be classified as a portable sign:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 629/923
A. Any sign which is permanently mounted in the ground.
B. Any sign which is permanently attached to a building.
C. Any sign painted or magnetically affixed to a vehicle, if it conforms to the shape of the vehicle and is not a
changeable letter or changeable copy sign. The vehicle must be used in the everyday operation of the business.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign which is suspended from or supported solely by a building or a wall of a building, and which
projects from the plane of the building to which it is attached.
SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE: A sign whereon the date, time, and/or temperature are indicated by intermittent
lighting and is limited to the numerals indicating the date, time and/or temperature. These signs are considered to be
freestanding.
SIGN, WINDOW PROMOTIONAL: A temporary sign, viewable from the exterior of a structure, which is attached to a
window for the specific purpose of attracting attention of a passerby to a sale, or to promotional items. By temporary it is
meant that a window promotional sign is not intended for display for more than sixty (60) days. An electrically operated
window promotional sign shall be considered an architectural sign and not a special sign as in section 15.4.10.9 of this
title.
SINGLE-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing only one dwelling unit.
SMALL ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A facility established to supply examination, diagnosis, and prophylactic
services and medical and surgical treatment to dogs, cats, birds, and the like, and equipped to provide housing and
nursing care for them during illness and/or convalescence; providing, however, that such hospital or clinic and any
treatment rooms, cages, pens, or kennels be maintained within a completely enclosed, soundproof building and that
such hospital or clinic be operated in such a way as to project no objectionable odors outside its walls. Small animals
may also be boarded at the small animal hospital or clinic if they are not being treated, as long as they are maintained
within the building meeting the previously listed requirements.
SPECIAL YARD: See definition of Yard, Special.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, the
installation of a pad or foundation for a manufactured home, the erection of temporary forms, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation. In all districts except the flood fringe and floodway districts, permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 630/923
walkways. In the flood fringe and floodway districts, land preparation such as clearing, grading, filling and installation of
streets and/or walkways are included in permanent construction. For those types of construction not requiring a building
permit or located outside the building permit jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale, start of construction shall be
considered to be the same as the "actual start" as described above.
STORY: That portion of a building between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above,
except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor
and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space is more
than six feet (6') above "grade" as defined herein, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor area shall be considered
a story. (See also definitions of Grade and Height, and see section 15.11.3.2 of this chapter.)
STREET CURB LINE: The street curb line shall be located at the farthest extent of the curb structure from the centerline
of the street for those streets with a curb structure and the farthest extent of the street surface from the centerline of the
street for those streets with no curb structure.
STRUCTURE: An assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or use including, among others, buildings,
stadiums, gospel and circus tents reviewing stands, platforms, staging, observation towers, radio towers, water tanks,
trestles, piers, wharves, open sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences, display signs, mobile homes, canopies, and pump
islands. (See also definition of Building.)
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who proposes to or is engaged in developing or improving a tract of land which complies with
the definition of "subdivision" as defined in this section.
SUBDIVISION: Except as provided in section 15.8.3.5 of this title, the division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more
parts, one of which is smaller than five (5) acres in area.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if
the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however,
include either: a) any project for health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Illinois
department of conservation or listed on the national register of historic places.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A structure designed and constructed specifically to support an antenna array, and may
include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, guywire support tower and other similar structures.
TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (TEMPORARY WCF): A WCF to be placed in use for sixty (60)
or fewer days.
THREE-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing three (3) dwelling units.
THROUGH LOT OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: See definition of Lot Types.
TOWER AND/OR ANTENNA USE PERMIT (TAUP): A permit issued by the city specifically for the location, construction,
use and compliance with the development standards of a proposed WCF.
TOWN SQUARE: That area bounded by Illinois Avenue on the west, Washington Street on the east, Jackson Street on
the north, and Main Street on the south. This shall include those properties both within and along this boundary.
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT: A group of two (2) or more single-unit dwellings, all situated in a recorded subdivision
with a distinct, described lot for each of such single-unit dwellings, and each of such single-unit dwellings (townhouse),
whether or not a part of a planned development having the following additional characteristics: a) at least two (2)
separate exterior entrances; and b) the same is either attached to adjacent dwellings by party walls extending from the
footings to the rooflines or, in the alternative, is situated in such close proximity to adjacent dwellings that there is no
visible separation between such dwellings from the footings to the rooflines.
Note: The reason for including separate lots in the definition is that each unit is assumed to be a separate unit
which can, and may very well be, sold separately. There is a difference between townhouses in this context and
certain apartment buildings. Apartment buildings are assumed to be a whole, not likely to be sold as pieces.
TRAILER: Any vehicle without motive power in operation designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn
by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 631/923
TRANSIENT GUEST: A person or family who resides at a place other than his or her usual place of residence for no
more than twenty nine (29) consecutive days in exchange for compensation.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable unit built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel
and recreational purposes.
TRUCK OR EQUIPMENT TERMINAL: Any lot, structure or premises used for the parking or storage of capital
equipment such as trucks, trailers over three-fourths (3/4) ton capacity, or other like equipment.
TWO-UNIT DWELLING: A building containing two (2) dwelling units.
VACATION RENTAL UNIT: An accommodation for transient guests where a residential dwelling is rented for lodging for a
period of time no less than twenty four (24) hours and not to exceed twenty nine (29) consecutive days. Such use may or
may not include an on site manager. For the purposes of this definition, a residential dwelling shall include all housing
types and shall not include group living or other lodging uses.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the strict terms of this title through the zoning board of appeals as provided in subsection
15.6.9.1B of this title.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
except devices moved by human power.
WINDOW PROMOTIONAL SIGN: See definition of Sign, Window Promotional.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF): Any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless
telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, equipment facility and a support
structure to achieve the necessary elevation.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any wireless service as defined in the telecommunications act of 1996, title 47, United
States Code, and as it may be amended, including, but not limited to, facilities for the transmission and reception of
radio, television, or microwave signals used for communication, cellular phone, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and any other wireless services
licensed by the FCC and unlicensed wireless services.
YARD: A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, excepting as
otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, unoccupied other than by driveways, fences, poles,
posts, steps, terraces, walks, walls and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture not exceeding
applicable height and vision obstruction limitations of this title. The depth of a front yard is the least distance between the
front lot line and the building line. In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots
indicates otherwise, a front yard shall be provided on all frontages. Where one of the front yards which would normally
be required on a through lot, is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the administrative official may waive the
requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots. In the case of corner lots, a front
yard of the required depth shall be provided on either front yard, but where possible in accordance with the prevailing
yard pattern; and a second front yard of one-half (1/2) the depth required generally for front yards for the district shall be
required on the other frontage. In the case of corner lots with more than two (2) frontages, the administrative official shall
determine the front yard requirements, subject to the following requirements: a) at least one front yard shall be provided
having the full depth required generally in the district, and b) no other front yard on such lot shall have less than one-half
(1/2) the full depth required generally.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, unoccupied other than by driveways, fences, poles,
posts, steps, terraces, walks, walls, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture not exceeding
applicable height and vision obstruction limitations of this title. The depth of a rear yard is the least distance between the
rear lot line and the building line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the building line and a side lot line, unoccupied other than by driveways, fences, poles,
posts, steps, terraces, walks, walls and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture not exceeding
applicable height and vision obstruction limitations of this title. The width of a side yard is the least distance between the
side lot line and the building line. A side yard extends from the front yard, or from the front lot line where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard or to the rear lot line where no rear yard is required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 632/923
YARD, SPECIAL: A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public street, required to perform the same functions as
a side or rear yard, but adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term "side yard" nor the term "rear
yard" clearly applies. In such cases, the administrative official shall require a yard with minimum dimensions as generally
required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district, determining which shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot
on which the yard is to be located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and location of structures
and buildable areas thereon. (Ord. 2013-20; Ord. 2013-31; Ord. 2014-48; Ord. 2015-7; Ord. 2017-03; Ord. 2017-08)
Title 16
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM; LAKE AND RESERVOIR
REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS
16-1-1: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This Chapter shall apply to the City waterworks and sewerage enterprise operations and regulations. (Ord. 98-42)
16-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
ACT OR THE ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. 1251 et seq.
AGENCY: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation for Cross Connection
Control of the University of Southern California (USC), the American Water Works Association, American National
Standards Institute, American Society of Sanitation Engineers, (ASSE) and certified by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The City Manager of the City of Carbondale or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
ASSESSMENT FEE: The fee charged the user for the privilege of using the water and/or sewer system which was
installed by the City. The purpose of the assessment fee is to pay the fair share of the amortized cost of the existing,
capital improvements, or replacement.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER: A backflow prevention device used as protection against cross-connection where
the device is not subjected to back pressure due to pumps or any other conditions which may cause back pressure. This
device may never have a downstream shut off valve or be installed where it will be in continuous operation for more than
twelve (12) hours.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water
supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system, water from a source such as wells, lakes, orstreams, process fluids, or used
water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which
the water purveyor does not have control.
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW (in MGD): The total measured volume recorded by a properly operating and calibrated sewer
meter in a given period of time divided by the number of days included in said period of time.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flowing back of used, contaminated or polluted water due to a negative gauge or sub6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 633/923
atmospheric pressure in that pipe.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water, foreign liquids, gases or other substances back into the distribution pipes of the potable
water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a
potable water system in accordance with the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The amount of oxygen required for the biochemical degradation of dissolved
organic material to occur under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C)
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil,
waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, ending five feet (5')
outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
CISTERN: An artificial reservoir for storing water.
CITY: The City of Carbondale, Illinois.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COMMERCIAL: Any designated building structure used for the purpose of sale, purchase, barter, wares, merchandise,
or services, the operation or maintenance of office or recreational and amusement enterprises primarily for sale or profit.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any
additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit which the treatment works was designed to treat and remove.
CONNECTION CHARGE: The charge made for the installation of the water or sewer connection and reimburses the City
for expenses ofmaterials, equipment, labor and overhead.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by the presence of any substance to a degree which could
create a health hazard.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems;
one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby
there may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct Cross-Connection: A cross-connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or
unsafe substance.
Indirect Cross-Connection: A cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum
or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system.
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR OR CCCDI: A plumber who holds an Illinois plumbing license
issued in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1), and who has successfully completed both the written
and performance examinations offered by the Agency. These examinations demonstrate an understanding of the
principles of backflow and back siphonage, and the hazard presented to a potable water system; identifying locations
which require installation of cross-connection control devices; identifying, locating, inspecting, testing, maintaining and
repairing cross-connection control methods and devices in-line, as located throughout each system, which connect to a
community public water supply. These requirements are described in 35 Illinois Administrative Code 653.802(d)(1)(D)
through (F), and as thereafter amended.
CURRENT LABOR RATE: The City of Carbondale's water and sewer fund employee's direct labor rate, payroll burden
rate and overhead rate.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Public Works of the City of Carbondale, Illinois. However, "Department" when used
in the context of Chapter 5, Cross-Connection Control of this Title, shall mean the Illinois Department of Public Health.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Department of Public Works for the City of Carbondale or his designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 634/923
DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY: An assembly designed to prevent contamination of the potable water
system due to backflow from the fire protection system containing nontoxic substances.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly which is effective against backflow caused by back pressure and
back siphonage, which is used to protect the potable system from pollutants that would not constitute an actual health
hazard, but might be objectionable to the water supply system. The double check valveassembly is used to isolate
nonhealth hazards.
DRAIN: Any pipe that carries wastewater or water-borne wastes in a building drainage system.
DWELLING: Any building which is wholly or partly used, designed or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
occupants; provided, that "temporary housing" as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used, designed, or intended to be used for living, sleeping, working, and eating.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water
discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the
handling, storage and sale of produce.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device, practice or substance in a water system or its operation resulting from a real
or potential danger to the health and well-being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of
life.
HYDROGEN ION CONCENTRATION: See definition of pH.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant that does not meet the criteria as set forth in the definition of "compatible
pollutant" above.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under
section 307(b) or (c) of the Act1, into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater discharged from industrial, trade, or business processes as distinct from their
employees' domestic waste or waste from sanitary conveniences.
INDUSTRY: Any firm or business primarily concerned with producing a product or by-product for sale or profit.
INFILTRATION: The entrance of storm and/or ground water into the sanitary sewer through cracks, bad joints, or other
flaws in piping and/or manholes.
INFLOW: The entrance of storm and/or ground water into thesanitary sewer through a pipe or manhole.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to carefully and critically examine all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances,
appliances and installation of a plumbing system to maintain compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code,
77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contribute to a
violation of any treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the City's
NPDES permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with
Section 405 of the Act2, or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent State criteria (including those contained
in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the POTW.
LATERAL: The sanitary service line between the main line and the building.
mg/l: Milligrams per liter.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: Any industrial user of the City's waste water disposal system who:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 635/923
A. Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day, or:
B. Has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow in the City's wastewater treatment system, or
C. Has in his wastes "toxic pollutants" as defined pursuant to the City, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or the
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or
air emissions generated by the system.
MAY: "May" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units and\or rooming units.
MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL UNIT: Any structure or structures containing more than one dwelling unit or rooming unit and
where the waterand/or sewer service is metered or recorded by a single meter.
NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination system for discharge of wastewaters
to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to section 402 of PL 92-500.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act3 which
applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD: Any regulation
developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR section 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE: Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations
prescribing a section 307(c)4 categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard
is thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of proposal in the federal register. Where the standard is
promulgated later than one hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a "new source" means any source, the
construction which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for consumption, personal or culinary use.
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or sanitary conveniences as distinct from
wastes from industrial, trade or business process, when such domestic wastes do not exceed a BOD strength of two
hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) or a suspended solids in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250
mg/l).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association,
joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
pH: The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
hydrogen ion concentration.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any
person.Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of private water supply on the premises or from the
main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water
supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building or buildings where a
person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or
private sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic radiological or biological) in water that tends to
degrade its quality so as to constitute, reduce or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for
drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or preparing foods.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 636/923
PRETREATMENT: Treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the joint treatment works.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in
a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the public or a
consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
C. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
D. Cooling waters;
E. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
F. Chemicals in solution suspension;
G. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for
firefighting purposes.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been
shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing within the
city's sanitary sewersystem with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person who legally owns any premises supplied with or in any manner connected to a public
water supply.
PROPERTY OWNER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located upon a user's premises. A building plumbing
system is considered to be a user's water system.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners or abutting projects have equal rights and which is controlled by public
authority.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes, and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public,
including wells, and well structures, intakes, and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and
appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking
or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty
five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the federal water
pollution control act5, as amended, which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that
convey wastewater to the POTW but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility
providing treatment. For the purpose of this title, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the
POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the (city's) POTW.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a minimum of two (2)
independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located
between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASEE standard 1013 and USC manual for RPZ devices. During
normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply
pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include
tightly closing shut off valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ): A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
REGULATORY AGENCY: The state and federal environmental protection agencies.
RELIABLE PAYMENT RECORD: A user has not had services terminated due to nonpayment nor been late in making a
payment in the previous twelve (12) months.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling or part of a dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is rented by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 637/923
the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not the husband or wife, father or mother, son or daughter,
grandparent or grandchild, brother or sister, uncle or aunt, nephew or niece, or cousin of the first degree, of the owner or
operator.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms intended to be used for living or sleeping but not for cooking purposes.
SANITARY BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of the sanitary drainage system inside the walls
of any building which receives the discharge from soil or waste stacks and branches and conveys the same to a point
three feet (3') outside the building walls where it connects with its respective building sewer.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage from domestic and industrial sources and is constructed and
operated by the City on a properly conveyed easement or right of way and is not designed for the admission of storm,
surface and ground waters.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through which water
is supplied to the user.
SERVICE DEPOSIT: A deposit for water and sewer service.
SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER: A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions
and industrial establishments together with such ground, surface, and storm water as may be present.
SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating
sewage.
SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage to meet
State and Federal standards.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage to meet State and
Federal standards.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating to meet State and Federal standards and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
SEWER LATERAL: Those sewer pipes lying in the street, right of way, alley or easement which are used as sanitary
collectors for an individual building or structure.
SEWER MAIN: Those sewers lying in streets, alleys, or rights of way or in easements which are used for collectors for
two (2) or more individual services.
SEWER SERVICE: Service of sewer provided by the City of Carbondale.
SEWER SERVICE USER CHARGE: The current established rate on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes
do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal usage.
SHALL: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the City's wastewater disposal system who:
A. Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day, or
B. Has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow in the City's wastewater treatment system, or
C. Has in his wastes "toxic pollutants" as defined pursuant to section 307 of the act or state of Illinois statutes and
rules, or
D. Is found by the city, Illinois environmental protection agency or the U.S. environmental protection agency (EPA) to
have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 638/923
treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A structure designed for a family to reside. A "family" shall be defined as in section
15.11.4 of this code.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity
of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation or any temporary discharge that has "the potential" to
disrupt the collection system or wastewater treatment process.
SMALL BUSINESS: A commercial or industrial type structure occupied by a business which does not normally use water
for other than personal sanitary purposes where the number of persons employed does not exceed eight (8), and public
restrooms are not provided.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual" issued by the executive office of the president, office of management and budget, 1972.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard
Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Control Federation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A pipe or conduit which is designated to carry storm and surface
waters and drainage, but not sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
SURCHARGE: The assessment in addition to the service charge which is levied on those persons who have been
issued a significant industrial user permit whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration value established
as representative of normal sewage or wastewater.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a user's piping system regarding the location of all connections to
the public water supply and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross
connection control devices and methods located within that user's piping system. The survey must be in written form,
and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Matter that is suspended in a sample and can be retained by a glass fiber filter which is
dried to a constant weight at one hundred three to one hundred five degrees Celsius (103 - 105°C).
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material, not dangerous to
health, may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system.
TRUNK SEWER (Sometimes Called INTERCEPTOR LINE): A sewer that receives the sewage from the collection
system and conveys the sewage to the wastewater treatment plant.
USEPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
USFDA: The United States Food and Drug Administration.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed
through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
USER: The property owner, tenant, occupant, or person in control of any premises supplied or in any manner connected
to a public water supply.
USER TYPES:
Industrial User: Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the
following divisions:
A. Division A - Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
B. Division B - Mining
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 639/923
C. Division D - Manufacturing
D. Division E -Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas And Sanitary Services
E. Division I - Services
Residential Or Commercial Nonindustrial: Any user of the treatment works not classified as an industrial user or
excluded as an industrial user as provided for in this definition.
User Class: The type of user either "residential" or "commercial" (nonindustrial) or "industrial" as defined herein.
VACUUM: Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
WATER CONNECTION: That part of the water distribution system connecting the water main to a point between the
water main and the property line, including the curb stop, meter box, meter, and lid, completely installed and ready for
service to the user's water service pipe.
WATER MAIN: That part of the water distribution system located within street or alley rights of way or nonprivate
easements which is designed to supply more than one water connection.
WATER METER: A device used to measure the consumption of water.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES: The sanitary sewer collection system, including both collector and
interceptor trunk sewer, force mains, lift stations, wastewater treatment plant and appurtenances operated by the City.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT AND/OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: The complete treatment
facilities, including, but not limited to, grit chamber, aeration basins, final clarifiers, tertiary lagoons, chlorination facilities,
buildings, and appurtenances used to treat sanitary and industrial sewage constructed and operated by the City and
includes both the southeast and northwest wastewater treatment plants.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
WATER SERVICE: Service of water supplied by the City of Carbondale.
WATER SERVICE PIPE OR USER SERVICE LINE: The connection between the meter and the user's structure or
property being served.
WATERCOURSE: A channel or conduit in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
WELL: A shaft, hole or other structure used to retrieve water from the ground.
WET INDUSTRY: An entity of any kind which discharges industrial waste in excess of two hundred milligrams per liter
(200 mg/l) of BOD or two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) of SS within any one hour time period of any day.
(Ord. 98-42; 1998 Code; Ord. 2000-04; Ord. 2004-64; Ord. 2013-21)
16-1-3: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be subject to a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
B. Liable To City: Any person who violates any provisions of this title may be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or
damage caused to the city by reason of such violation, notwithstanding the penalties provided hereinabove.
C. Falsifying Information: Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this title or
wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 640/923
or method required under this title, shall be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 98-42)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
16-2-1: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The existing waterworks and the existing sewerage system of the city shall be maintained and operated together as a
combined waterworks and sewerage system. Such combined system shall include the entire waterworks and the entire
sewerage system of the city and all future improvements and extensions thereto. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-2: MOLESTING, DESTROYING, REMOVING, AND THEFT OF SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally molest or destroy any portion of the municipal water or wastewater
system of the city, including the property outside as well as inside the city. No person shall remove, destroy, carry away,
or otherwise tamper with any item attached to the water or sewerage or drainage system of the city. (Ord. 98-42; 1998
Code)
16-2-3: UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS WITH SANITARY SEWER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly to make or cause to be made any connection between a
sanitary sewer and a storm drain or between a storm drain and a sanitary sewer so that the water discharged from the
sanitary sewer or from any toilet, tub, washbasin, sink, or other fixturenormally draining into a sanitary sewer is
discharged into a surface or storm sewer or other sewer made and designed to carry surface water. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-4: DEPTH REQUIRED FOR BUILDING DRAIN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, lay and construct any building sewer from the residence property line to
the sewer main at a depth less than six feet (6') or as deep as grade will permit. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-5: USE OF ANOTHER WATER SUPPLY; CROSS CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
A. Other Water Source: No premises shall be connected to the city water supply through mains supplied by water from
any other source unless the city manager grants permission. The city manager may terminate such permission at any
time. The city manager shall have power to prescribe reasonable regulations for the use of water from another source
on premises having a connection with the city water system.
B. Cross Connection Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, except the city, to cause a connection to be made or
to allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever between the city water supply and any other source of water supply
upon his premises. Every person having any other source of water supply upon his premises is required to make a
user's declaration of nonexistence of cross connection upon a form supplied by the city before he shall be permitted
to obtain or continue to use water from the city water system. city water services shall be discontinued upon any
premises upon which there is found to be a connection between the city water supply and another water supply; and
such service shall not be restored until such cross connection has been discontinued. (Ord. 98-42; 1998 Code)
16-2-6: USE OF GROUND WATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED:
The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply ground water from within the city limits of the city of Carbondale,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 641/923
Illinois, by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at points of withdrawal
by the city of Carbondale, Illinois. (Ord. 2004-74)
16-2-7: USER OF CITY SANITARY SEWER NOT SUPPLIED BY CITY WATER SYSTEM:
When a user of the sanitary sewer system is supplied water from a source other than the city water system, the user
shall furnish access to a water meter which measures water supplied and, in such instances, the city reserves the right
to assure itself at the user's expense of the accuracy of the meter. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-8: ANNEXATION:
No person shall receive water or sewer service from the city without annexation into the city, unless the city has an
agreement with the user for such service. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-9: USE OF CITY WATER AND SEWER SERVICES:
Subject to the conditions contained herein, any user of the water and sewer system of the city who is utilizing only the
sewer system of the city shall also connect to and use the water system of the city under the following conditions:
A. Annex Into City Limits: Within three (3) years after said user is notified by the city that water service is available to
said user, said user shall annex into the city limits and connect to the water system of the city; failure of the user to
petition to annex and connect to the water system of the city as set forth herein shall result in the termination of sewer
service by the city to said user.
B. Failure To Comply; Notice Of Termination: In the event any user of the city's sewer system fails to comply with the
terms of this title, the city shall notify said user of the requirements of this title and shall further notify the user in
writing, utilizing the same address at which utility bills are now sent to said user, that his said use of the sewer system
shall be terminated. Notice shall be mailed to the user's address by first class mail at least two (2) times. The first
notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the termination date of said user, and the second notice shall
be mailed not more than fifteen (15) days, nor less than ten (10) days prior to said termination date.
C. Services Provided By City: The city shall provide water and sewer services as set forth herein within the "jurisdictional
area" of the city as that term is defined by the laws of Illinois. No such services will be provided outside of such area
unless the city has an agreement with such user for the provision of said service. Said agreement shall provide that
said user shall pay its proportionate share of the cost of any service so provided. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-10: CONNECTING WATER SERVICE:
No person, other than an authorized employee of the department, shall turn any water service on or off, except that a
licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing his work or upon receiving a written order from the department.
(Ord. 98-42)
16-2-11: WATER METERS:
A. Meters Required: All premises using water shall be metered andshall have a shutoff valve which will terminate all
water supply to the entire structure. No person, except a department employee, shall break or injure the seal or
change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter. All meters used for the purpose of billing by
the city for water service shall be of a type approved by the department and shall be and remain the property of the
city. Meter installation will be generally located on the property line as approved by the department and according to
standards established by the American Waterworks Association (AWWA).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 642/923
B. Service To More Than One Unit: When the consumption of water and/or sewer service for more than one residential
unit is metered or recorded by a single meter, the service shall be in the name of the property owner or property
manager and the property owner or property manager shall be billed for the services provided the residential units.
C. Service Deposit Requirements: The service deposit requirements shall be the same as the service deposit
requirements established in section 16-3-8 of this title. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-12: ACCESS TO METERS:
A. Right Of Entry: The department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the
department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the department shall at all reasonable
hours, have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing,
removing, or inspecting the same, and no person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful
discharge of his duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such water meter.
B. Consumption Estimated: In the event that the amount of water supplied to a user during any month cannot be
ascertained, the consumption for that month shall be estimated by the finance department. A reasonable estimate
may be based on the consumption history of the account being estimated.
C. Other Factors Used: If the account does not have sufficient consumption history to use as a basis for an estimate, the
finance department may use other factors they deem appropriate to estimate the consumption for the billing period.
(Ord. 98-42)
16-2-13: REIMBURSEMENT FOR DAMAGE TO METERS OR APPURTENANCES:
Any damage which a meter or appurtenance sustains due to the negligent or careless acts or omissions of the owner,
agent, or tenant, to properly secure and protect the meter as well as any damage which may occur due to hot water or
steam backing from a boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city on presentation of a bill therefor. If the
bill is not paid when due, the water may be shut off and shall not be turned back onuntil all charges have been paid to
the city. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-14: METER FAILURE:
If any meter shall fail to register properly, the department shall estimate the consumption and bill accordingly. The meter
will then be replaced. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-15: INACCURATE METERS:
A user may request that his meter be tested. If the user's meter is found to register in excess of two percent (2%),
through no fault, negligence or carelessness of the user, a new meter will be installed and no charge will be made. If the
meter is found to be accurate and in a good working condition, it will be returned to service and a charge of fifty dollars
($50.00) will be made of the requesting user. Whenever possible, the requesting user will witness the test. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-16: HYDRANTS:
No person, except employees of the city in the performance of their duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant, except in
case of emergency, without first securing a written permit from the department. In no case shall any hydrant be opened
or closed except with a hydrant wrench provided by the city. A reasonable charge to be paid in advance shall be made
for said permit based upon the cost of issuance and inspection and the estimated amount of water to be used. All
hydrants installed shall be of the type approved by the department and according to standards established by the
American Waterworks Association (AWWA). (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 643/923
16-2-17: USER SUBSCRIPTION TO WATER OR SEWER ONLY:
When a person requests service of either water only or sewer only, the following procedure shall be followed:
A. Water Only: The user will be billed for water only providing he demonstrates to the satisfaction of the department that
none of the water passing through the meter in question is going into the sanitary sewer system and that all
wastewater is being properly treated in accordance with acceptable sanitary standards as specified by the city,
county and state.
B. Sewer Only: The user will be billed for sewer only based on his water consumption from whatever source it may be
provided. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-18: CITY NOT TO PROVIDE WATER ONLY OR SEWER ONLY:
No user presently being furnished water and sewer service by the city shall be allowed to discontinue either water or
sewer service from the city without also discontinuing the other service. When notice is received by the city of intent to
discontinue either water or sewer service, the city shall immediately notify the user of the requirement that the other
service be discontinued. The city shall discontinue said service within seven (7) days after said notice is given. Further,
the city shall not provide any water or sewer service to a user who is presently receiving either of said services from the
city, and discontinues either of said services, in whole or in part, and subsequent to the effective date of this section,
acquires either water or sewer service from another municipality, sewer district, water district, or other person, company
or corporation. (Ord. 98-42)
16-2-19: EMERGENCY DISCONNECT AND RECONNECT FOR CAUSES UNRELATED TO
NONPAYMENT:
A. Emergency Disconnect Of Service: In the event a user requests an emergency disconnect of his service after regular
working hours as established by the department, the service will be disconnected provided the user agrees in writing
to pay to the department on the next working day a disconnect charge equal to the amount of the minimum call out
provided by current established labor rates. Should the user fail to pay the disconnect charge on the next working
day, his service will not be reconnected until said amount is paid to the department.
B. Reconnection After Hours; Fee: If the user requests the service reconnected after working hours, the reconnection will
be made provided the user agrees in writing to pay to the department on the next working day a reconnection charge
equal to the amount of the minimum call out provided by current established labor rates. Should the user fail to pay
the reconnection charge on the next working day then the user's service will be immediately discontinued and will not
be reconnected until all amounts due the department plus an additional reconnection charge of forty dollars ($40.00)
is paid. The reconnection charge assessed under this section may be waived by the department if the city has not
incurred additional expenses due to the reconnect service. (Ord. 2012-35)
Chapter 3
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES
16-3-1: WATER AND WASTEWATER USER CHARGE; SURCHARGE CALCULATIONS:
The city council hereby adopts the following rates and charges for the sale of water and the provisions of sewer service
to the public, which shall be as follows:
A. Water User Service Charge Rates: There shall be and is hereby established a minimum charge for operation,
maintenance, capital replacement, improvement and debt service, and a basic rate for the consumption of treated
water of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 644/923
1. Effective with bills issued on and after July 1, 2011 and until May 1, 2012, for consumption beginning on June 1,
2011 and to April 1, 2012, a basic residential and commercial user rate of three dollars fifty two cents ($3.52) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumption shall be applied to all users of the city's water system except
for the following: a) the two (2) 10-inch meters currently serving Southern Illinois University and the meters serving
the public water districts to which a basic rate of three dollars eighteen cents ($3.18) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons of water consumption shall apply; b) the water customers who previously were customers of the Crab
Orchard water district shall pay a basic rate of five dollars sixty nine cents ($5.69) per one thousand (1,000) gallons
of water consumption; c) Lakeside water district shall pay three dollars thirty one cents ($3.31) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water consumption; d) South Highway water district shall pay three dollars eighteen cents
($3.18) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumption. The minimum charge is one hundred (100) gallons
per day, times the number of days in the billing period, times the applicable rate for each meter.
2. Effective with bills issued on and after May 1, 2012, for consumption beginning April 1, 2012, a basic residential
and commercial user rate, as shown in the table below, per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumption
shall be applied to all users of the city's water system except for the following: a) the two (2) 10-inch meters
currently serving Southern Illinois University and the meters serving the public water districts to which a basic rate,
as shown in the table below, for bulk water customers per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumption shall
apply; b) the water customers who previously were customers of the Crab Orchard water district shall pay the user
rate as shown in the table below for residential and commercial customers plus the surcharge of one dollar eighty
seven cents ($1.87) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumption as per the intergovernmental
agreement and plan of dissolution as approved by the city council on November 6, 2007. In addition to the charges
for water consumption, each account and/or meter shall pay the monthly customer account charge, as shown in
the table below; this charge shall be added to the monthly bill for water services.
WATER SERVICE CHARGES
Effective Date
(Fiscal Year)
May 1,
2012
(FY2013)
May 1,
2013
(FY2014)
May 1,
2014
(FY2015)
May 1,
2015
(FY2016)
For consumption beginning on April 1,
2012
April 1,
2013
April 1,
2014
April 1,
2015
Monthly residential and commercial customer account
charge
$ 3.24 $ 3.40 $ 3.56 $ 3.76
Residential and commercial rate per 1,000 gallons of water
consumed
3.69 3.87 4.06 4.25
Monthly bulk water customer account charge 324.00 340.00 356.00 376.00
Bulk water rate per 1,000 gallons of water consumed 3.33 3.49 3.66 3.84
B. Wastewater Service Charges: The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic wastewater user charge and an industrial surcharge, if
applicable. The wastewater service charges shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or
sewage meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations:
A 5 day, 20 degree centigrade BOD of <200 mg/l
An SS content of <250 mg/l
1. Wastewater Service Charge: There shall be and is hereby established a minimum charge for operation,
maintenance, replacement, improvement and debt service and a basic rate for the use of and for service supplied
by the wastewater facilities of the city.
a. Effective with bills issued on and after July 1, 2011 and until May 1, 2012, for use beginning on June 1, 2011 and
to April 1, 2012, a basic user rate of three dollars seventy four cents ($3.74) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of
water consumption shall be applied to all users of the city's wastewater facilities. The minimum charge is one
hundred (100) gallons per day times the number of days in the billing period, times the applicable rate for each
meter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 645/923
All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater facilities shall pay a minimum flat rate charge per month
adequate to cover the basic user rate of three dollars seventy four cents ($3.74) per one thousand (1,000)
gallons. The flat rate charge will allow a maximum of five thousand (5,000) gallons per month. In the event use of
the wastewater facilities is determined by the approving authority to be in excess of five thousand (5,000) gallons
per month, the approving authority may require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply
or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied.
b. Effective with bills issued on and after May 1, 2012, for use beginning on April 1, 2012, a basic user rate, as
shown in the table below, per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumption shall be applied to all users of
the city's wastewater facilities. In addition to the charges for wastewater service, each meter and/or account shall
pay the monthly customer account charge, as shown in the table below; this charge shall be added to the
monthly bill for wastewater services.
All nonmetered residential users of the wastewater facilities shall pay a minimum flat rate charge per month
adequate to cover the basic user rate, as shown in the table below, per one thousand (1,000) gallons. The flat
rate charge will allow a maximum of five thousand (5,000) gallons per month. In the event use of the wastewater
facilities is determined by the approving authority to be in excess of five thousand (5,000) gallons per month, the
approving authority may require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer main
to measure the amount of service supplied. In addition to the charges for wastewater service, each nonmetered
residential user of wastewater facilities shall pay the monthly customer account charge, as shown in the table
below; this charge shall be added to the monthly bill for wastewater services.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
Effective Date
(Fiscal Year)
May 1,
2012
(FY2013)
May 1,
2013
(FY2014)
May 1,
2014
(FY2015)
May 1,
2015
(FY2016)
For consumption beginning on April 1,
2012
April 1,
2013
April 1,
2014
April 1,
2015
Monthly customer account charge for wastewater
services
$3.53 $3.97 $4.47 $5.03
Wastewater services rate per 1,000 gallons of water
consumed
4.21 4.74 5.33 6.00
2. Exceptions: No charge shall be assessed for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the
city based on the water that is solely used for either a swimming pool, which does not drain into any public sanitary
sewer system, or an irrigation system, which provides water to the user's lawn and/or garden, provided that:
a. The user having a swimming pool informs the city's finance department that he has filled the swimming pool and
requests a credit against the wastewater service charge based on the volume of water used to fill the swimming
pool. This credit will be allowed only once per calendar year; and
b. The user having an irrigation system uses a water meter and a cross connection control device, separate from
the water meter used for nonirrigation purposes, to record the volume of water used by the irrigation system. For
users of water originating from other than the city water system, they shall, at their own expense, supply, install,
and maintain such separate water meter and a cross connection control device. For users of water originating
from the city water system, they shall contact the public works department to have installed and maintained, at
the user's expense, such water meter and a cross connection control device. The meter for the irrigation system
shall not be placed in such a manner that the consumption is first recorded by a nonirrigation meter.
3. Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users who have been issued a significant industrial user wastewater
discharge permit whose wastewater exceeds the normal concentration for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The
surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes and
shall be computed as follows:
a. Water Sampling: The concentration of water used for computing surcharge shall be established by water
sampling. Water sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be
binding as a basis for surcharges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 646/923
b. Surcharge: A monthly charge based on the cost of establishing, operating, and maintaining the wastewater
treatment plant of the city shall be made monthly on each holder of a significant industrial user discharge permit,
and the rate of such charge shall be as follows:
Surcharge on all wastes with BOD in excess of 200 mg/l
Total BOD rate = $0.10/100 mg/l/1,000 gallons
Surcharge on all wastes with SS in excess of 250 mg/l
Total SS rate = $0.06/100 mg/l/1,000 gallons
The above rates are based upon and are contingent upon the aforementioned cost of establishing, operating,
and maintaining the wastewater treatment plant of the city.
c. Time Of Payment And Method Of Measurement:
(1) A monthly surcharge payment shall be paid to the city within twenty (20) days following submission of the bill
by the city.
(2) The monthly billing shall be based on actual metered wastewater, volume and/or water usage provided;
however, that the city and the user may mutually agree to another method of measurement.
d. Termination Of Services: In the event of the failure of the user to pay any of the surcharges herein stated, or in
the event of any other breach of the terms of this chapter by the user which is not corrected within sixty (60) days
after the notice of breach is given to such user by the city, the city may at its option: 1) terminate service to the
user, and/or 2) enforce the provisions of this chapter by any legal means. Election by the city to terminate service
shall not release the user from its obligation to pay any and all charges and fees accrued to the date of
termination.
C. Late Fees: If the water and/or wastewater user fails to pay the water and/or wastewater bill by the due date stated
within the bill, a five dollar ($5.00) late fee shall be added and collected with the bill, effective for all bills issued on or
after January 1, 2008. (Ord. 2011-54)
16-3-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW FOR COMPUTING USER CHARGES:
The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption
and/or wastewater discharge calculated to the lowest even increments not less than one hundred (100) gallons.
A. Water Meters; Wastewater Meters: If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of
his water from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public
sewer, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters and/or wastewater meters of a type
approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of wastewater discharged to the sanitary system.
B. Devices For Measuring Volume Of Waste: Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by
the city at the cost of the user if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption
records. This includes users where inflow and infiltration contribute significantly to the discharge.
C. Devices For Determining Volume Of Wastewater: Metering devices for determining the volume of wastewater shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the owner of the facility. Following approval and installation, such meters may
not be removed, unless service is canceled, without the consent of the city. Calibration of the meter shall be required
at least annually or at the discretion of the city in accordance with subsection 16-6-6E of this title. (Ord. 98-42)
16-3-3: WHEN WATER AND WASTEWATER CHARGES MAY BE ESTIMATED:
A. Consumption Estimated: In the event that the amount of water supplied to a user during any month cannot be
ascertained, the consumption for that month shall be estimated by the finance department. A reasonable estimate
may be based on the consumption history of the account being estimated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 647/923
B. Other Factors: If the account does not have sufficient consumption history to use as a basis for an estimate, the
finance department may use other factors they deem appropriate to estimate the consumption for the billing period.
(Ord. 98-42)
16-3-4: SALE OF UNTREATED WATER:
A. Authority Of City Manager: The city manager is hereby authorized to negotiate and enter into agreements for the sale
of untreated water pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein.
B. Agreement: The agreement between the city and the purchaser of said untreated water shall provide that the rules
and regulations of the city including, but not limited to, the Illinois plumbing code, which has been adopted by the city
and the rules and regulations of the pollution control board of the state, and the environmental protection act1 of the
state, shall not be violated.
C. Compliance Required: The purchaser of said water shall adhere to an agreement with the city providing that the
above rules, regulations and laws shall be complied with, and that the purchaser shall indemnify and hold harmless
the city from the use of said untreated water purchased from the city. (Ord. 98-42)
16-3-5: ADJUSTMENT OF BILLS:
When any user receives a bill which in the user's opinion is too high, at the user's request, either orally or in writing, the
city shall conduct an investigation to determine if such complaint is accurate. As a result of that investigation the finance
director or a person designated by the finance director is authorized to make the following bill adjustments:
A. Adjustment Made: If the city's investigation has revealed no evidence of negligence or fault on the part of the user and
the finance department has not authorized an adjustment in that user's bill in the past twelve (12) months, then an
adjustment will be made. The amount of the adjustment will be fifty percent (50%) of the charges on the high bill.
However, the adjusted bill will not be less than the user's average bill or a minimum bill, whichever is highest. The
average bill will be the average consumption over a six (6) month period from the user's past twelve (12) month billing
history. If a user does not have a billing history, the finance department may establish an average consumption for
that account.
B. Sewer Only Account:
1. If the user's account is a sewer only account, defined as, connected to the city's public sanitary sewer system and
billed for wastewater service charges, but not connected to the city water supply system and not billed for water
service charges, and the investigation of the user's bill indicates the cause of the high consumption did not direct
the flow of water into the city public sanitary sewer system, then the adjustment procedure may be amended to
adjust the user's high bill to an average bill.
2. If the cause of the high consumption indicates that the flow of water did enter the city's public sanitary sewer
system, then the adjustment procedure identified in subsection A of this section will be used to calculate the
adjustment. The adjustments provided in this section are in addition to any adjustment to a user's account as
provided in this chapter.
C. Results Of Investigation: If the results of the investigation by the department reveal that the user appears negligent or
the user has had an adjustment within the past twelve (12) months, then no adjustment will be made.
D. Installment Agreement: Whether or not an adjustment to the bill is allowed for any of the reasons stated in
subsections A and B of this section, the user may enter into an installment agreement in order to pay the outstanding
charges on their account, if appropriate hardship circumstances exist. The user shall pay not less than ten percent
(10%) of the total amount due with the remainder of the amount paid in equal monthly installments for a period not to
exceed twelve (12) payments. During the installment payment period the user's total payment shall be the installment
payment plus the month's regular bill for services. Failure to meet required monthly installment payments may result
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 648/923
in the obligation of the customer to pay the remaining balance in full before restoration of water service may continue.
The user shall not be allowed to enter into any additional installment arrangements for subsequent monthly service
bills if the user is currently required to make installment payments for a previous monthly bill. Installation agreements
shall be limited to one agreement per account, per year.
E. Fair Adjustments: It is the intent of these adjustment procedures to allow reasonable administrative leeway in order to
make fair adjustments and promote good public relations and user confidence and satisfaction. Excessive
adjustments, both in number and in dollar value, are not intended nor will chronic adjustments be tolerated. (Ord.
2012-35)
16-3-6: DISCONNECT FOR NONPAYMENT:
A. Delinquent Payment: If the outstanding balance of a user's account is not paid within five (5) calendar days of the
payment due date, the user's service shall be discontinued. If the user has entered into and is complying with an
adjusted payment agreement schedule pursuant to subsection 16-3-5D of this chapter, the user's service will not be
disconnected.
B. Notice Sent: Notice of the date that service shall be discontinued shall be sent to users at least five (5) calendar days
prior to the proposed discontinuance date.
C. Request For Bill Adjustment Meeting: If a user requests a bill adjustment meeting prior to the discontinuance date, the
meeting shall be scheduled no sooner than five (5) calendar days after the request has been received by the city
unless the user agrees to an earlier date. Prior to the meeting, the user shall provide the finance department with a
statement of the specific reason(s) why the user claims the bill should be adjusted. After the bill adjustment meeting,
service to the user shall be continued for at least five (5) calendar days after written notice of the department's
decision is either delivered in person or sent by certified mail to the user's last known address as shown by the
finance department records.
D. Authority Of Finance Director: The finance director or a person designated by the finance director shall represent the
city and conduct the bill adjustment meeting. The finance director or person designated by the finance director is
authorized to make any adjustments provided for in section 16-3-5 of this chapter.
E. Restoration Of Service; Reconnect Fee:
1. If service is discontinued, it will not be restored until the outstanding balance plus a forty dollar ($40.00) reconnect
fee has been paid or until the user is in compliance with the user's adjusted payment schedule plus a forty dollar
($40.00) reconnect fee has been paid. If the user fails to request a bill adjustment meeting until after service has
been discontinued, the meeting shall be conducted in accordance with this section but service shall not be restored
until the user has complied with this subsection.
2. Service shall not be discontinued on Fridays or the day before a legal holiday. Restoration of service will be made
only during regular working hours as may be established by the city, except that restoration may be made at times
other than regular working hours provided the user agrees in writing to make the necessary payment of the
outstanding bill on the next working day in addition to a charge equal to the amount of the minimum call out as
provided by current established labor rates. Should the user fail to make the required payments on the next
working day, then the user's service will be immediately discontinued and service will not be reconnected until
payment of the outstanding bill has been made. (Ord. 2012-35)
16-3-7: COLLECTION OF OUTSTANDING ACCOUNT; LIEN ON PROPERTY:
In the event the outstanding balance of payments due to the city for services rendered or water delivered or sewage
accepted for treatment is not paid within sixty (60) days of the due date of billing or in the event said payments are
deemed uncollectible by the finance director on accounts with no activity within the past year then the entire balance
shall be deemed delinquent and the city may take any legal action necessary to collect payments due, including, but not
limited to, causing a lien to be filed against the real estate upon and for which the services or products were supplied. A
lien will be filed against any real estate for which an outstanding balance in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 649/923
due. At least fourteen (14) days prior to a lien being filed, the city shall send notice of the amount due, the proposed date
upon which the lien will be filed, and procedures for obtaining a bill adjustment to the last known address of the person
whose name is on the account and the owner of the property as shown by the tax records on that date by first class mail.
The amount of the lien shall be the amount of the unpaid bills plus reasonable legal fees and shall be filed against said
real estate in the appropriate county office of Jackson County, Illinois. The lien shall be released only upon payment of
the entire amount for which the lien was filed plus filing fees.
The city of Carbondale will review all outstanding account balances. The city reserves the right to close the account for
nonpayment, in which case all delinquent accounts will be turned over to the legal department for further action. (Ord.
2012-35)
16-3-8: SERVICE DEPOSITS:
A. Deposits Required: Service deposits will be required of all water and sewer, water only, and sewer only users and
shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
Meter Size Deposit
5/8 inch or 3/4 inch $100.00
1 inch to less than 2
inch
200.00
2 inch to less than 3
inch
300.00
3 inch and over Equal to the cost of 2 months estimated bill of all services (water, sewer, and refuse)
utility tap and recycling fee
Hydrant Meter
3/4 inch $100.00
3 inch 400.00
B. Held In Escrow: All service deposits will be held in escrow for the purpose of paying the bills of users who fail to meet
their obligations for any address where the user has received service.
C. Deposit Returned: When service is discontinued, the deposit will be returned to the user upon payment of the final bill.
D. Refund: The individual account owner may request the refund of their service deposit provided they have established
a reliable payment record at that location for the past five (5) consecutive years. A reliable payment record is further
defined as "a specific account that has incurred not more than four (4) delinquencies in the five (5) year period".
E. Separate Service Deposit: The individual who moves from one location to another is required to make a separate
service deposit for the new location, unless the owner has established a "reliable record", for five (5) consecutive
years, at a previous address as defined in subsection D of this section. If criteria are met, the service deposit can be
transferred from the old service address to the new service address at the same rate initially deposited. (Ord. 2012-
35)
Chapter 4
TAP OR CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS AND CHARGES
16-4-1: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 650/923
In addition to all other charges for tapping into or connecting with the municipal sanitary sewer system, or the municipal
water system, including inspection of connection, street opening fees and permit fees heretofore established by proper
ordinance of the city, no connection permit shall be issued, nor shall any tap or other connection be installed or made
with or into any municipal sanitary sewer or water system of the city, either directly or indirectly from any lot or tract of
land unless the department shall have certified as follows:
A. Assessment Made: That such lot or tract of land to be thus served by such connection or tap has been assessed for
the cost of construction of the sewer and water main with which the connection is made.
B. Assessment Not Made: If no assessment has been levied for such construction cost, that proceedings for the levying
of such assessment, or assessments, have been or will be commenced in due course.
C. Assessment Paid By Developer: That the cost of construction for said sewer or water main has been paid by the
developer or builder platting said lot or tract of land; this shall not include lots or tracts served by the municipal sewer
system, and which were not a part of the plat or tract developed.
D. Assessment Not Paid By Developer: If no assessment has been levied and no assessment proceedings will be
completed in due course, and the developer or builder of the lot or tract of land has not made payment, a sum equal
to the portion of the cost of construction of the sewer and water main which would be assessable against said lot or
tract shall be paid to the city.
E. Additional Connection Charges: If none of the above conditions can be certified by the department, no permit to tap or
connect to any sanitary sewer or water main shall be issued by the public works director unless the applicant shall
pay an additional connection fee, or fees, which shall be equal to the portion of the cost of the construction and
installation of water and sewer mains, which would be assessable against said lot, tract or parcel to be served by
such tapping or connection pursuant to such permit. Such assessable cost shall include an area as well as front foot
or other assessments and shall be determined by the department upon a comparable basis per foot and area as
similar assessments for such public improvements were determined and levied against other properties in the district
or neighborhood for such public improvement. If no such assessments have previously been levied in such district or
area then such calculation shall be made upon the basis of a uniform charge per foot or per area, which may have or
shall be estimated or levied for similar public improvement most recently constructed, such determination having
regard for construction costs current on the date of such determination. (Ord. 98-42)
16-4-2: TAP OR CONNECTION CHARGES:
The tap or connection charges for new water or sewer service shall be determined by the department and shall not be
less than the cost of the materials used; plus the rental cost of the equipment used; and plus the labor cost. (Ord. 98-42)
16-4-3: PAYMENTS BEFORE TAP OR CONNECTION:
A. Amount Of Deposit: Before any new water or sewer connection is made, the user shall deposit with the finance
department the amount determined in accordance with the following schedule:
1. Water taps:
Meter Size Amount Of Deposit
5/8 inch $ 750.00
1 inch 800.00
2,600.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 651/923
11/2 inch
2 inch 2,800.00
3 inch 3,800.00
4 inch 4,200.00
2. Sewer taps:
Type Of Service Amount Of Deposit
No pavement $ 900.00
Gravel 1,300.00
Oil and chip streets 2,000.00
Concrete/bituminous 2,400.00
Brick 3,000.00
B. All Requirements Met: Prior to installation of service, a zoning certificate for the property to be served must have been
issued by the planning department. If a zoning certificate, annexation agreement, and other required permits have
been issued and the appropriate deposits or installment payments have been made and no other fees or debts are
due, the city will install service.
C. Additional Costs: The user will be billed with any additional costs incurred over and above the tap or connection
charge deposit, or refunded with any excess in tap or connection charge deposit collected. The bill will contain an
itemized listing of materials, rentals, labor, and other charges incurred in making the connection. In those cases
where a second party is acting for the owner, a bill will be sent to the second party and said bill must be paid prior to
the department's turning on the water.
D. Delinquent Payments: If service is provided prior to the payment of any balance due on a tap or connection charge, or
assessment fee, including an installment payment for a tap/connection charge or an assessment fee, and payment is
not made by the payment due date, water and/or sewer service may be discontinued. Service may not be reinstated
until the user has paid the delinquent payments plus the appropriate reconnect fee. (Ord. 2007-26)
E. LEED Certification: Projects that are designed to and receive LEED certification from U.S. green building council
(USGBC) will be eligible for a partial or full refund of water and sewer tap fee paid to the city at the time the water or
sewer connection is made, for a project that is subsequently LEED certified. A refund of fifty percent (50%) of such
connection or tap fees will be granted to projects that receive silver LEED certification, a refund of seventy five
percent (75%) for such projects that receive gold LEED certification, and a refund of one hundred percent (100%) of
such connection and tap fees will be granted to projects that receive platinum LEED certification. In order to receive
the refund, the project developer or owner will be required to provide to the city a copy of the certification, indicating
the level of certification that was achieved on the construction. Documentation of LEED certification must be
submitted to the city within two (2) years of the date the permits were first issued by the city in order to receive the
refund. (Ord. 2010-03)
16-4-4: INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS FOR CONNECTION CHARGES AND ASSESSMENT FEES:
A. Connection Charges: Connection charges may be paid in installments upon payment of not less than ten percent
(10%) of the total amount due with the remainder of the amount paid in no more than twenty four (24) monthly
payments with interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum on the unpaid balance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 652/923
B. Assessment Fees: Assessment fees may be paid in installments upon payment of not less than one percent (1%) of
the total amount due with the remainder of the amount paid in no more than one hundred twenty (120) monthly
payments if the assessment is for water lines and no more than two hundred forty (240) monthly payments if the
assessment is for sewer lines with interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum on the unpaid balance.
C. Installment Arrangements: Installment arrangements must be in writing and approved by the finance director or a
person designated by the finance director.
D. Deposit Required: Upon receipt of the deposit to cover the cost of the tap or upon written approval of an installment
arrangement, as set forth above, the tap or connection will be made by an authorized city employee. (Ord. 98-42)
16-4-5: EXTENSIONS BY PETITION OF WATER MAINS OR COLLECTOR SEWERS:
The owners of property within the city may apply to the city council, by petition, for the extension of water mains or
collector sewers. However, the city council may, on its own initiative and without any such petition having been filed,
proceed to construct such extensions or additions within the city limits. The filing of any such petition shall not make it
mandatory upon the council to proceed with the construction of any such extension or addition. (Ord. 98-42)
16-4-6: EXTENSIONS BY DEVELOPERS OF WATER MAINS OR COLLECTOR SEWERS:
Developers may make extensions of existing city water and sewer lines, providing: a) all requirements of the city's zoning
and subdivision ordinances including easement widths and the department's specifications have been met, b) the
department and the state of Illinois have issued a permit to extend same, and c) the city council has approved the
extension. (Ord. 98-42)
16-4-7: METHODS OF PAYMENT FOR EXTENSIONS:
A. City Extensions; Payments: All extensions made by the city shall be paid for:
1. Out of the surplus utilities revenues, which costs shall be recovered through the collection of assessment fees at
the time adjacent property is connected onto the system; if this method is used, a thorough engineering and
economic analysis shall be made by the department to determine whether the extension is feasible; no physical
extension shall be made without prior approval by the city council; or
2. Through the use of the special assessment method as provided for and governed by Illinois statutes dealing with
the board of local improvements procedures; or
3. Through the use of loan funds from the water and sewer infrastructure development revolving loan fund, as
provided in subsection B of this section.
B. Water And Sewer Infrastructure Development Revolving Loan Fund; Private Developers:
1. There is hereby created a water and sewer infrastructure development revolving loan fund.
2. The owner or developer of subdivided land, which is unimproved with water lines and sanitary sewer lines, may
apply for a loan from the city to finance the extension of water and sanitary sewer lines to such land. The owner or
developer shall complete a loan application and submit such other documents deemed necessary and appropriate
by the city manager.
3. The city manager shall review the application and all documentation submitted by the owner or developer in
determining whether or not to approve the loan. The determination by the city manager shall be based upon
whether the approval of the loan is in the best interests of the city and shall be final.
4. All loans made from the water and sewer infrastructure development revolving loan fund shall be evidenced by a
note and by not less than a second mortgage on the land which is to be improved by the extension of water and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 653/923
sewer lines.
5. As lots within the subdivision, which is improved by the extension of water and sanitary sewer lines, are sold, the
owner or developer shall pay to the city the prorated amount of the water and sewer infrastructure development
loan, plus any accrued interest for the year in which the lot or lots are sold. However, all loans made from the
revolving loan fund shall be paid within one hundred twenty (120) months of the making of the loan for water lines
and two hundred forty (240) months for sanitary sewer lines. Upon payment of the prorated amount of the loan, the
city shall execute and deliver to the owner or developer a release of the mortgage for the lot or lots sold.
6. All loans shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum on the unpaid balance. Interest shall be
paid annually on the anniversary date of the loan.
7. The owner or developer shall also pay any legal fees, recording costs, and other miscellaneous expenses incurred
by the city in administering the loan. (Ord. 98-42)
Chapter 5
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
16-5-1: COMPONENTS OF CITY WATER SYSTEM:
The components of the City water system shall include the public water supply system and the property owner's water
system.
A. Public Water Supply System: The public water supply system shall consist of the water source facilities and the
distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the Director
up to the point where the property owner's water system begins. This is generally at the meter.
B. Property Owner's Water System: The property owner's water system shall include all of the facilities beyond the user's
side of the property line service connection (curbstop/shutoff) used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to the user's points of use. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-2: CONNECTIONS:
Connections between potable water systems and other systems, devices or equipment containing water or other
substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis.
A. There shall be no facility, arrangement, device or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a potable water
supply.
B. All property owners shall prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:
1. All cross-connections are eliminated or approved cross-connection control devices are installed by a CCCDI in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications for control of backflow and back siphonage; and
2. All cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical
testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall be at the property owner's expense. (Ord. 98-
42)
16-5-3: SURVEY, INVESTIGATION AND RECORDS CONTROL PROGRAM:
This Section establishes an active cross-connection survey, investigation and records control program which includes,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 654/923
without limitation, a cross-connection control survey of the distribution system which shall be conducted by the Director
at least every two (2) years.
A. Purpose: The purpose of this survey is to compile and update an inventory of devices, and to determine if potential or
actual cross-connections exist.
B. Collection Of Information: The survey shall consist of a pencil and paper collection of information conducted by
telephone, mail or personal visit to the owner, tenant, occupant or manager of a specific property. The survey shall be
completed and mailed back to the Director within ten (10) days of receipt.
C. Inspection Of Premises: All property owner's premises shall, upon reasonable notice and at reasonable times, be
open to the Director for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections, testing, repair and
maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the property owner's premises.
D. Plumber Inspection; Owner Responsibility: All property owners shall arrange on-site inspection by a licensed plumber
of water use practices on the premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to the
water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the private or public potable water
system. These surveys shall be at the property owner's expense. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-4: APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE REQUIRED:
An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a property owner's water system,
where, in the judgment of an Agency certified CCCDI, an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system
exists, including without limitation:
A. Auxiliary Water Supply: Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an
additionalsource by the Director, and the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;
B. Presence Of Hazardous Substance: Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water supply system, including without limitation, premises having sources or systems
containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
Director's sanitary control;
C. Intricate Internal Plumbing Connections: Premises having internal plumbing connections that, in the Director's
judgment, are too intricate to determine whether or not cross-connections exist;
D. Limited Access Properties: Premises, where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it
is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey; and
E. History Of Cross-Connections: Premises where cross-connections have been previously established or reestablished.
(Ord. 98-42)
16-5-5: INSTALLATION OF APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE:
Unless an Agency certified CCCDI determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system
exists, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of this Chapter on
each service line to a property owner's water system serving, without limitation, facilities including:
A. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 655/923
B. Laboratories;
C. Piers, docks, and waterfront facilities;
D. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or water pumping stations;
E. Food or beverage processing and/or dispensing equipment;
F. Chemical plants;
G. Metal plating industries;
H. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
I. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
J. Car washes; and
K. Microbreweries. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-6: LEVEL OF PROTECTION:
Based on the degree of hazard to the water system, an appropriate level of protection shall be required, including,
without limitation:
A. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard.
B. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device
shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a
system or health hazard.
C. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved double detector check valve assembly backflow
prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could
cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-7: FIRE SAFETY SYSTEMS:
Fire safety systems shall be equipped with a double detector check valve assembly located at the point of connection
between the fire safety system and the water supply line to protect the water supply against backflow and back
siphonage except under the conditions described in subsection A below:
A. Where Safer System Already In Place: A fixed proper air gap with a break tank or other storage vessel or a reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer shall be installed at the point of connection between the fire safety system and
the water supply service line to protect the water supply against backflow and back siphonage when the fire safety
system contains additives such as antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals. The RPZ assembly may be located at
the point of connection to the section of the system containing such additives when the connection to the water
supply is protected by a double detector valve assembly; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 656/923
B. Standard Use: Fire Department connections served solely by a water system without any nonpotable connections or
chemical additives shall require installation of a double detector check valve assembly. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-8: APPROVAL OF CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES:
Only cross-connection control devices which are approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of
the University of Southern California, the American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering
and the American National Standards Institute and certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance
with applicable industry specifications shall meet the requirements of this Chapter.
A. Installation Standards: Installation of approved devices shall be made only as specified by the Research Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American
Society of Sanitary Engineers, and the American National Standards Institute.
B. Maintenance: Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. The
manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on the premises.
C. Approved Devices: In addition to the requirements contained in this Section, only cross-connection control devices
which meet the Illinois Plumbing Code for cross-connection control devices shall be approved for use. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-9: INSTALLATION OF APPROVED DEVICES:
Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35 Illinois Administrative Code 653.802, as amended,
and only as specified by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California
or applicable industry specifications. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-10: REQUIRED MAINTENANCE:
Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance
manual shall be available on site. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-11: APPROVED CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES:
Approved cross-connection control devices include:
A. Fixed Proper Air Gap: A fixed proper air gap which shall be used whenever technically possible.
B. Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers: Atmospheric vacuum breakers which may be installed subject to the following
conditions:
1. An atmospheric vacuum breaker shall not be installed where back pressure may occur;
2. An atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed at the highest point in the water line and after the last control
valve before the point of discharge and a minimum of six inches (6") above the flood level rim of the receptacle;
3. An atmospheric vacuum breaker shall not be used for installations where the substance in the container
receivingwater is lethal or toxic. Examples of acceptable installations include, without limitation:
a. Surface wash piping for a gravity filter;
b. Solution tanks of gravimetric dry chemical feeders;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 657/923
c. Outlets with hose attachments; and
d. Receptacles with a low level inlet where the substance contained is nontoxic such as food or beverages.
C. Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventer: Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers (RPZ) may be
installed in accordance with the specifications of this Chapter, subject to the following conditions:
1. Installation:
a. Units shall be accessible for maintenance and testing;
b. Minimum clearances recommended by the manufacturer shall be used:
c. Relief ports shall not be plugged. A drain of sufficient size to accommodate the RPZ water discharge rate of flow
shall be provided and shall remain free flowing under all conditions;
d. A collection system with an air gap under the relief port drain shall be installed with ceiling level units; and
e. No reduction shall be made in the size of the relief port drain.
2. Bypasses: A second backflow preventer shall be installed parallel to the first if there is only one service line and
the water service cannot be interrupted. Bypass lines without approved backflow preventers shall not be installed.
3. Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventers: Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be used
for installations where a fixed proper air gap is not possible, including, without limitation:
a. The water line used to provide makeup water for chemical feeders in a water treatment plant;
b. Receptacles with a low level inlet where the contents are nontoxic such as food or beverages; and
c. Receptacles or vessels which can subject the water supply line to back pressure.
4. Water Service Lines: Water service lines which connect a community water supply to industrial or commercial
establishments shall include either a reduced pressure principle backflowpreventer or a fixed proper air gap with
repumping if those establishments constitute a hazard to the water supply due to the nature of chemicals or other
material handled within the facility. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-12: INSTANTANEOUS WATER HEATERS AND WATER STORAGE HEATERS:
Instantaneous water heaters and water storage heaters using shell and tube design hot water boiler-fire heat exchangers
shall be acceptable for heating water for domestic use under the following conditions:
A. Acceptable Chemical Additives: Chemical additives to control corrosion and scale of the hot water boiler system shall
not contain toxic chemicals (e.g., chromate or nitrite based inhibitors).
1. Chemicals approved by the USEPA or USFDA which will not break down to harmful substances in the system may
be applied for scale and corrosion control in public water supplies (e.g., food grade caustic soda, sodium silicate,
sodium polyphosphate).
2. The addition of sodium sulfite as an oxygen scavenger in hot water boilers is acceptable when approved double
check-valves in compliance with 35 Illinois Administrative Code section 653.801(d), as amended, are installed.
B. Double-Check Valve Assembly: A double-check valve assembly, in compliance with 35 Illinois Administrative Code
section 653.801(d), as amended, shall be installed in the cold water inlet piping of the heat exchanger.
1. The unit shall be tested annually and required service performed within fifteen (15) days; and
2. A maintenance log shall be maintained and a copy submitted to the Director within ten (10) days of inspection,
repair, or change to include information specified in 35 Illinois Administrative Code section 653.802(e)(4), as
amended. The log shall be submitted to the Director within ten (10) days of testing or maintenance. (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 658/923
16-5-13: RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER, TENANT OR OCCUPANT:
A. Inspection And Maintenance Of Devices: The property owner, tenant or occupant of any premises where backflow
prevention devices required by this Chapter are installed shall have all devices inspected, tested, maintained and
repaired in accordance with the following schedule, or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified
in manufacturer's instructions. All such inspections, maintenance, repairs and replacement costs shall be the sole
expense of the property owner.
1. Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at thetime of installation and at least annually thereafter.
2. Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at the time of installation and at least annually
thereafter, and any required services shall be performed within fifteen (15) days.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested upon installation and at least annually or
more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. Any required service shall be performed within five (5) days.
B. Testing: Testing shall be performed by a CCCDI certified by the Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of
the CCCDI's certification shall be in writing and filed with the City prior to testing.
C. Tag Attached: Each device shall have a legible tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection,
name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. Maintenance Log: A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
1. The date of each test or visual inspection;
2. The name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection;
3. The test results;
4. The repairs or servicing required;
5. The repairs and date completed; and
6. The service performed and date completed.
E. Backflow Prevention Devices: Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or
otherwise made ineffective without the Director's specific authorization.
F. Booster Pump: Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump
shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the
service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less. The property owner, the tenant or the
occupant shall maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working order and shall certify to the Director, at
least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 98-42)
16-5-14: VIOLATION; PROCEDURE:
A. Notice: The Director shall notify the owner, tenant or occupant of a building or premises where a violation of
thisSection is determined to exist.
B. Abatement: The Director shall set a reasonable time, based on the level of hazard to health, for the owner, tenant or
occupant to have the violation removed or corrected.
C. Service Discontinued: Upon the failure of the property owner, tenant or occupant to have the defect corrected by the
end of the specified time period the Director may order water service to the building or premises to be disconnected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 659/923
D. Reinstatement Of Service: Water service shall not be reinstated until all violations of this Section have been removed
or corrected and fees for reinstatement of service have been paid to the Finance Department. (Ord. 98-42)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
16-6-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Unlawful Acts, Conditions:
1. Objectional Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.
2. Sewage Or Other Polluted Waters: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the jurisdiction of
the City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
3. Privy, Cesspool Or Other Facility: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
B. Connection To Public Sewer Required:
1. The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or any other
purpose situated within the City and abutting on any public way shall be required at their expense to connect all
sanitary facilities therein, existing or new, directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of any commercial, industrial, or multi-family dwelling or within
three hundred feet (300') of the property lineof other residential dwellings.
2. If the owner of any area annexed to the City which had a commercial, industrial, residential or any other use, has a
private sewage disposal system at the date of annexation to the City, and complies with the provisions of the
Environmental Protection Act of the State or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder or the ordinances of
either the City or the County, regulating private sewage disposal systems, such owner shall not be required to
connect sanitary facilities to the public sewage system for a period not to exceed three (3) years after the date of
annexation. The three (3) year requirement to connect to the public sewage system after annexation set forth
hereinabove may be extended up to an additional two (2) years by the City Manager, if it is deemed to be in the
best interests of the City. The City Manager shall advise the Council of any extensions granted.
3. If, however, such a private sewage system should fail to meet any of the above listed requirements, the structures
in question shall be connected with the public sewerage system, at the owner's expense, after receiving the
required ninety (90) day notice; provided, that the public sewage system is available. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Application; County Standards: Where the City sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 16-6-1
of this Chapter, the sanitary facilities shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
provisions of the Jackson County Sewage Disposal Systems Ordinance within the jurisdiction of the City at the
owner's or developer's expense.
B. Private System Abandoned: At such time as the City sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection D of this Section, connection shall be made to the City sewer in
compliance with this Title, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 660/923
C. Owner Responsibility: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times and at no expense to the City.
D. Limited Time To Correct: When the City sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said
sewer within sixty (60) days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean
bank-run gravel or dirt in compliance with the laws of the State or the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Authority To Make Connection Or Tap: No person other than an authorized City employee or contractor approved by
the Public Works Director shall make any tap to, connection with or opening into, alter or disturb the public sewer
system of the City.
B. Installation And Connection: All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
C. Separate Sewer For Each Building; Exception:
1. A separate and independent sanitary sewer shall be provided to each building. Should a sanitary sewer main line
not be available to additional buildings placed on the lot, then the additional building may be attached to the
existing lateral line after approval of the Department of Public Works and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
2. However, if the ownership of buildings on the same lot becomes separated so that the buildings are no longer
under common ownership, the buildings shall then be provided with separate sanitary sewers by their respective
owners. In lieu of providing separate sanitary sewers for each building, the owners may enter into a written
agreement providing that a common sanitary sewer will be maintained. A copy of that agreement shall be given to
the City.
D. Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are
found, or examined and tested by the Public Works Director, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.
E. Compliance With Federal Standards: Disposal into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharged in
compliance with Federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act or more stringent State or City
standards.
F. Building Sewer Permits:
1. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: a) for residential and commercial service, and b) for
service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the approving authority.
2. A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if the approving authority
determines that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations, and wastewater treatment
facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(Ord. 98-42)
16-6-4: CONNECTION PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS:
A. Code Compliance: The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and back-filling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations or policies of the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 661/923
B. Depth Of Sewer Connection: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought into the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer.
C. Tight Connection; Approval Required: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations or policies of the City. All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the approving authority before installation.
D. Notice To Inspect: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the approving authority when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
E. Storm Water Excluded: No person shall connect roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or
other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. All such existing connections shall be terminated within thirty (30) days
after notice by the City to so terminate.
F. Protection Of Public: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-5: DISCHARGE INTO PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. Storm Water, Ground Water, Other Subsurface Drainage: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, to any sanitary sewer.
B. Drainage Into Storm Sewers: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as
are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority.
Uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted process waters shall be discharged, on approval ofthe approving
authority to a storm sewer, sanitary sewer or natural outlet.
C. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
5. Any treated or untreated substance from any cleanup site of leaking underground storage tanks.
D. Other Harmful Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the approving authority that such wastes can harm
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 662/923
either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming this opinion as to the acceptability
of these wastes, the approving authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The following substances are included in the provisions of this subsection:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit or sixty five degrees
Celsius (150°F or 65°C).
2. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100)
mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous attemperatures between thirty two degrees
and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (32° and 150° F)(0° and 65°C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor greater than three-fourths (3/4) horsepower shall be subject to the review and approval of the
approving authority.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether
neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for
such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or objectionable odor producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the approving authority, as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of long half-life (over 100 days) without special permit. The radioactive isotopes
I131 and P31 used at hospitals are not prohibited if properly diluted at the source.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
9. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, including but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate.
b. Excessive discoloration, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the sewage treatment works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs".
10. Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage
treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge
to the receiving waters.
11. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues,
sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation or reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no
case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act: any criteria, guidelines, or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended, the
Clean Air Act, as amended, the Toxic Substances Control Act, as amended, or State criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.
12. Except as may be approved by special agreement with the Public Works Director, no person shall discharge
wastewater to the sewage works containing in excess of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 663/923
0.25 mg/l arsenic 0.3 mg/l nickel
0.02 mg/l cadmium 1.0 mg/l selenium
0.3 mg/l chromium-hexavalent 0.1 mg/l silver
1.0 mg/l chromium-trivalent 0.7 mg/l zinc
0.3 mg/l copper 0.025 mg/l cyanide
0.1 mg/l lead 0.0005 mg/l mercury
(Ord. 98-42)
16-6-6: ALTERNATE METHODS OF TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL:
A. Jurisdiction Of Approving Authority: If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection 16-6-
5D of this Chapter; and which in the judgment of the approving authority may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the approving authority may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
3. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or
sewer charges under the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Review And Approval: If the approving authority permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the approving authority,
and subject tothe requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
C. Grease Traps And Interceptors: Grease traps, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
approving authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the approving authority, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
D. Maintenance Of Facilities: Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
E. Installation Of Meter And Sampler: Each industry shall install, within one hundred twenty (120) days after having
received notice from the City, a sewage meter and an automatic proportional sampler approved by the approving
authority. The meter shall be used to measure the volume, and the sampler shall be used to sample waste discharge
into the sewer from the industry. The industry shall operate the meter and shall maintain records of such volumes.
The meter must be in good repair and accurate in measurement. The City may inspect the meter for accuracy at any
time and may require necessary repairs or replacement at the cost of the industry.
F. Metering And Sampling Results; Conflict Resolution: The records of each industry required to install a meter shall be
available to the City's duly authorized representatives for inspection at any reasonable time. Metering and sampling
of the industry's waste may also be accomplished by the City's authorized representative. All samples taken by the
City shall be divided with the industry if the industry so requests. The above described procedure shall not preclude
the industry from collecting samples and presenting the quantities in analysis of said samples to the City for its
consideration. The City Engineer shall first resolve any question relative to the results of the sampling and testing. If
the industry does not accept the decision of the City, it shall notify the City in writing. If the City and the industry are
unable to resolve the variations in test results, then the industry shall, in writing, submit a request to the City Manager
to have the matter resolved. The City Manager and a representative of the industry shall submit the test variances to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 664/923
a mutually agreeable laboratory for further tests, and the conclusions by that laboratory shall be accepted as final by
each party. The cost of such testing by the laboratory shall be paid equally by the parties hereto. Failure of the
industry to give written notice of its objection to the City's test results, or to the decision by the City Engineer within
ten (10) days after the receipt of such test results, or to the decisions by the City, shall constitute acceptance by the
industry of the City's test results or the City Engineer'sdecision.
G. City To Maintain Records: Similarly, the City shall maintain acceptable meters and proportional sampling to measure
the volume and composition of wastes treated by the City, and the City shall maintain records of such volume and
composition. These records shall be available for inspection by the industry's authorized representatives at any
reasonable time. Likewise, the industry shall have reciprocity with regard to the City sampling and analyzing of
volume and composition of wastes treated by the City.
H. Pretreatment Facilities:
1. No industry shall deposit into the sanitary sewer system of the City any material which will clog or substantially
impede the flow in said sanitary sewer or impede the operations of the wastewater treatment plant. Each industry
shall be subject to the enforcement by the City of all existing City sewer ordinances in effect at all times. Each
industry shall further provide, install, and maintain screening facilities approved by the City Engineer for the
removal of solids from its wastes so that such materials going into the sanitary sewer are maintained at a minimum
size level to prevent undue problems in the water pollution control facilities or plant of the City. This screening shall
be required upon findings of the need for such screening by the City Engineer. The industry shall install said
screens at its own cost upon receipt of written notice by the City Engineer to the industry.
2. Whenever the waste from any industry is found to interfere with the treatment process of the wastewater treatment
plant of the City, written notice shall be given by the City Engineer to the industry, and the industry shall be required
to construct a waste treatment system and to pretreat all waste before it is discharged into the City sanitary sewer
system. Pretreatment shall be sufficient to reduce the strength or the characteristics of the wastes to such a degree
that it will not interfere with the aerobic processes of the water pollution control plant of the City. Such notice shall
be served upon the industry and shall set a date and time for compliance with this Section.
3. It shall be a prima facie case that a waste interference with the treatment processes of the wastewater treatment
plant exists if the waste contains acidity below pH 5.5, or the waste contains alkalinity of above pH 9.5, or any grab
sample taken at any time of any day has noticeable materials or constituents that are detrimental to the processes
existing in the wastewater treatment plant as determined by the City Engineer.
4. Plans, specifications, and design data for such pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the
Public Works Director and by the Environmental Protection Agency of the State before any construction work on
the pretreatment system shall begin. Construction, maintenance, and operation of said pretreatment facilities shall
be the sole responsibility of theindustry and shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating
condition by the industry at its expense. All pretreatment facilities constructed under the provision of this Title shall
conform to Federal pretreatment standards as specified in 40 CFR 403, as amended.
I. Control Manhole Required: When required by the City, any industry served by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole for purposes of metering and sampling in the building sewer. Such
manhole shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Public Works Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and maintained by him at his
expense in a safe and accessible manner at all times. In the event that the Public Works Director does not require the
construction of a control manhole on the property of the industry, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the City sanitary sewer system to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
J. BOD Or SS: The average five (5) day BOD or the SS of the waste shall not exceed two hundred (200) mg/l and two
hundred fifty (250) mg/l respectively, in analysis described herein.
K. Standards And Methods Used: All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of water and wastes of
which reference is made in this Title shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods or Methods for
Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, USEPA, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewer works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 665/923
particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and SS analyses
are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab
samples.
L. Special Agreements: No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment thereof by the industrial concern, provided
such payments are in accordance with any agreement between the City and the user. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-7: RATES BASED UPON TYPE OF SEWAGE IN ADDITION TO VOLUME:
A. Rate Adjustment Procedure; Requests Limited: In order that therates and charges may be equitably adjusted to the
service rendered, the City shall have the right to base its charges not only on volume, but also on the strength and
character of the sewage and wastes of which it is required to treat and dispose. The approving authority shall have
the right to measure and determine the strength and content of all sewage and wastes discharged, either directly or
indirectly, into the City's sanitary sewerage system, in such manner and by such method as it may deem practicable
in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper charge. After
charges have been established, their reconsideration may be requested. Analysis of composite samples of the
sewage and wastes certified by a registered engineer or a qualified graduate chemist may be submitted in support of
such request. The City may then adjust the charges to the current established rates required by such analysis or may
recheck the findings by additional sampling and analysis. Requests for rate adjustments may be submitted no more
than once every twelve (12) months.
B. Applicable Standards: The determination of suspended solids and five (5) day biological oxygen demand contained in
the waste shall be in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage
and Industrial Wastes, or Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, USEPA, as written by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial
Wastes Association. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. Right Of Entry: The City and its authorized employees shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Safety Rules Observed: While performing the necessary work on private properties pursuant to this Chapter, the City
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.
C. Entry Through Easement: The City and its duly authorized employees shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-9: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
A. Protection: If the approving authority deems necessary, each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
ofprohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Code. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans
showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review, and
shall be approved by the City before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of this Code. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to
immediately telephone and notify the publicly-owned treatment works of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 666/923
B. Written Notice: Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the approving authority
a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this
Chapter or other applicable law.
C. Notice To Employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees
who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. 98-42)
16-6-10: SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS:
A. Wastewater Discharges: It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge, without a City significant
industrial user wastewater discharge permit, to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the City, and/or to the POTW, any wastewater except as authorized by the approving authority in accordance with
the provisions of this Code.
B. General Permits: All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge to the POTW shall obtain a
wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging to the POTW. All existing significant industrial users
connected to or discharging to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this Section.
C. Permit; Fee: Application users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the City,
anapplication in the form prescribed by the City, and accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Existing users
shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Section, and
proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or discharging to the POTW. In
support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
1. Name, address and location (if different from the address);
2. SIC number, according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
3. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those mentioned in this Code as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 204(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as
amended;
4. Time and duration of discharge;
5. Average daily and three (3) minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any;
6. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;
7. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
discharged;
8. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any City, State,
or Federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
9. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule
by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall be no later
than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply
to this schedule:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 667/923
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completingconstruction, etc.).
b. No increment referred to in subsection C9a of this Section shall exceed nine (9) months.
c. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user
shall submit a progress report to the approving authority including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this
increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to
the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to
the approving authority.
10. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;
11. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
12. Number and type of employees, hours of operation of the plant, and proposed or actual hours of operation of
pretreatment system;
13. Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and
conditions provided herein.
D. Permit Modifications: Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the
wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical
pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
this Section, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing
wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the approving authority within one hundred eighty (180) days after the
promulgation of an applicable Federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections C8
and C9 of this Section.
E. Permit Conditions: Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Code and all other
applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. Permits may contain the following:
1. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
2. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
4. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
5. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number,
types and standards for tests and reporting schedule;
6. Compliance schedules;
7. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see Section 16-6-11 of this Chapter);
8. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the City,
and affording City access thereto;
9. Requirements for notification of the City or any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system.
10. Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per subsection 16-6-5D9d of this Chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 668/923
11. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this Title;
F. Permits Duration: Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be
issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The
terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the City during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements, as identified in Section 16-6-6 of this Chapter are modified, or other just cause exists. The
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
G. Permit Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new
or changed operation without the prior approval of the City. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the
terms and conditions ofthe existing permit.
H. Application For Permit: Application for permit shall be submitted by the user to the Public Works Director on the form
provided by the City. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-11: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE:
A. Compliance Date Report: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW,
any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the approving authority a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited
by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the
user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by
a qualified registered professional engineer.
B. Periodic Compliance Reports.
1. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the
case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the approving
authority during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard
or by the approving authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are
limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during
the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsection A of this Section. At the discretion of
the approving authority and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles,
etc., the approving authority may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
2. The approving authority may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate.
In such cases, the report required by subsection B1 of this Section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated
by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and
concentration, or production and mass, where requested by the approving authority, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequencyof monitoring shall be prescribed in the
applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the regulatory agency pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, part 186, and amendments
thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the regulatory agency. Sampling shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques approved by the regulatory agency.
Where 40 CFR, part 186 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling
and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication Sampling and
Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments
thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the regulatory agency. (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 669/923
16-6-12: ENFORCEMENT AND SUSPENSION OF TREATMENT AND DISCHARGE PERMIT:
A. Harmful Discharges:
1. The City may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when, in the
opinion of the City, such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes
interference to the POTW or causes the City to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
2. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit
shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure or refusal to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the City shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The City
shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the cause
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the City
within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence.
B. Revocation Of Permit: Any user who violates the following conditions of this Code, or applicable State and Federal
regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this Section:
1. Failure of a user to report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
2. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
4. Violation of conditions of the permit.
C. Notification Of Violation: If any user violates this Code, wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or
requirements contained herein, the City may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the
violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, the user shall submit a plan for the satisfactory correction of
the violation to the City.
D. Show Cause Hearing:
1. The City may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause
before the City Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City Council regarding the violation, the reasons
why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the
City Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing.
2. The City Council may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any
officer or employee of the Department of Water and Sewer Services to:
a. Issue in the name of the City Council a notice of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses
and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
b. Take the evidence;
c. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the City Council for action thereon.
3. At any hearing held pursuant to this Section, testimony must be given under oath and recorded. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
4. After reviewing the evidence, the City Council may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge which
directs, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on its existing treatment facilities, and devices or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 670/923
other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate
may be issued.
E. Legal Action: If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the City's wastewater disposal
system contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, Federal or State pretreatment requirements, or any order of the
City, the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Circuit Court of this
County. (Ord. 98-42)
16-6-13: SEWER BACKUP POLICY:
A. Existence Of Blockage: Upon notification of a sewer backup, city personnel will check the sewer main for blockage. If
a blockage exists in the sewer main, it will be cleaned by the city.
B. Responsibility Of Owner: If no blockage exists in the sewer main, it is the user's responsibility to check and clean the
sewer between the building and the sewer main (including the right of way area if the blockage was not caused by
lack of maintenance by the city), and to be in full compliance with section 4-2-1 of this code requiring a sanitary
lateral check valve.
C. Compensation: No compensation for damages and cleanup costs will be made if the blockage is located between the
house and the sewer main, unless the blockage is on public right of way and is caused by the negligent acts of the
city. If the blockage caused damage inside the building, the property owner shall take immediate action to mitigate
damages, including the contact of a janitorial service to clean up the premises to ensure that no further damage
occurs.
D. Request For Compensation: Compensation for damages occurring inside the property owner's building may be made
if the blockage is determined to be the responsibility of the city.
1. Requests for compensation should be made as follows: send a description of the damages, along with receipts for
cleanup costs, the date of the incident, your name, address and daytime telephone number to: City Of Carbondale,
P.O. Box 2047, Carbondale, IL 62902-2047, Attention: Purchasing/risk manager. This information will be forwarded
to the city's general liability insurance carrier.
2. In the event the insurance carrier denies the claim and the requesting party desires to pursue the claim against the
city: The purchasing specialist will prepare a report on the facts of the claim for presentation to the city manager
who will make a determination regarding a possible settlement. The person requesting compensation will be
notified of this decision in writing at the address provided to the purchasing/risk manager. (Ord. 2012-29)
16-6-14: USE OF SEWER JET:
A. Problem In User's Lateral: The utility maintenance crew will respond to sewer backup calls during regular working
hours and there will be no charge for determining if the problem exists in the city's sewer main or the user's lateral. If
it is determined the problem is located in the user's lateral, the city utility maintenance crew may use the sewer jet to
clean the user's lateral provided: 1) the user requests such service and signs a waiver holding the city harmless for
any damage caused by using the sewer jet in the user's lateral, 2) the user has a usable outside cleanout on their
lateral, and 3) the user agrees to pay the city's standard hourly rate for labor and equipment.
B. Call After Hours: If the utility maintenance crew responds to a sewer backup call after regular working hours and it is
determined the problem is located in the user's lateral, the user will be charged an amount equal to the minimum call
out as provided by established current labor rates and the current equipment rate. The utility maintenance crew may
use the sewer jet to clean the user's lateral provided: 1) the user requests such service and signs a waiver holding
the city harmless for any damage caused by using the sewer jet on the user's lateral, 2) the user has a usable
outside cleanout on their lateral, and 3) the user agrees to pay an amount equal to the minimum call out as provided
by established current labor rates. (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 671/923
Chapter 7
WATER EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
16-7-1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all persons using water both in and outside of the City, and regardless of
whether any person using water shall have a contract for water service with the City. (Ord. 98-42)
16-7-2: OCCURRENCE OF WATER EMERGENCY:
A water emergency arises when the Cedar Lake level falls below elevation 417.0 or such other mechanical breakdown
or malfunction of the treatment or distribution system which would make the available supply of potable water in short
supply. (Ord. 98-42)
16-7-3: DECLARATION OF WATER EMERGENCY:
Whenever a water emergency, as described in Section 16-7-2 of this Chapter exists, the City Manager shall declare the
existence of such emergency by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency
and invoking the restricted usage provisions contained in this Chapter. (Ord. 98-42)
16-7-4: CERTAIN USES OF WATER PROHIBITED:
The use and withdrawal of water by any person for the following purposes may be prohibited upon issuance by the City
Manager of the declaration provided for in Section 16-7-3 of this Chapter, which shall specify those purposes for which
such use is prohibited and the times when such prohibition shall be in effect. Such prohibition may include:
A. Watering Yards: The sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines,
gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation.
B. Washing Mobile Equipment: The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses, railroad cars, or any other
type ofmobile equipment.
C. Cleaning Outdoor Surfaces: The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches and other outdoor
surfaces.
D. Cleaning Buildings: The washing of the outside of dwellings; the washing of the inside and outside of office buildings.
E. Cleaning Equipment And Machinery: The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment and
machinery.
F. Ornamental Fountains: The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of water,
which does not have a recirculating system.
G. Swimming Pools: Swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and recirculating system.
H. Escape Through Defective Plumbing: The escape of water through defective plumbing, which shall mean the knowing
permission for defective plumbing to remain out of repair. (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 672/923
16-7-5: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
If the action taken by the City Manager under Section 16-7-4 of this Chapter proves to be insufficient to reduce
consumption to tolerable levels, additional restrictions may be declared as follows:
A. Disconnection from the system of air conditioning units requiring potable water as heat exchange medium.
B. Lowering of water pressure to absolute minimum levels of safe operation.
C. Pumping of water into the system so regulated as to provide only limited water portions each day. (Ord. 98-42)
16-7-6: EXCEPTION TO MAINTAIN SANITATION:
The City Manager shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use of water consistent with the available supply in any
case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards. (Ord. 98-42)
16-7-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Police Officers Enforce: Every police officer of the City shall, in connection with his duties imposed by law, diligently
enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Discontinuance Of Service: The City Manager, or his designee,shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter by the discontinuance of water service in the event of violation hereof. (Ord. 98-42)
Chapter 8
CITY RESERVOIR REGULATIONS
16-8-1: FISHING:
A. Legal Gear; Registration Required: The reservoir shall be open to the public for fishing with hook and line. Each
fisherman will be allowed to use one trotline, throw line or bank line not to exceed twenty five (25) hooks, and the
user must make registration with the caretaker at the reservoir before using the trotline, throw line or bank line. No
nets, seines or traps shall be used at any time.
B. Compliance With Statute: Chapter 515 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes and all administrative orders and rules
adopted under Illinois administrative code 810, as amended, pertaining to legal fish harvest size and creel limits shall
apply to the reservoir property at all times. (Ord. 98-42)
16-8-2: LAWFUL AND UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
A. The reservoir may be open to the public for special community events, specifically authorized by the Carbondale city
manager with such restrictions as the said manager includes with the authorization.
B. It shall be unlawful to do the following:
1. Swim, Skate Or Ice Fish: It shall be unlawful to swim, ice skate, or ice fish at any time on the reservoir property.
2. Firearms: It shall be unlawful to use any firearms upon the reservoir or adjacent city property at any time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 673/923
3. Duck Blinds Or Traps: It shall be unlawful to construct duck blinds or traps on reservoir or adjacent city property.
4. Use Of Nets, Seines Or Traps: It shall be unlawful to fish by use of nets, seines, or traps at any time in the
reservoir.
5. Damage Plants; Operate Motor Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to damage, destroy or pilfer any tree, shrub, plant or
equipment on the premises of the reservoir. It shall further be unlawful for motor vehicles of any kind to operate
anywhere on reservoir or adjacent city property, except on areas specifically designated by signs for motor
vehicles.
6. Discard Debris: It shall be unlawful to discard upon the reservoir or adjacent city property bait cans or other
receptacles, bottles, papers or other debris.
7. Operate Motor Boats: It shall be unlawful to use either an outboard motor boat or inboard motor boat on the city
reservoir at any time. (Ord. 2015-46)
16-8-3: LITTER:
A. Additional Provisions In Force: The provisions of title 10, chapter 2, "Litter Control", of this code, as amended, shall be
in full force and effect on the reservoir or adjacent city property.
B. Prohibited Deposits: It shall be unlawful to deposit or allow to be deposited in any manner, body wastes, animal
excrement, or "hazardous waste" as defined by IEPA regulations, in any place on reservoir or adjacent city property,
except where specifically designated. (Ord. 98-42)
16-8-4: TRESPASS:
Certain areas of reservoir property are not for public use. Those areas shall be marked with "No Trespassing" signs
indicating that entry thereon is forbidden. Anyone who knowingly and without authority enters into any area of the city
reservoir which is marked "No Trespassing" shall be in violation of trespassing and subject to prosecution pursuant to
title 14 of this code. (Ord. 98-42)
16-8-5: PARK DISTRICT GRANTED CONCURRENT JURISDICTION:
In that area of the city reservoir leased to the Carbondale park district, the park district shall have concurrent jurisdiction
with the city for the enforcement of its regulations and restrictions for use of the park system. (Ord. 98-42)
Chapter 9
CEDAR LAKE REGULATIONS
16-9-1: TERRITORY TO WHICH RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLY:
The rules and regulations adopted herein shall apply to City owned land situated in part of Sections 1, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 35 and 36 in Township 10 South, Range 2 West of the Third Principal Meridian and part of Sections
18, 19, 30, and 31 of Township 10 South, Range 1 West of the Third Principal Meridian, all in Jackson County, Illinois,
and including the water surface of Cedar Lake. City property lines shall be appropriately marked at junctures with roads,
and where major property corners are located. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-2: POSTING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Copies of rules and regulations adopted herein shall be posted in a conspicuous location at a public access area on
Cedar Lake property. (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 674/923
16-9-3: DESIGNATED AREAS:
This chapter hereinafter makes reference to designated areas for certain functions, namely: docking; swimming;
spillway; water intake; parking; fires; and picnicking and camping. Such areas shall be designated hereafter by
appropriate Council resolution(s) identifying such areas in map form. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-4: USE OF BOAT, HOUSEBOATS, AND OTHER FLOTATION DEVICES:
A. Boat Motor Power:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized government personnel in the performance of their duties, to
use or operate upon Cedar Lake a boat with a motor in excess of ten (10) horsepower.
2. No person shall operate on any boat upon Cedar Lake more than one gasoline powered motor at the same time. If
a boat is equipped with more than one motor, only one motor may be in the water at any one time, and all other
motors on the boat shall be maintained in a raised position and either have no fuel tank for the motor in the raised
position attached or on board, or have no propeller for the motor in the raised position attached or on board.
3. Persons operating boats within the cove(s) where boat launches or boat docks are located shall not operate the
motor of the boat at a speed in excess of idle speed.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or possess a motor upon Cedar Lake unless the motor has a legible
factory affixed ID tag or tags stating the serial number, model number, and horsepower rating. (Ord. 98-42)
B. Other Boats And Flotation Devices:
1. Canoes, sailboats, rowboats, inflatable rafts with four (4) or more air chambers, kayaks, paddle boards, and
inflatable rafts manufactured to accommodate small horsepower motors are permitted upon Cedar Lake.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to use upon Cedar Lake personal flotation devices, including, but not limited to,
air mattresses, rafts with three (3) or less air chambers and not manufactured for use with a motor, kite boards, sail
boards, or inner tubes, except in those areas designated as floating areas or for emergency reasons.
3. No person shall water ski, tow persons or animals through the water or use a motorized ski board, water cycle, jet
ski or similar device upon Cedar Lake.
4. No person shall operate, or possess a houseboat upon Cedar Lake. (Ord. 2018-16)
C. Docking:
1. Docking is permitted only in designated areas.
2. No unattended overnight storage of boats is permitted.
D. Prohibited Areas: No person shall operate, use or maintain a boat within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any area
designated by signs as swimming areas, floating areas, the spillway area, or the water intake area, except authorized
personnel in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-5: FISHING:
A. Fishing: Cedar Lake shall be open to the public for fishing with hook, line and pole only, except that trotlines are
prohibited.
B. Regulations: Persons fishing in Cedar Lake shall do so in accordance with the following sections of the Fish and
Aquatic Life Code, 515 Illinois Compiled Statutes, which are adopted by reference except as these sections are
modified by this chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 675/923
1. Sections 5/1-10 through 5/1-115, definitions;
2. Section 5/1-215, illegal fishing devices - public nuisance;
3. Section 5/5-5, ownership and title-violations-penalties;
4. Article 10, limits-seasons-methods of taking; except section 5/10-105, fish importation permits, and section 5/10-
135, sport fishing charter boats;
5. Section 5/20-5, necessity of license-exemptions; section 5/20-15, owners fishing own land-exemption; section
5/20-20, nonresident license; section 5/20-30, application-issuance of license; section 5/20-40, golden years fishing
and hunting license; and section 5/20-110, possession of license, permit or stamp.
Provided further that persons fishing in Cedar Lake shall do so in accordance with administrative rules adopted in
17 Illinois Administrative Code 810, as amended, adopted pursuant to the above referenced sections of Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
C. License For Nonresidents: The City Council may establish, by resolution or ordinance, terms, conditions, and fees for
a City fishing license for nonresidents of the City. Should the City Council adopt such a resolution, then any person
who is a nonresident of the City shall be prohibited thereafter from fishing in Cedar Lake unless the person is
licensed to fish by the City as herein provided and maintains in the person's possession the City fishing license.
D. Fishing Tournaments: All fishing tournaments shall be approved on an individual basis by the City Manager or his
designee. For the purpose of this section a "fishing tournament" shall be defined as any group of competing
fishermen consisting of more than twenty (20) boats.
E. Fish-Offs:
1. Fish-offs shall be approved and scheduled by the City Manager or his designee, who shall maintain a calendar of
these events.
2. Simultaneous fish-offs shall be scheduled and limited to one per boat launch.
3. Fish-offs shall be prohibited on holidays and three (3) day weekends.
4. For the purpose of this section "fish-offs" shall be defined as any group of competing fishermen consisting of
twenty (20) boats or less. (Ord. 98-42)
F. Fees For Fish-Offs And Fishing Tournaments: All fish-offs and fishing tournaments shall pay a fish-off/fishing
tournament fee. The amount of the fee shall be established by the City Council by resolution and shall be posted at
the boat launches. (Ord. 2014-14)
16-9-6: SWIMMING, SNORKELING AND SCUBA DIVING:
A. Designated Swimming Area; User Fee:
1. No person shall swim or wade at Cedar Lake except in the swimming area designated by signs or other
appropriate markings at Cedar Lake Poplar Camp Beach.
2. Every person who is five (5) years of age or older shall pay a user fee prior to using or entering Cedar Lake Poplar
Camp Beach. The amount of user fee shall be established by the city council by resolution and shall be posted at
the entrance to the beach area. The city council may, in its discretion, establish a pass which entitles the holder
thereof to enter and use the beach on multiple occasions. Admittance shall be denied to those persons who do not
pay the user fee.
B. Scuba Diving Or Snorkeling: No person shall use scuba diving gear or snorkeling gear in Cedar Lake except, for
authorized personnel in performance of their official duties or others when required to do so in an emergency
situation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 676/923
C. Beach Rules And Regulations: The following beach rules and regulations shall govern the use of and activity
occurring at Poplar Camp Beach:
1. No person shall enter upon or use the Poplar Camp Beach in a state of total nudity or solely in his or her
underwear. All persons entering upon or using the Poplar Camp Beach shall wear a bathing suit, swimsuit, or other
garment which conceals from view the genitalia and buttocks. Females shall also wear a bathing suit, swimsuit, or
other garment to conceal their breasts.
2. All children age eleven (11) years or younger shall be accompanied by a parent, a guardian, or a person who is
eighteen (18) years of age or older;
3. Jumping or diving into the lake from a beach area is prohibited;
4. Alcoholic beverages in the beach area or parking lot is prohibited;
5. Glass bottles or removable type "pop-top" cans are prohibited in the beach area;
6. No one under the influence of alcohol or drugs shall be allowed in the water;
7. All swimmers must leave the water for safety reasons during thunderstorms;
8. Team sports (activities) on land at the beach area are prohibited;
9. Only one person per flotation device will be permitted in the floating area;
10. Swimmers must remain within the designated and buoyed swimming area;
11. Floaters must remain within the designated and buoyed swimming area.
D. Operational Procedure: Poplar Camp Beach operational procedures shall be as follows:
1. The beach will be closed during thunderstorms, and on rainy days as the city manager or his designee deems
necessary.
2. The beach will be closed when capacity is reached as determined by the city manager or his designee and will
remain so until the situation is relieved.
3. Lifeguards shall be on duty during all hours the beach is open and will enforce the rules and regulations of the
beach area.
4. Lifeguards will be equipped with the proper communications and safety equipment.
5. The speed limit on the city owned portion of the entrance road and in the beach parking lot shall be five (5) miles
per hour.
6. When the beach is closed, the entrance road will be barricaded and there will be no trespassing allowed during
closed hours of seasons. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-7: SHOOTING, HUNTING AND TRAPPING:
A. Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions: No person shall use firearms upon city owned Cedar Lake property. No person shall
possess firearms upon city owned Cedar Lake property, except hunters engaged in the transportation of firearms for
the purpose of hunting legally on the south noncity owned property of Cedar Lake. However, those firearms shall be
unloaded and fully encased in a protective covering at all times. Authorized personnel in the performance of their
official duties are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 98-42)
B. Hunting Or Trapping Prohibited; Definitions: No person shall hunt or trap any animal while upon city owned Cedar
Lake property, except authorized personnel in the performance of their duties or as permitted by subsection C of this
section. For the purposes of this section "hunt" is defined as the intentional killing of or an attempt to kill any animal,
excluding fish. For the purposes of this section "trap" is defined as the intentional catching of or attempt to catch any
live wild animal, excluding fish.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 677/923
C. Regulations: Seasonal nonfirearm, archery (bow and arrow) hunting of white tailed deer is permitted as regulated by
the Illinois department of natural resources on designated city owned Cedar Lake property as allowed by rules to be
established by the city manager or his designee and as identified by map and/or signage. Hunters may boat to
designated lands open for hunting and tie up or dock their boat during archery deer hunting season only. Overnight
docking or storage of boats and the like is not permitted. Tree stands and blinds (tents) used for deer hunting must be
removed from the area at the end of each day's hunt. Construction or using any tree stands with nails, screws, or any
device which pierces or cuts the bark of the tree is not permitted. All motor vehicle and ATV use is prohibited. (Ord.
2014-28)
16-9-8: DESTRUCTION OF TREES OR PROPERTY:
No person shall intentionally or knowingly damage, destroy, or remove any city owned tree, shrub, plant, sign, barricade,
equipment, or facility at Cedar Lake property without the consent of the city. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-9: MOTORIZED VEHICLES, BICYCLES AND HORSEBACK RIDING:
A. Vehicles And Horseback Riding Restricted:
1. No person shall operate while upon Cedar Lake property any motorized vehicle except upon surfaced road. No
person shall ride a horse while upon Cedar Lake property except upon surfaced roads or upon designated bridle
paths.
2. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or ride a horse or other animal on fire trails or on surfaced area beyond
any barricade or sign prohibiting the same.
B. Bicycles: Bicycles are permitted on fire trails during the months of May through October only when the trails are dry.
C. Bridle Paths Use Restricted:
1. Closure Date: Bridle paths will be designated by signs. The bridle paths shall be closed from November 1 through
April 30 of each year. However, the city manager or his designee may allow the use of the bridle paths during this
period if in his opinion there will be minimal to no damage to the paths.
2. Required Conditions: Any person may use designated bridle paths during the open months (May 1 through
October 31) subject to the following conditions:
a. Trail rides sponsored by an organization shall show proof of accident and liability insurance covering the use of
bridle paths by such organization to the lake superintendent. Such organizations shall purchase and maintain
comprehensive general liability insurance with combined single limit liability of not less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for damage. The city shall be shown as an additional insured and be furnished
with certificates of insurance.
b. The city manager or his designee may close the bridle paths when, in his opinion, there is a likelihood that use
will cause damage to the bridle paths due to wetness, general weather conditions, or other conditions. No person
shall ride on the bridle paths when signs are posted indicating the paths are closed.
c. No person while using the bridle paths shall allow a horse to gallop or run.
d. Any person or organizations who violates this section may be prohibited from future use of the bridle paths by
the lake superintendent.
D. Authorized Personnel Exempt: Authorized personnel during the performance of their duties are exempt from the
prohibitions of this section. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-10: HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE AND LITTER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 678/923
A. Trash Containers Use Limited: No person shall use trash containers at Cedar Lake to dispose of their household
garbage or household trash. Persons shall deposit in trash containers at Cedar Lake only litter created during their
use of Cedar Lake property.
B. Body Waste Or Animal Excrement: For purposes of this section, it is unlawful to deposit or allow to be deposited in
any manner, body wastes or animal excrement in any place on Cedar Lake property, except where specifically
designated.
C. Other Debris: It shall further be unlawful to discard upon Cedar Lake property bait cans, or other receptacles, bottles,
papers, or other debris, except in trash containers provided by the city. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-11: ANIMALS:
A. Control, Restraints: The owner or agent of the owner of any animal shall keep the animal under control by keeping the
animal on a leash, rope, chain or other similar device at all times except while using areas on land not designated for
other uses and not closed from public use. However, in those areas animals shall be under the command and control
of a person at all times.
B. Swimming; Parking Areas: No owner or agent of the owner of any animal shall allow the animal to be within five
hundred feet (500') of a designated swimming area or its adjacent parking areas.
C. Entering Water: No person shall allow any animal to enter the water at Cedar Lake except for dogs entering the water
for the purpose of retrieving game lawfully taken on forest service property.
D. Floating On Device: No person shall allow any animal to float on any personal flotation device on Cedar Lake. (Ord.
98-42)
16-9-12: PARKING AT CEDAR LAKE PROPERTY:
While upon Cedar Lake property:
A. Restricted To Off Surface Roadways: No person shall park a motor vehicle off of surfaced roadways except where
specifically designated.
B. Obedience To Signs: No person shall park a motor vehicle in any area designated by signs as a no parking area.
C. Obstructing Traffic: No person shall park a motor vehicle in such a manner as to block traffic or other motor vehicles,
the boat launch, any public facility, service entrance, barricade or fire trail. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-13: STATE BOATING SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The state department of natural resources safety rules and regulations as amended from time to time for the operation of
boats are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-14: FIRES:
Fires are prohibited except recreational fires in areas designated for such purposes. (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 679/923
16-9-15: PICNICKING AND CAMPING:
Picnicking and camping shall be permitted in designated areas only, with appropriate rules and regulations posted
therefor. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-16: TRESPASS:
Certain areas of Cedar Lake property are not for public use. Those areas shall be marked with "No Trespassing" signs
indicating that entry thereon is forbidden. Anyone who knowingly and without authority enters into an area of Cedar Lake
which is marked "No Trespassing" shall be guilty of trespass. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-17: PUBLIC USE AREAS:
A. Hours Regulated: No person shall use any area designated as a public use area at Cedar Lake except between the
hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless the area is designated as a camping area, or the
boat launch area when used for its intended purposes.
B. Beach Operational Hours: No person shall use the designated beach area at Cedar Lake except during its operational
hours. Operational hours of the beach shall be posted at the beach area. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-18: SOLICITING AND CONCESSIONS:
No person, except the city or a duly authorized representative or contractor of the city, shall solicit in any manner the sale
of any goods, services, or donations or operate a concession of any kind upon Cedar Lake property. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-19: CONSTRUCTION AND ERECTION OF STRUCTURES AND OBJECTS:
No person shall construct or erect any structure or object of any kind on Cedar Lake property, except city employees in
the performance of their duties. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-20: DIVING OR JUMPING FROM CLIFFS OR OTHER OBJECTS:
No person shall dive or jump from any cliff, bluff, rock, hill, spillway, or other object into the water at Cedar Lake, except
for reasons of emergency. No person shall repel off of any cliff, bluff, rock, hill or other object except for reason of
emergency. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-21: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No person shall consume or possess any open alcoholic beverage on any property at Cedar Lake which is under the
jurisdiction and control of the city. (Ord. 98-42)
16-9-22: ENFORCEMENT:
The Cedar Lake supervisor, designated city officials, Carbondale police officers and any state or federal governmental
officials who are designated by law to enforce similar state or federal regulations, are hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, including issuing citations and/or serving summonses upon any person who violates the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-42)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 680/923
Chapter 10
CEDAR LAKE WATERSHED
16-10-1: DRAINAGE AND WATERSHED AREA FOR CEDAR LAKE:
A. The real property described as follows constitutes a drainage area, and the watershed area for Cedar Lake:
Township 10 South, Range 1 West of the 3rd Principal Meridian; Makanda Township
Section 7 Southeast 1/4, Southwest 1/4, Northwest 1/4, Section 17 Southwest 1/4, Northwest 1/4
Section 18
Section 19
Section 30
Section 31
Section 32
Township 10 South, Range 1 West of the 3rd Principal Meridian; Pomona Township
Section 1 Southeast 1/4, Southwest 1/4,
Section 2 Southeast 1/4
Section 11 Northeast 1/4
Section 12
Section 13
Section 14 Southeast 1/4
Section 22 Southeast 1/4, Southwest 1/4,
Section 23
Section 24
Section 25
Section 26
Section 27
Section 34
Section 35
Section 36
Township 11 South, Range 1 West of the 3rd Principal Meridian
Section 5
Section 6
Section 7
Section 8 Northeast 1/4, Northwest 1/4,
Township 11 South, Range 2 West of the 3rd Principal Meridian
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 10 Northeast 1/4, Southeast 1/4, Northwest 1/4
Section 11
Section 12
Section 13
Section 14
B. Said area described in subsection A above is depicted on the Cedar Lake Watershed Project Map on file in the office
of the City Clerk.
C. Said area as described and set forth in this Section of this Chapter consists of an area of land, the water of which
drains into Cedar Lake, the water supply source of the City. (Ord. 98-42; 1998 Code)
16-10-2: DRAINAGE AND WATERSHED AREA FOR CITY RESERVOIR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 681/923
A. The real property described as follows constitutes a drainage area, and the watershed area for the City Reservoir:
Township 9 South, Range 1 West; Carbondale Township
Section 31 Southeast 1/4
Section 32
Section 33 West 1/2
Township 10 South, Range 1 West; Makanda Township
Section 4 Northwest 1/4
Section 5
Section 6
Section 7 North 1/2
Section 8 North 1/2
B. Said area referred to in this Section is depicted on the Reservoir Watershed Map on file in the office of the City Clerk.
C. Said area as described and set forth in this Section consists of an area of land, the water of which drains into the City
Reservoir, the water supply source of the City. (Ord. 98-42; 1998 Code)
16-10-3: DRILLING, OPERATING OF OIL OR GAS WELLS OR ASSOCIATED HYDROCARBONS
PROHIBITED:
In said areas described and depicted in this Chapter, drilling or operating of oil and gas wells or associated
hydrocarbons, liquid and/or gaseous, carbohydrons of any kind whatever in and under the land is unlawful. (Ord. 98-42)
Chapter 11
PROTECTION OF FUTURE CONTROL AND NEW LARGE CAPACITY
USES
16-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the use and sustainability of the city of Carbondale's water and sanitary sewer
system, including the city reservoir and Cedar Lake. (Ord. 2015-13)
16-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
"Carbondale water and sewer system" shall mean Cedar Lake, the raw water pump station, the transmission line from
the raw water pump station to the water treatment plant, the water treatment plant, the water distribution lines, the water
storage tanks, the sanitary sewer collection lines and lift stations and the sanitary sewer treatment plants. (Ord. 2015-13)
16-11-3: CONVEY, GRANT, SELL, OR LEASE:
The city council shall not convey, grant, assign, sell, or lease the city's water and sewer system, nor any parts thereof, as
defined, without first conducting two (2) public hearings, the notice of which shall be published in two (2) or more sources
at least thirty (30) days prior to each public hearing. No vote shall be taken on any proposal to convey, grant, assign, sell,
or lease the city's water and sewer system until at least thirty (30) days after the last public hearing. Such proposals must
be approved by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those city council members present, but with at least five (5) city council
members voting in the affirmative. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking necessary actions during a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 682/923
work stoppage, natural disaster or during a declaration of a state of civil emergency issued per the authority granted in
section 1-2A-5 of this code.
In considering whether to convey, grant, assign, sell or lease the city's water and sewer system, the city council must
consider the best interests of the city and its citizens as defined by the following factors:
A. The proposal takes into account potential long term effects of the proposed change on the city and satellite water
districts currently under contract with the city;
B. The proposal protects the Cedar Lake watershed from pollution, and takes into account the long term capacity of the
watershed;
C. The proposal provides for the protection of groundwater and surface water of Cedar Lake;
D. The proposal has a water conservation component in case of water shortage;
E. The proposal ensures high water quality for end users;
F. The proposal provides a means of access to water for low or fixed income water users;
G. The proposal takes into account any potential ancillary growth which could contribute to increased water usage and/or
pollution to the watershed;
H. The proposal provides sufficient information which can be used by the city, the public, and water districts served by
the city, to make informed decisions;
I. The proposal allows the city, after any proposed change, to exercise a level of control over the water and sewer
system; and
J. The proposal allows participation by all water districts served by the city in discussing and responding to changes,
which the proposal would create for them. (Ord. 2015-13)
16-11-4: AGREEMENTS WITH LARGE CAPACITY USERS:
The city of Carbondale shall not enter into any agreement that would increase the demand on the water and/or sewer
system use by more than one million (1,000,000) gallons per day average without first holding at least two (2) public
hearings, the notice of which shall be published in two (2) or more sources at least thirty (30) days prior to each public
hearing, and then making a determination that the increased demand will not be detrimental to the city's water and/or
sewer system. Such a determination shall be made after answering in the affirmative to the factors listed in subsections
16-11-3A through J of this chapter. Such a determination and approval to enter into an agreement with a large capacity
user shall be by the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of those city council members present, but with at least five (5) city
council members voting in the affirmative. (Ord. 2015-13)
Title 17
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS IN GENERAL
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 683/923
17-1-1: PUBLIC HIGHWAYS DEFINED:
All streets and alleys heretofore dedicated as such by the original plat of the City, or by any addition thereto, the plat
whereof has been accepted and approved by the City Council, as heretofore made a matter of record as provided by
law, and all streets and alleys heretofore or which hereafter shall be opened, laid out or established by ordinance, order
or resolution of the City Council in matter provided by law, and all streets and alleys lawfully extended through any lands,
adjacent to the City over which the City may have jurisdiction, and such as have been laid out, opened, extended or
established by ordinance, order or resolution of the City Council and the title thereto acquired by the City for street
purposes, are hereby declared to be public highways, and all such ordinances, orders and resolutions are hereby
continued in force. (R.O. 1929 Ch. XXXV § 4)
17-1-2: AWNINGS SUSPENDED OVER STREET:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to set up, or cause to be set up, over any street, alley or sidewalk
any awnings less than eight feet (8') high or to suspend any awning or any sign, sign box or fixture over any street or
sidewalk lower than eight feet (8') above the same or to suspend any merchandise or other article in front of any building
and more than two feet (2') from the wall thereof so that any part of the same shall be less than eight feet (8') above the
sidewalk or ground. This Section shall not apply to awnings, etc., already erected and in place, but shall apply to any of
the aforesaid which shall hereafter be erected. (R.O. 1929 Ch. XXVI § 1)
17-1-3: DEPOSITING BUILDING MATERIALS:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to obstruct, occupy or use, in or about the erection, construction or
repair of any house or other building, any part of any sidewalk, crosswalk, crossing or pavement, or any portion of any
street in excess of one-half (1/2) the width thereof, with any brick, stone, lumber, lime or other builders' material. (R.O.
1929 Ch. XXVI § 1)
17-1-4: NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. Obstruct Flow Of Vehicular Or Pedestrian Traffic:
1. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person or any group of persons to obstruct, encroach upon, or to
block the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in an unreasonable manner upon any public highway, street,
sidewalk, alley or common area or upon any private way, or any part thereof, by any means whatsoever.
2. No person or group of persons shall obstruct, encroach upon, or unreasonably block the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic upon any public highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or publicly-owned common area, or any part
thereof, by any means whatsoever, unless he or they have received an encroachment permit pursuant to Section
17-1-5 of this Chapter.
B. Penalty: Any person or group of persons who is found guilty of violating the provision of subsection A2 above shall be
fined in an amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 93-10; Ord. 97-166)
17-1-5: ENCROACHMENTS:
A. Permit Required:
1. A person or group of persons may be granted the privilege of encroaching upon any public highway, street,
sidewalk, alley, or publicly owned common area (hereinafter referred to as public right of way) of the city by the
issuance of an encroachment permit. There shall be four (4) types of encroachment permits:
a. Continuous Encroachment Permit: That issued for encroachments which, by their nature, are not readily
movable and which reflect an intent by the holder of the permit of a permanent or quasi-permanent status.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 684/923
b. Temporary Encroachment Permit: That issued for encroachments which may be readily moved and which are
intended by the holder of the permit to be of a duration of less than one year.
c. Sidewalk Restaurant Encroachment Permit: That issued for sidewalk restaurant encroachments which are
intended by the holder of the permit for a duration of one year.
d. Residential Block Party Permit: That issued for encroachments which are social events held within a residential
block zoned R1 in which at least fifty percent (50%) of the property is zoned residential and is held for a period
less than twenty four (24) hours.
2. An encroachment permit, either continuous or temporary, shall only be issued for the purpose of public
convenience or public necessity. The issuance of the encroachment permit shall grant the person the privilege of
using the right of way for the purposes set forth in said permit, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the
permit and this section. This permission to encroach upon public right of way granted by the city is only a license to
use the property in question; it is neither an easement nor a conveyance of real property; it may be revoked by the
city at any time for any reason without compensation to the permit holder. After notice of the revocation, the permit
holder shall immediately remove said encroachment from the city right of way. Prior to being granted an
encroachment permit, a person shall make an application on a form provided by the city. The applicant must
comply with the requirements of subsection B of this section, unless such compliance is waived by the city council.
No continuous encroachment permit shall be issued unless first approved by a majority of the city council members
then holding office. No temporary encroachment or sidewalk restaurant encroachment permits shall be issued
unless first approved by the city manager.
B. Application For Permit; Fee Required: Any person or group seeking the privilege of encroaching upon any public right
of way in the city shall file an application for an encroachment permit, specifying whether the permit sought is
continuous or temporary, with the city manager or his designee. The application shall include the following:
1. A detailed map of the proposed location.
2. A description of the proposed encroachment including nature of construction, material to be used, the exact
dimensions, a drawing of the encroachment, an explanation of any utility requirements and location of such utilities.
3. The name and address of the person or group that will be responsible for the operation and/or maintenance of the
encroachment; if the person or group is a corporation, the applicant shall list the names and addresses of all
officers and the registered agent of the corporation.
4. A certificate of insurance indicating the applicant has purchased and maintains public liability and property damage
insurance in an amount acceptable to the city to secure payment for any loss or damage caused by the
encroachment. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as an additional insured.
5. A statement providing that in consideration of receiving the encroachment permit, the applicant will pay any and all
expenses, including compensation for damages, caused by the encroachment and that the applicant will indemnify
and hold harmless the city from any action, proceeding or claim of liability asserted against the city resulting from
the encroachment or from the issuance of the encroachment permit.
6. The period of time for which the encroachment permit is sought.
7. If the application is for the continuous encroachment permit, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
8. If the application is for the sidewalk restaurant encroachment permit, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
year shall be paid.
C. Recommendation By City Manager: Upon submission of a complete application and the payment of the fee, the city
manager or his designee shall examine the application and investigate the proposed encroachment to determine
whether the proposed encroachment is consistent with this code and all other applicable law. With respect to an
application for a continuous encroachment permit, the city manager shall make a recommendation to the city council
as to whether the permit should be issued or denied.
D. Conditions For Approval: Upon receiving the recommendation of the city manager, the city council may grant a
continuous encroachment permit subject to any conditions or terms it deems appropriate to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare including, but not limited to, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 685/923
1. The encroachment shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary manner, and kept
free from trash, weeds or other debris.
2. The encroachment shall be designed, constructed, and maintained without the presence of any overhead wiring;
any and all wiring required or utilities, including electric and telephone wiring, shall be placed underground insofar
as it is reasonably possible.
3. The specific time at which the encroachment permit will expire.
4. The prohibition of any relocation or design modification of the encroachment without prior approval of the city.
Any continuous encroachment permit may be amended or revoked by the city council following receipt of a
recommendation from the city manager.
E. Temporary Encroachment Permit: The city manager is authorized to issue a temporary encroachment permit for the
following events or activities:
1. Banners/Decorations: The city manager may issue a temporary encroachment permit to a person, group or
organization for the purpose of displaying banners or other decorations, upon receipt of an application and a
nonrefundable application fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00).
a. The application shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant shall be a unit of state or local government or a not for profit organization whose primary or
secondary purpose is the promotion of the arts, cultural activities or tourism. The design and/or content of the
banners or decorations shall be limited to that which promotes the arts or a significant cultural or tourism
related activity.
(2) The duration of time which the encroachment shall be in effect, the placement and/or location of the banner
or other decoration, and the manner in which the encroachment will promote the arts, cultural activities or
tourism.
(3) In addition to the above information, the application shall include all information required under subsections
B1 through B6 of this section.
Upon submission of a complete and accurate application, and payment of the application fee, the city
manager, or his designee, shall examine the application and investigate the proposed encroachment to
determine whether the proposed encroachment is consistent with this code and all other applicable laws. The
city manager may grant a temporary encroachment permit subject to any conditions or terms he deems
appropriate to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
b. The authorized encroachment of a banner or other decoration shall comply with the following conditions, or be
subject to immediate revocation by the city manager:
(1) The applicant shall pay a fee to the city for the installment and removal of banners. This service fee shall be
on a per pole or banner/decoration basis and shall be adjusted from time to time to cover the city's cost to
perform the service.
(2) The size, design, location and duration of the banners/decorations shall be subject to the approval of the city
manager, who shall deny a permit for any banner or decoration that is not in the best interest of the city of
Carbondale.
(3) The banners and/or decorations shall meet the following standards at all times during the authorized
encroachment:
(A) The banners/decorations shall be designed/constructed to be installed on utility poles or other locations
approved by the city and that there shall be no more than two (2) banners/decorations per pole/location;
(B) The surface area of any banner or decoration not to exceed twenty five (25) square feet per banner or
decoration;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 686/923
(C) There shall be a minimum of sixteen feet (16') of clearance between the banner or decoration and the
public right of way;
(D) The location of the proposed encroachment shall be within or bounded on at least one side by one of the
following zoning districts: SB secondary business; BPL planned business; BWA wholesale and automotive;
BPR primary business; LI light industrial; GI general industrial;
(E) The size, design and method of construction, of any banner or decoration shall be approved by the city
manager and shall be in accordance with any and all city, state and federal laws and regulations. The
banners or decorations shall be picked up by the applicant after removal by the city. The city is not
responsible for damages to the banner/decoration and if a banner/decoration requires maintenance or
repair, the applicant will be responsible for making the repair. All removal and reinstallation shall be done by
the city for which the applicant will be charged a service fee;
(F) Should the city revoke the encroachment permit, the applicant will remove the banner or decoration within
three (3) working days or else the city shall remove the banner/decoration at the applicant's expense;
(G) The method of construction, maintenance and replacement of any banner or decoration shall be approved
by the city and shall be in accordance with any and all city, state and federal safety laws and regulations.
c. The police chief, fire chief, and development services director shall make or cause to be made sufficient
inspections to ensure the permit holder complies with this section and all other provisions of this code.
d. The city manager may deny, amend or revoke a temporary encroachment permit for banners or other
decorations if the permit would be inconsistent with the standards set forth herein, or is determined not to be in
the best interests of the citizens of Carbondale.
2. Sidewalk Sales: The city manager may issue a temporary encroachment permit for a sidewalk sale to a person,
group or organization who desires to sell, offer to sell, or display its goods and merchandise upon the public right of
way immediately adjacent to its current operated retail business that is located in one of the zoning districts set
forth herein. The application shall be made in writing to the city manager at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
proposed date(s) of the sidewalk sale. A nonrefundable application fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) shall
be submitted along with the application to the city manager.
a. The application shall include the following information and meet the following requirements:
(1) The applicant's name, address, organization and principal officers, in addition to the manager of the retail
business who shall act as the contact person in regard to the application.
(2) The applicant shall be a person or entity that desires to sell, offer to sell, or display its goods and
merchandise upon the public right of way immediately adjacent to its current operated retail business that is
located in one of the following zoning districts:
SB - Secondary business
BPL - Planned business
BPR - Primary business
BWA - Wholesale and automotive
(3) In addition to the above information, the application shall include all information required under subsections
B1 through B6 of this section.
Upon submission of a complete and accurate application, and payment of the application fee, the city
manager, or his designee, shall examine the application and investigate the proposed encroachment to
determine whether the proposed encroachment is consistent with this code and all other applicable laws. The
city manager may grant a temporary encroachment permit subject to any conditions or terms he deems
appropriate to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 687/923
b. The authorized encroachment permit for a sidewalk sale shall comply with the following conditions, or be subject
to immediate revocation by the city manager:
(1) Adequate space must be available on private property in front of the business premises in order to conduct a
sidewalk sale. A minimum three foot (3') wide passageway shall be left accessible for pedestrians. No
merchandise shall be displayed within six feet (6') of the curb line of the street.
(2) The sidewalk sale shall be conducted in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or fire hazard.
(3) All merchandise displayed or offered for sale shall be displayed in a secure manner so as not to threaten the
safety of any pedestrians.
c. The police chief, fire chief, and development services director shall make or cause to be made sufficient
inspections to ensure the holder of the temporary encroachment permit complies with this section and all other
provisions of this code.
d. The permit shall be effective from the date indicated on the permit, and shall expire on December 31 of that
same year, unless sooner revoked by the city.
e. The city manager may deny, amend or revoke a temporary encroachment permit for a sidewalk sale if the permit
would be inconsistent with the standards set forth herein, or is determined not to be in the best interests of the
citizens of Carbondale.
3. Nonresidential Business Temporary Encroachments: The city manager may issue a temporary encroachment
permit to other businesses located in zoning districts which are not residential in nature. The application shall be
made in writing to the city manager. A nonrefundable application fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
submitted along with the application to the city manager.
a. The application shall include the following information and meet the following requirements:
(1) The applicant's name, address, organization and principal officers, if applicable.
(2) In addition to the above information, the application shall include all information required under subsections
B1 through B6 of this section.
Upon submission of a complete and accurate application, and payment of the application fee, the city
manager, or his designee, shall examine the application and investigate the proposed encroachment to
determine whether the proposed encroachment is consistent with this code and all other applicable laws. The
city manager may grant a temporary encroachment permit subject to any conditions or terms he deems
appropriate to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
b. The authorized encroachment permit for an encroachment as described in this subsection E3 shall comply with
the following conditions, or be subject to immediate revocation by the city manager:
(1) The permit holder shall maintain the encroachment in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or fire
hazard.
(2) The city manager shall enumerate such other terms and conditions for the encroachment as is reasonably
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of other persons using the right of way.
c. The police chief, fire chief, and development services director shall make or cause to be made sufficient
inspections to ensure the permit holder complies with this section and all other provisions of this code.
d. The permit shall be effective from the date indicated on the permit, and shall expire on December 31 of that
same year, unless sooner revoked by the city.
e. The city manager may deny, amend or revoke a temporary encroachment permit described in this subsection E3
if the permit would be inconsistent with the standards set forth herein, or is determined not to be in the best
interests of the citizens of Carbondale.
F. Sidewalk Restaurant Permit: The city manager is authorized to issue a sidewalk restaurant encroachment permit as
set out below:
1. Definitions: The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them when used in
this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 688/923
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any public place which is kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to
the public as a place where meals are sold and served and where meals are actually and regularly served to the
public. A food service establishment shall have seating available for patrons as well as adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment. A food service establishment must have employed therein a sufficient number
and kinds of employees to prepare, cook, and serve full meals for its guests. Food service establishments must
keep a record of all food items sold such that a determination that the restaurant is serving meals regularly can be
made. Food service establishments serving alcohol shall also meet requirements of title 2 of this code applicable to
such licensee.
OUTDOOR RESTAURANT: Use of a public sidewalk or plaza area by a food service establishment, for the serving
of food and beverages to seated customers.
PERMIT AREA: The sidewalk area designated on the permit specifying the area of operation of the outdoor
restaurant.
PERMITTEE: The person or entity operating a food service establishment who has received a permit allowing for
the operation of an outdoor restaurant.
2. Permits Required:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor restaurant on a public sidewalk without a sidewalk
restaurant encroachment permit.
b. The sidewalk restaurant encroachment permit shall allow a food service establishment located in the primary
business district (BPR) of the city to operate an outdoor restaurant subject to the requirements of this section.
c. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may contain such written conditions as the city manager, or his
designee, deems warranted to protect the use of adjacent right of way for its intended purpose or to prevent
congestion of vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow and to otherwise carry out the purpose and intent of this section
and this code.
d. The permit holder shall, as part of the right granted pursuant to the permit, be entitled to remove or exclude
persons from the permit area during hours of business operation. Such permittee is authorized to give notice to
any such person to prevent such entry.
e. The sidewalk restaurant encroachment permit shall expire annually on December 31 of each year. There is an
annual permit filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
f. Any sidewalk restaurant encroachment permit shall be subject to suspension or revocation as hereafter provided.
3. Application: Application for a sidewalk restaurant encroachment permit shall be made on forms supplied by the
city, and submitted to the city manager or his designee, together with the annual fee and shall at minimum include
the following:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property and the food service establishment
related to the permit.
b. A copy of a valid license issued by the Jackson County health department.
c. A scaled drawing or sketch depicting the dimensions of the proposed permit area and which shows the location
and type of tables, chairs, trash receptacles and other equipment proposed to be used, location of ingress and
egress, the city owned equipment facilities in or adjacent to the area proposed which are visible to the eye,
including, but not limited to, parking meters, trees, manhole covers and utility poles or openings.
d. An operations plan specifying the proposed dates, days and hours of operation of the outdoor restaurant, the
hours of operation of the adjacent restaurant, scheduled maintenance of the permit area, maximum seating
capacity, and method of providing security and maintenance.
e. An executed waiver of liability in a form approved by the city attorney.
f. Any other information related to the requirements of this chapter that the city manager may require.
g. All persons, prior to receiving a permit, shall procure and maintain for the duration of the permit, public liability
and property damage insurance pertaining to the permit area in a minimum amount of one million dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 689/923
($1,000,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate per occurrence and
property damage in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), naming the city, its officers and
employees as additional insured, and the same shall provide that policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior
to the expiration date without thirty (30) days' advance written notice to the city. Proof of such insurance issued
by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of Illinois in the form of a certificate of insurance
shall be attached to the application.
4. Application Review:
a. No permit shall be granted, pursuant to this section, unless the finance director or his designee shall certify that
there are no outstanding fines, fees, taxes, or other charges due and owed to the city by the owners of the real
property on which the restaurant is located or the applicant.
b. All applications for sidewalk restaurant encroachment permits shall be reviewed by the city to determine
compliance with each of the requirements of this section.
c. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant supplies all information required on or by the application form and
is in compliance with the regulations contained in this section.
d. The applicant shall be notified of the status of the application and its approval or the reason for its denial within
ten (10) business days of filing the application.
5. Regulations:
a. An outdoor restaurant is permitted only on sidewalks or approved plaza areas. The permit area shall be
immediately adjacent to the food service establishment requesting the permit, or a sidewalk contiguous to the
sidewalk adjacent to the food service establishment.
b. No permit will be granted if seats or equipment in the outdoor restaurant result in the need for additional
restrooms unless such additional restrooms are provided.
c. The hours when service is permitted at the outdoor restaurant shall be between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M.
d. Any person making use of an outdoor restaurant shall do so in a reasonable manner with due regard for the
health and safety of persons and property. No permittee shall make any physical alteration to public property. A
permittee shall owe a duty to the city of Carbondale and third persons to maintain the permit area in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition.
e. The permittee shall keep the permit area free of litter, cans, bottles, and spills at all times. The permittee shall
promptly collect and dispose of all litter, trash and other waste materials associated with the outdoor restaurant,
including materials in the adjacent public right of way or property originating from the outdoor restaurant. The
permittee shall dispose of any such waste in their own trash receptacles only. The permittee shall not dispose of
any such waste in public trash receptacles.
f. Upon the expiration or other termination of an outdoor restaurant use permit, the permittee shall immediately
remove all tables, chairs, furnishings, equipment and other items of personal property from the permit areas. Any
such items remaining upon the public right of way after a reasonable opportunity to remove the same may be
removed and disposed of by the city of Carbondale at the sole cost and expense of the permittee.
g. A sidewalk restaurant encroachment permit allows for the temporary placement of tables, chairs, furnishings,
equipment, and other items of personal property related to the restaurant. Except for plaza areas, all tables and
chairs must be "portable", meaning that no such furniture shall be chained together or bolted together as a unit
or affixed to the outdoor wall or ground surface.
h. Umbrellas shall have a maximum diameter of eight feet (8') and a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') above
the ground, a weighted base, and be fabric covered. All umbrellas must be made of cloth fabric; vinyl umbrellas
are prohibited. Umbrella materials may not have a shiny, synthetic appearance. Signage on umbrellas is
prohibited. No lettering, advertising, graphics, and/or logos are allowed on the umbrella face.
i. No signs, banners or other like advertising shall be located in the permit area, unless in accordance with section
15.6.5 of this code, and the restaurant may post a menu detailing food, beverages, or special items.
j. Tables, chairs and umbrellas shall be located so that there remains open, at all times, a longitudinal walking
space, the location of which shall be determined by the city, of a minimum of four feet (4') in width, with slopes
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 690/923
not to exceed Americans with disabilities act (ADA) requirements.
k. The city manager or his designee may promulgate administrative rules, substantially related to the requirements
contained in this section. Such rules shall be attached to the permit and be followed by the permittee.
6. Suspension Or Revocation: The use of a public sidewalk as a sidewalk restaurant shall be subject to temporary
suspension or termination at any time by the city in the interest of the public health, safety, welfare and for
community events. To the extent that a permit area is needed by the city for the purposes for which it was
dedicated, or any other public purpose, the city may immediately suspend or terminate the sidewalk restaurant
permit by sending written notice to the permittee and assume full possession and control of the permit area. The
permittee shall remove all furniture from the right of way within the time specified by the notice. If the furniture is not
removed by the permittee, the city shall be authorized to remove all furniture and other objects of the permittee
from the permit area. If such furniture is not reclaimed by the permittee within seven (7) days after removal by the
city, the property shall be presumed abandoned and subject to disposal according to law.
7. Public Property: The provisions of this section shall apply only to the locating of outdoor restaurants on public
property or public right of way and shall not apply to any private property.
8. Indemnification; Payments For Cleaning Or Damages:
a. As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, each permittee shall agree in writing to indemnify and hold
harmless the city against all claims of liability, loss, injury, death, or damage whatsoever in connection with or
arising out of the use of the outdoor restaurant by anyone.
b. As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, the permittee shall agree to, within ten (10) days after the
billing date, pay to the city all costs associated with damage to the pavement or other city owned facilities located
in or adjacent to the permit area caused by operation of the food service establishment, or costs to clean or
remove trash from the permit area or adjacent premises occasioned by the failure of the permittee to clean or
remove such trash.
G. Residential Block Party Permits: The city manager shall establish policies and procedures for the issuance of
residential block party permits, and shall set forth the requirements, fees, limitations, and enforcement of the terms of
the permit.
H. Enforcement:
1. The city may inspect the permit area at any time. The city shall mail or deliver the result of the inspections to the
permittee.
2. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be remedied within the time given in the notice or, if not stated in
the notice, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of delivery or postmark on the notice.
3. Any permittee violating or failing to comply with the terms or requirements of this section shall be subject to the
penalty provisions and procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-05)
17-1-6: OBSTRUCTIONS RESULTING FROM LOADING OR UNLOADING:
No person shall obstruct or encumber any street, alley or sidewalk, or any portion thereof, with merchandise or other
property for a longer time than may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading any such
merchandise or property, or removing the same therefrom. (1929 Code § 25-51)
17-1-7: UNPROTECTED EXCAVATIONS PROHIBITED; REQUIREMENTS OF DESIGNATED
STREETS:
A. Open Excavation Prohibited: No person making any excavation on or adjoining any street, alley or sidewalk shall
leave said excavation open and unprotected.
B. Requirements Of Designated Streets:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 691/923
1. Any person engaged in excavation or construction which requires the movement of dirt, rocks, sand or gravel in
excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds within the city, shall, prior to said transportation, acquire a designated
route to points within the city from the director of public works. (Ord. 73-76 § 1; 1998 Code)
2. Any person so engaged as set forth in subsection B1 of this section may utilize any street within the city by filing a
performance bond, which bond shall provide as follows: that the person shall utilize certain streets within the city as
set forth therein; that he will assure that said streets shall be in the same condition as they were at the termination
of said excavation or construction and the utilization of said streets, normal wear and tear excepted, as said streets
were prior to said utilization; and shall provide a surety acceptable to the finance director of the city, which is
acceptable to the director of public works. (Ord. 73-76 § 1)
17-1-8: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO SUPERINTEND IMPROVEMENTS:
The director of public works shall superintend all improvements upon the streets, sidewalks, sewers and alleys. He shall
have charge of the improvements, repair and cleaning of all streets and alleys and street crossings in the city. (1929
Code § 35-1; Ord. 1504 Art. 5 § 3)
17-1-9: STREETS AND ALLEYS KEPT CLEAN:
The director of public works shall, as far as practicable, see that the streets and alleys are kept clean and free from
rubbish and debris of all kinds. (1929 Code § 35-2; Ord. 1504 Art. 5 § 3)
17-1-10: HARMFUL MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall throw or deposit any glass, bottles, crockery or earthenware, tacks, nails and tin cans in or upon any
sidewalk, alley or other public place within the city. (1929 Code § 25-72)
17-1-11: SPITTING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any sidewalk or in any public hall or other public building.
(Ord. 731 § 1)
17-1-12: DIGGING UP STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
No person shall, within the limits of the city, injure or tear up any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or any part thereof, or
dig any hole, ditch or drain in, or dig or remove any sod, stone, earth, sand or gravel from any street, alley or public
ground of the city, without first having obtained permission of the director of public works to do so. (1929 Code § 25-54;
Ord. 1504 Art. 5 § 3)
17-1-13: BACKFILLING OF STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to backfill any excavation for water main, sewer main or gas mains in the traveled
portion of any street in the city, unless such backfilling shall be done with no. 8 rock. Such backfilling must be well and
faithfully done, and all sidewalk, curbing and paving previously taken up must be replaced to as good condition as it was
previous to the opening of the trench. (Ord. 1082 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 73-76 § 2)
17-1-14: DEPOSITING RUBBISH AND DIRT; DUTY TO KEEP STREETS CLEAN:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in or upon any street, alley, or other public place, any dirt, rubbish, paper,
garbage, filth, or slop of any character whatsoever.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 692/923
B. Any person engaged in excavation or construction within the city, shall, prior to the time any motor vehicle of said
person enters onto any street, alley, or other public place, provide that the wheels and tires of said motor vehicle are
reasonably free from any dirt, or filth of any character whatsoever.
C. Any person engaged in the excavation or construction within the city as set forth in subsection B of this section, or any
employee, agent or subcontractor thereof, shall, prior to the time said person enters onto any street, alley, or other
public place with any motor vehicle make certain that said motor vehicle is reasonably free of any dirt of any
character whatsoever. Said person must take such steps as are necessary on the site of any construction or
excavation to make certain that no dirt is placed upon any street, alley or other public place of the city. (Ord. 73-76
§ 3)
17-1-15: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 97-166; 1998 Code)
Chapter 2
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
17-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter:
OWNER: The person holding legal or equitable title to the land. There shall be a presumption that the name appearing
on the previous year's tax rolls is the legal or equitable title holder of the land.
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED: Every natural person who has permanently lost the use of a leg or both legs, an arm or
both arms, or any combination thereof or any person who is so severely disabled as to be unable to move without the aid
of crutches or a wheelchair or any person who has obtained an affidavit from their physician stating that such person is
physically unable to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of
the berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. (Ord. 81-96)
17-2-2: REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS:
A. Responsibility Of Owner: Every owner and every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land within the
City fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, except those lots listed on the snow register, shall remove and clear
away or cause to be removed and cleared away snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain from a path of at least thirty inches
(30") in width along theentire length of the sidewalk which fronts or abuts their property and the roadway.
B. Time Limit For Removal: Except as provided in subsection C hereof, snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain shall be
removed as provided in subsection A of this Section within forty eight (48) hours after the cessation of any fall of
snow, sleet, or freezing rain.
C. Maintain Sidewalk In Safe Condition: In the event snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain on a sidewalk has become so hard
that it cannot be reasonably removed without damage to the sidewalk, the owner shall cause enough sand or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 693/923
abrasive material to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe and shall maintain the sidewalk in
such condition until weather permits the owner to comply with subsection A of this Section. (Ord. 81-96)
17-2-3: REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS:
A. Responsibility Of Owner: Every owner and every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land within the
City used in the operation of a public transportation system within the City, shall remove and clear away or cause to
be removed and cleared away, snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain from its passenger loading and unloading areas, if
any.
B. Maintain Passenger Loading And Unloading Areas: Snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain shall be removed and cleared
away from its passenger loading and unloading areas within forty eight (48) hours after the cessation of any fall of
snow, sleet, or freezing rain, except that if the snow and ice has become so hard that it cannot be reasonably
removed without damage to the underlying surface, such owner shall, within the said forty eight (48) hour period,
cause enough sand or other abrasive material to be put on the passenger loading and unloading area to make
walking thereon reasonably safe and shall maintain the sidewalk in such condition until weather permits the owner to
comply with subsection A above. The owner shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause said areas to be
cleared from such snow, sleet, or freezing rain. (Ord. 81-96)
17-2-4: DEPOSITING OF SNOW AND ICE RESTRICTED:
No person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company, or syndicate shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow
and ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or loading or unloading areas of a public transportation
system, except that snow and ice may be windrowed on public roadways incident to the cleaning thereof or windrowed
on curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks in business districts. (Ord. 78-10)
17-2-5: SNOW CLEARANCE REGISTER:
A. Any physically handicapped owner who pays a ten dollar ($10.00) deposit fee and has no outstanding snow clearance
bills shall have the lot upon which their residence is located listed upon the snow clearance register. The City
Manager shall arrange to have the sidewalks fronting or abutting the lots listed on the snow clearance register
cleared of snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain as soon as possible.
B. Any handicapped owner whose sidewalks are cleared pursuant to subsection A of this Section shall be billed by the
City for the actual costs of clearing the owner's sidewalks. If the owner fails to pay the bill within thirty (30) calendar
days after notice of the bill is sent, their deposit shall be applied to the bill and their lot shall be stricken from the snow
clearance register. This is not a limitation on any other legal remedy the City may have.
C. Any physically handicapped person who does not have snow clearance bill outstanding shall have their lot stricken
from the snow clearance register and their deposit refunded upon request. (Ord. 81-96)
17-2-6: DEPOSITS NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS OR ON PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS:
No person, business entity, or any type of organization shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or passenger loading or unloading areas of a public transportation
system, except that snow and ice may be piled up next to public roadways incident to the cleaning thereof or piled up on
curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks. (Ord. 81-96)
17-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter or who fails to comply with its requirements, shall be fined not
less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 694/923
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 81-96;
Ord. 97-166; 1998 Code)
Chapter 3
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE AND UNLICENSED MOTOR
VEHICLES
17-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is left unattended on any private property, not owned or leased by the owner
or bailee of the vehicle, for a period of thirty (30) days or longer without being moved or entered by the owner or bailee of
the vehicle in question.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least thirty (30) days, the engine,
wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged, or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. Inoperable motor vehicle
shall not include any vehicle which:
A. Is rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in order to perform maintenance or repairs
to the vehicle in question; or
B. Is kept within a completely closed building or a carport; or
C. Is maintained on the property of a business enterprise lawfully engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor
vehicles.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the City which is not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines ofevery way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
UNLICENSED VEHICLE: Any vehicle not bearing a current license plate and not stored in a completely closed building
or carport on any residentially zoned property.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels,
treads, runners, or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include without limitation,
automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy or wagon. (1998 Code)
17-3-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES:
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the City limits. No person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the City
limits in such a manner as to cause a reasonable person to believe that the vehicle has been abandoned. (1998 Code)
17-3-3: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
A. Private Property: No person shall leave any "inoperable motor vehicle", as that term is defined in Section 17-3-1 of
this Chapter, upon any private property within the City limits.
B. Public Property: No person shall leave any motor vehicle, from which the engine, wheels or other parts have been
removed, altered, damaged or otherwise so treated as to render the motor vehicle incapable of being driven under its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 695/923
own motor power, on any street, alley, highway, or other public property within the City limits for a period of time
greater than twelve (12) hours. (Ord. 91-67)
17-3-4: UNLICENSED VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
No person shall park or store any unlicensed vehicle on any residentially zoned property other than in a completely
closed building or carport. (1998 Code)
17-3-5: DISPOSAL OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Disposition Required: Any owner or bailee of an inoperable motor vehicle located on private property not in
accordance with definition of "inoperable motor vehicle" in Section 17-3-1 of this Chapter must dispose of the vehicle
within ten (10) days of having received notice from the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager, the Chief of
Police, or any of their designees, commanding the disposition of the inoperable motor vehicle.
B. Notice: Notice shall be given as follows:
1. Written notice is required for all inoperable motor vehicles bearing a license plate and shall be in substantial
compliance with the following requirements:
a. Notice must be sent to the last known owner of the inoperable motor vehicle, as reflected in the vehicle
registration records of the Secretary of State for the State of Illinois, or the functional equivalent of such for the
state whose name appears on the license which is displayed by the inoperable motor vehicle, at the address
indicated by such records.
b. Notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, restricted delivery, return receipt requested.
c. Notice shall include the following information:
(1) A description of the inoperable motor vehicle;
(2) The location of the inoperable motor vehicle;
(3) The date on which the notice was mailed;
(4) An admonition that the inoperable motor vehicle will be towed at the direction of the City and at the owner's
expense if not properly disposed of within ten (10) days of receipt of written notice;
(5) The location to which the inoperable motor vehicle will be towed, together with the approximate fee for towing
and storage; and
(6) A date of not less than three (3) days and not more than eight (8) days subsequent to the mailing of the
notice at which time a hearing shall be held to determine whether the vehicle shall be towed.
2. If the inoperable motor vehicle does not bear a license plate, or if notice by mail is unsuccessful, there shall be
placed upon the windshield or, if none exist, upon any other conspicuous place on the inoperable motor vehicle a
self-adhering sign not less than seven inches by nine inches (7" x 9") in size containing the following information:
a. The vehicle has been deemed to be an inoperable motor vehicle;
b. The date on which the sign was placed upon the vehicle;
c. An admonition that the inoperable motor vehicle will be towed at the direction of the City and at the owner's
expense if not properly disposed of within ten (10) days;
d. The location to which the inoperable motor vehicle will be towed, together with the approximate fee for towing
and storage; and
e. A date of not less than three (3) days and not more than eight(8) days after the notice is posted at which time a
hearing shall be held to determine whether the vehicle shall be towed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 696/923
C. Hearing: Not less than three (3) days and not more than eight (8) days after the notice described in subsection B of
this Section is mailed, or posted, the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager shall hold a hearing.
1. If the owner or bailee of the inoperable motor vehicle appears, he shall present sufficient evidence to show cause
why the vehicle should not be towed.
2. If the owner or bailee of the inoperable motor vehicle fails to appear, the Building and Neighborhood Services
Manager shall receive a written statement from the complaining witness as to why the complaining witness
believes the vehicle to be an inoperable motor vehicle and should be towed.
3. If the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager finds the vehicle to be an inoperable motor vehicle, which
should be towed, he shall make a notation of the vehicle's description, its present location, the location to which it
is to be towed, and the date of towing. This notation shall be delivered to the Chief of Police. (1998 Code)
17-3-6: DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. Time Limit: Any owner or bailee of an abandoned vehicle must move or otherwise dispose of such vehicle within ten
(10) days of having received notice from the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager, the Chief of Police, or
any of their designees commanding the moving or proper disposal of the abandoned vehicle.
B. Notice: Notice shall be given in substantially the same manner as described in subsection 17-3-5B of this Section.
C. Hearing: A hearing shall be held in substantially the same manner as described in subsection 17-3-5C of this Chapter.
(1998 Code)
17-3-7: DISPOSAL OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES:
A. Time Limit: Any owner or bailee of an unlicensed vehicle must move or otherwise dispose of such vehicle within ten
(10) days of having received notice from the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager, the Chief of Police, or
any of their designees commanding the moving or proper disposal of the unlicensed vehicle.
B. Notice: Notice shall be given in substantially the same manner as described in subsection 17-3-5B of this Chapter.
C. Hearing: A hearing shall be held in substantially the samemanner as described in subsection 17-3-5C of this Chapter.
(1998 Code)
17-3-8: RECORDKEEPING:
Whenever a vehicle is authorized to be towed away pursuant to this Chapter, the Chief of Police or his designee shall
keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing its color, year of manufacture, make, model, body style, vehicle
identification number (VIN), if any, license plate year and number. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow,
the location towed from, location towed to, and reason for towing. (1998 Code)
17-3-9: EMERGENCY DISPOSAL:
A. Notice Required; Contents: Where an abandoned, unlicensed, or inoperable motor vehicle creates an imminent
hazard to traffic or to the health, safety, or welfare of the City, the City may tow the vehicle without giving prior notice
and providing a hearing prior to the vehicle being towed. However, the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager
or the Chief of Police must notify the owner or bailee of the vehicle within three (3) days of the tow by sending a
written notice to the owner or bailee by certified or registered mail, restricted delivery, return receipt requested. Notice
must contain the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 697/923
1. A statement that the vehicle has been towed with the reasons for towing;
2. The location to which the vehicle was towed;
3. The name, address, and phone number of the Building and Neighborhood Services Manager;
4. The opportunity to schedule a hearing within seven (7) days after having received notice.
B. Owner Or Bailee Not Liable: The owner or bailee shall not be liable for payment of towing and storage fees unless
there is just cause to believe the vehicle is abandoned or inoperable or the owner or bailee fails to schedule a hearing
within the requisite time period set out in subsection A4 of this Section. (1998 Code)
17-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be fined in an amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation is committed or allowed to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 97-166; 1998 Code)
Chapter 4
VEHICLES TRANSPORTING OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES
17-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the enforcement and interpretation of this Chapter:
DRIVER: Any person who owns, drives or keeps a vehicle used for transporting "offensive substances" as defined in this
Section.
OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCES: Carcasses of any animal, or any parts thereof, offal, filth or noisome substances.
VEHICLE: Shall include only those automobiles, trucks, trailers and wagons used for transporting or hauling offensive
substances. (Ord. 969 § 1)
17-4-2: CONSTRUCTION:
The bodies of all vehicles transporting or hauling offensive substances in or through the City shall be completely covered
with a solid material or with canvass or a tarpaulin and the covering shall be constructed, secured and maintained in a
manner that will not allow flies to enter or leave the bodies thereof; the bottom or bed of all such vehicles shall be
watertight. (1998 Code)
17-4-3: CLEANLINESS REQUIRED:
All vehicles used as set out in the preceding Section shall be kept and maintained by the driver thereof in a reasonably
clean and sanitary condition. Both the interior and exterior of such vehicles shall be kept free from accumulations of
offensive substances. (Ord. 969 § 3)
17-4-4: STOPPING IN CITY LIMITS; VEHICLE COVER REQUIRED:
No vehicles used as set out in Section 17-4-2 of this Chapter shall stop or park within the City limits while transporting
offensive substances, except in cases of emergency or in order to abide by traffic laws and regulations, and while in the
Citylimits, the bodies of such vehicles shall be kept covered completely at all times. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 698/923
17-4-5: RIGHT TO DETAIN FOR INSPECTION:
The police officers of the City and any representative of the County Health Department are hereby authorized to stop
and detain any vehicle transporting offensive substances in the City for the purpose of inspecting the same and to
ascertain if the provisions of this Chapter are being complied with. (Ord. 969 § 5)
Chapter 5
RESPONSIBILITY FOR SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND
CONSTRUCTION
17-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS COMMITTEE: A Committee made up of City of Carbondale department heads.
CARBONDALE SAFETY COMMISSION: An advisory committee created by City of Carbondale ordinance.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works, or any other City employee designated by the City Manager.
PARKWAY: That portion of the street between the curb line or the lateral lines of an improved roadway,and the adjacent
sidewalk or public way.
PERSON: Shall include persons, partnerships, corporations, or other business associates, and land trusts, both singular
and plural.
PUBLIC WAY: That portion of the street between the curb line or the lateral line of an improved roadway, and the
adjacent property or right-of-way line, intended for the use of pedestrians and as yet unimproved for such purpose.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street between the curb line or the lateral line of an improved roadway, and the adjacent
property or right-of-way line, intended for the use of pedestrian and improved for such purpose. (Ord. 76-1)
17-5-2: DUTIES OF PROPERTY OWNER:
Any person owning any lot or parcel of land, whether such lot or parcel of land is improved, unimproved, occupied or
vacant, abutting on any street, avenue, parkway, boulevard, or other public street of the City, is hereby required to:
A. Sidewalks:
1. Construct and install a sidewalk in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. Keep clean and open for public passage, any sidewalk or sidewalks abutting on or adjacent to such lot or parcel of
land, and to keep such sidewalk or sidewalks in good repair and good condition in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
B. Maintenance Of Parkway And Public Way:
1. To maintain the public way in a safe condition for pedestrians, free of all obstructions, excavations, tall grass,
weeks, bushes, trees, trash, debris or other substances or materials which may interfere with the free use of such
passageways by the public; except for those obstructions or ditches which have storm drainage, public utility or
other public purpose.
2. To maintain the parkway in a safe condition for pedestrians, free of all obstructions, excavations, tall grass, weeds,
bushes, trees, trash, debris or other substances or materials which may interfere with the free use of such
passageways by the public; except for those obstructions or ditches which have been constructed by the City, or
under authority granted by the City, for storm drainage, public utility or other public purposes. (Ord. 76-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 699/923
17-5-3: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, REPLACEMENT AND REPAIR:
A. License And Permit Required: No person shall construct, install, or repair any sidewalk within the City limits unless
such person has first obtained:
1. A sidewalk contractor's license as required by the provisions of this Chapter; and
2. A permit from the Director for such construction, installation, or repair, in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
B. Responsibility Of Director: The Director is hereby authorized and made responsible for planning and programming,
construction, replacement, or repair of sidewalks using the following guidelines as a basis for establishing
procedures:
1. New Construction: General priority for sidewalk construction shall be based on the following procedures: (Ord. 90-
95)
a. Street Section Traffic Flow Classification: Each street section classified as arterial (i.e., 8,000 or more cars per
day) still receive nine (9) points. Each street section classified as collector (i.e., 1,500 to 7,999 cars per day) shall
receive six (6) points. Each street section with four hundred (400) or more cars per day but less than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) cars per day shall receive three (3) points. Each street with lessthan four hundred
(400) cars per day shall receive zero points. (Ord. 90-95; 1998 Code)
b. Snow Route Classification: Each street section on an emergency snow route as designated in subsection 18-12-
3F of this City Code of ordinances shall receive five (5) points. Each street section on a secondary snow route as
designated in subsection 18-12-3G of this City Code of ordinances, shall receive three (3) points. Each street
section not on a designated snow route shall receive zero points. (Ord. 90-95)
c. Proximity To School Classification: Each street section within one-fourth (1/4) mile of a grade or high school shall
receive five (5) points. Each street section not within one-fourth (1/4) mile of a grade or high school shall receive
zero points.
d. Adjustment Of Number Of Sides Missing Sidewalks: The points from subsections B1a, B1b, and B1c above shall
be added together for each street segment and then multiplied by the number of sides of the street segment
missing sidewalks.
e. Rank Order To Be Established: All the street segments with three (3) or more points as a result of the procedure
in subsection A1a, A1b, A1c, and A1d above shall be placed in rank order from highest number of points to
lowest number of points. This order shall set the priority for new sidewalk construction.
2. Replacement Or Repair: When the Director becomes aware of locations where existing sidewalks are broken,
have sections of different height, or other defects such that travelling on the sidewalk presents a hazard under
normal weather conditions, the Director shall determine these sections to have priority comparable to that of the
street sections rated highest under the new construction property criteria established above.
C. Other Factors: In proposing sidewalk construction programs, the Director shall primarily consider the ranking
developed from subsection B above. However, the Director shall also take into consideration other factors including
but not limited to:
1. Absence of curbs and gutters and storm sewers.
2. Accident rate.
3. Pedestrian traffic volumes.
4. Available right of way.
5. Existence of steep grades or high banks.
In the event that a physical problem such as absence of curbs and gutters and storm sewers, available right of
way, and/or existence of steep grades or high banks set forth above precludes prompt implementation of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 700/923
sidewalk project on a street section having high priority based on the criteria in subsection 17-5-3C of this City
Code, theDirector shall identify the impediment and advise the City Manager and the City Council of the necessary
actions needed to make a sidewalk physically feasible and the estimated costs therefore. (Ord. 80-20)
D. Adoption Of Ordinance: Following determination by the City Council that sidewalk construction, repair and
replacement is required in accordance with the above, they may adopt an ordinance providing for said work to be
done and financed as provided by chapter 65, article 11, division 84 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 90-95)
E. Requirements In Conjunction With Building Permits:
1. Before a building permit is issued for a structure including mobile homes served by permanent water and sewer by
permanent water and sewer connections on a lot or tract having no abutting sidewalks where said lot or tract would
receive three (3) or more points on the rating system set forth in subsection B of this Section, the owner of such lot
or tract shall agree to install sidewalks on the side of all streets abutting such lot or tract that would have the
aforesaid three (3) or more points, not including, for corner lots, sidewalk extensions up to the curb line at the
nearest street intersection.
2. Construction of a sidewalk at any point may be deferred by execution of a signed agreement between the Director
and the owner or developer when the Director finds that it is unreasonable to construct sidewalks because of the
cost involved, taking into consideration the following factors: cost of engineering, cost of construction, need for
sidewalks, and the topographic condition of the terrain where the sidewalk would be constructed. Any such
agreement shall stipulate the terms and conditions under which such deferment shall terminate.
3. Before an occupancy permit is issued for structures described in subsection E1 above, the owner of the lot or tract
shall have had installed sidewalks on the side of all streets abutting such lot or tract that would have the aforesaid
three (3) or more points, not including, for corner lots, sidewalk extensions up to the curb line at the nearest street
intersection, unless subsection E2 above is applicable and a signed agreement between the Director and the
owner or developer has been properly executed. (Ord. 80-20)
17-5-4: SIDEWALK CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION PERMIT:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for a sidewalk to be constructed, replaced or repaired by any person unless he
shall possess a valid sidewalk contractor's license issued by the City Clerk, except as provided below. An application
for said license shall be made to the Director and shall include such information as shall be determined to be
necessary by the Director,including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Name and address of person and, in the case of any corporate applicant, names and addresses of the officers of
the corporation;
2. Names and addresses of the person or persons who will be responsible for the actual construction, replacement or
repair to be performed; and
3. Evidence that said persons are familiar with and agree to abide by the provisions of this Chapter and the
specifications adopted pursuant thereto.
Provided the owner of property or his tenant may construct, replace or repair a sidewalk adjacent to said property,
to a maximum quantity of fifty (50) square feet per year, without obtaining a sidewalk contractor's license, provided
all other provisions of this Chapter, including the obtaining of a permit, are complied with any provided further that
said person does the work personally. (Ord. 90-95)
B. License Revocation: Upon recommendation by the Director, and subject to a written appeal to City Council submitted
to the City Clerk within five (5) days of same, the City Manager can revoke, for cause, a sidewalk contractor's license
granted under the authority of this Chapter. Notice of revocation may be served in person or mailed by certified mail
to the last known address of the firm or its owner. Evidence of any violation of this Chapter shall be sufficient cause
for revocation.
C. License Fee: The fee for a sidewalk contractor's license, for all or any part of a year, shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00). All said licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 701/923
D. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, replace, or repair, or cause to be constructed,
replaced or repaired by contract, any sidewalk, or to begin excavation for the construction, replacement or repair of
any sidewalk, without first obtaining from the Director a permit in writing to do so. No fee shall be charged for said
permit. The permit application shall contain the following information which shall be attested to by the owner or his
agent so authorized in writing:
1. Street address of property in question, or in absence of any assigned street number, the legal description of the
property adjacent to the street right of way in which construction is to take place;
2. Name and address of property owner;
3. Name, address and license number of licensed sidewalk contractor who will perform work;
4. Description of a related construction work, including buildingpermit number, planned as part of same project on the
owner's adjacent property;
5. Evidence that the proper grade for the sidewalk has either been determined and made available to the contractor
by the Director, or that he has approved the surface grade of construction proposed by the owner or contractor;
6. Evidence that the contractor and/or owner is familiar with all the provisions of this Chapter and the construction
specifications adopted pursuant thereto and agrees to abide thereby.
All work for which a permit is issued shall be completed and accepted by the Director within forty five (45) days of
the date of issuance, otherwise the permit shall be considered null and void. Where justified by reason of related
work or for other good or sufficient reasons, this time period may be extended by the Director, either at the time of
issuance or as an extension granted prior to said time of expiration.
E. Inspections Required: The Director or his authorized representative shall inspect the work to be performed under each
sidewalk permit as follows:
1. After submission of permit application and prior to issuance;
2. After completion of all cut, fill, grading and placement of forms, and prior to the pouring of any concrete; and
3. Following certification by the owner or contractor that the work has been satisfactorily completed in accordance
with the provisions of the permit and this Chapter.
Any person to whom a permit has been issued must obtain written approval to proceed from the Director or an
authorized inspector prior to further work being done or the permit marked completed and the work accepted by the
City. (Ord. 76-1)
17-5-5: FINANCE SCHEDULE:
A. Sidewalk Constructed After January 13, 1976: Any sidewalk constructed after January 13, 1976, shall be financed
entirely by the owner of the abutting or adjacent property to such a sidewalk, except that the City shall bear the
expense of all engineering, establishing of grades, construction of extensions of public walks to the curb line at corner
lots, and other costs not normally associated with the construction of sidewalks along an improved street as may be
recommended by the Director and approved by City Council. Provided, however, that the construction of sidewalks in
tracts of land being subdivided or on unimproved streets which are being improved by the abutting property owner
with approval of the City, shall in all instances be completely financed by the person owning such propertyincluding all
engineering and other incidental expenses, except as may be agreed to otherwise by action of the City Council.
B. Sidewalks For Platted Corner Lots: Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, at such time as sidewalk
construction shall be required, under Sec. 17-5-3 of this Chapter, on both sides of any platted corner lot, the City shall
be responsible for paying fifty percent (50%) of the costs of construction incurred on both sides of such corner lot,
except if the corner lot is: 1) zoned or used for commercial purposes, or 2) in a tract of land being subdivided or
abutting an unimproved street, the City shall not be responsible for paying any such costs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 702/923
C. Replacement Or Repair Of Sidewalk: The cost of sidewalk replacement or repair shall be paid entirely by the City, if
the Director or his designee determines that the sidewalk in question qualifies under the City's replacement program.
This determination shall be based on a point system established by the Director or his designee. If the sidewalk in
question does not qualify under the City's replacement program, but is in need of replacement or repair, and if the
property owner requests, in writing, that the sidewalk in question be replaced or repaired, then the City and the
property owner shall share equally the cost to replace the sidewalk. In no case shall the City share in the cost of
replacement or repair of the sidewalk where the request for the City participation is not made in writing prior to the
performance of the replacement or repair work and where the request has not been approved by the Director or his
designee. The Director or his designee may grant approval of such request after determining that:
1. The work is justified on the basis of City specifications and accepted engineering and safety standards;
2. The width and length of work to be performed is justified on the same basis; and
3. The cost of the work is in conformity with recent costs paid by the City for similar work. Should the Director
determine that the above criteria are not fully substantiated, he may adjust the amount of the City's participation as
is needed for conformity. (Ord. 90-95)
17-5-6: DESIGN CRITERIA:
Specifications for construction, replacement and repair of sidewalks shall adhere to the following standards, except as
noted.
A. Width Of Sidewalks: All sidewalks shall be constructed to a minimum width of four feet (4'0"), except where the
volume of pedestrian traffic justifies a greater width, the Director may require a greater width to provide for such
condition. Upon such ruling by the Director, the person owning the abutting property may petition the City Council for
the City to pay for the cost ofconstruction of said additional width unless the use to which the property is being put
substantially contributes to the need for extra width.
B. Location: All sidewalks shall be located such that the edge of the walk is one foot (1'0") from the street right-of-way
line, entirely on street right of way, unless the Director authorizes in writing an alternate location do to inadequate
right-of-way width, grade conditions, and location of ditches or other physical features which cannot be feasibly
altered.
C. Slope: All sidewalks shall be constructed with a minimum slope towards the street of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot of
width, and a maximum longitudinal grade of six percent (6%) except where a greater longitudinal grade may be
authorized in writing by the Director.
D. Integrity And Permanence Preserved: All sidewalks shall be constructed such as to preserve their integrity and
permanence; and, new sidewalks or sidewalk replacements, when built as part of the same project as driveways or
parking areas, shall be defined by construction or expansion joints, as determined to be necessary by the Director,
and shall be continuous through asphalt paved areas; and, when sidewalks are constructed upon property which is
paved other than with Portland cement paving, said new sidewalks shall be constructed continuously through said
existing paving and shall be constructed with Portland cement paving.
E. Detailed Specifications: Detailed specifications for the construction of sidewalks shall be developed by the Director in
booklet form and, upon adoption by resolution by the City Council, shall be in effect from and after date of adoption.
Any violation of said specifications, following adoption by Council, shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this
Chapter and the penalty provisions provided therefor.
F. Temporary Walkway: In situations where physical conditions make construction of new sidewalks to adopted
standards impractical, or where new street or other construction is anticipated which would cause a basic change to
the location of a needed sidewalk, the Director may cause to be constructed at City expense or upon agreement at
the owner's expense, a temporary walkway. Said temporary walk may be constructed of such materials and to such
standards as the Director shall determine to meet both safety and economic conditions within the projected timetable
for permanent sidewalk construction. (1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 703/923
17-5-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each day's violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be
punishable as provided in this Section. (Ord. 90-95; Ord. 97-166; 1998 Code)
17-5-8: FINANCIAL HARDSHIP PETITIONS:
A. Any person who is aggrieved by the application of the sidewalk article by reason of being financially unable to pay the
special tax for sidewalk construction or repair shall file a petition in such form as the City Treasurer may require fully
setting forth the hardship grounds on which the petitioner relies.
B. All petitions shall be filed with the City Treasurer on or before April 1 of the year during which the first installment of a
special tax becomes due. No petition shall be filed after such time.
C. The City Treasurer shall review all petitions properly filed no later than June 15 and shall immediately thereafter report
its recommendations to the City Council stating their reasons for their recommendation in their report.
D. If the City Treasurer denies a request, he shall, within two (2) weeks thereof, forward said request. If the request is
granted, the City Treasurer shall refrain from reporting the unpaid tax to the County Collector; however, no unpaid tax
shall go unreported to the County Recorder of Deeds for the purpose of recording with the County the City's tax lien
against the property. No unpaid tax shall go unreported to the County Collector indefinitely. The Treasurer shall
review any hardship petition granted every two (2) years on or about April 15 to determine the status of the case and
to report the Treasurer's findings to the City Council on or about the June 15 following their review. The City Council
shall, within two (2) weeks, direct the Treasurer to report or to refrain from reporting the unpaid tax to the County
Collector. (Ord. 75-24)
Chapter 6
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
17-6-1: CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED:
All sidewalks along or upon any street or part of a street or alley shall be made of Portland cement concrete. (Ord. 690
§ 1)
17-6-2: MANNER OF CONSTRUCTION ASCERTAINED FROM ORDINANCE:
Sidewalks shall be constructed in the manner specifically provided in the ordinance fixing the location, dimension and
grade thereof. (Ord. 690 § 1)
17-6-3: RELATION TO STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE:
All sidewalks shall be located such that the edge of the walk is one foot (1') from the street right-of-way line, entirely on
street right of way, unless the Director authorizes in writing an alternate location due to inadequate right-of-way width,
grade conditions, the location of ditches or other physical features which cannot be feasibly altered. (Ord. 1514 § 7B)
17-6-4: THICKNESS AND WIDTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 704/923
A. Sidewalks: All sidewalks shall be not less than four inches (4") in thickness. All sidewalks shall be constructed to a
minimum width of four feet nine inches (4'9") except where the volume of pedestrian traffic justifies a greater width,
the Director of Public Works may require a greater width to provide for such condition. Upon such ruling by the
Director, the person owning the abutting property may petition the City Council for the City to pay for the cost of
construction of said additional width unless the use to which the property is being put substantially contributes to the
need for the extra width. (Ord. 690 § 2; Ord. 1514 § 7A)
B. Crosswalks: All crosswalks shall be not less than five inches (5") thick and of the same width of connecting walks.
(Ord. 690 § 2)
17-6-5: SURFACE ROUGHENED:
On all grades exceeding five percent (5%) the surface of finished walks and crosswalks shall be roughened with a brush,
toothed roller or other suitable tool. (Ord. 690 § 2)
17-6-6: SLOPE:
All sidewalks shall be constructed with a minimum slope towards the street of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot of width, and
a maximum longitudinal grade of six percent (6%) except where a greater longitudinal grade may be authorized in writing
by the Director. (Ord. 1514 § 7C)
17-6-7: CROSS DRAINAGE:
A. Required: At the ends of all crosswalks on unpaved streets, and at other points along the sidewalks where the
watercourses or surface drains of any kind cross the line of the proposed sidewalks, cross drainage shall be
provided.
B. Type And Size Of Pipe: The cross drainage required by the preceding subsection shall consist of hard burned, salt
glazed, vitrified clay, sewer pipe of sufficient size in each individual case to readily carry the water naturally reaching
them.
C. Length And Placement Of Pipes: The pipes referred to in thepreceding subsection shall be of sufficient length to
extend not less than one foot (1') on either side of the sidewalk under which they are placed and shall in general be
placed so that their upper sides are below the bottom of the concrete walk. (Ord. 690 § 3)
17-6-8: SUBGRADE:
That portion of the streets and alleys to be covered with sidewalks and crosswalks shall be brought to a subgrade by
excavating or filling, as the case may be, the cross section to conform in every respect to the cross section of the walks
when completed, and the upper surface shall be parallel with and below the surface of the finished walk, a distance
equal to the thickness of the walk. Whenever soft clay or spongy ground is developed in the subgrade that will not
compact under the roller or tamper, it shall be removed and the excavation filled with suitable dry earth before the
concrete is placed. All subgrades shall be thoroughly rolled or properly tamped by hand before the concrete is laid
thereon. When a fill exceeding one foot (1') in thickness is required, it shall be thoroughly compacted by flooding, rolling
or tamping in layers not exceeding six inches (6") in thickness and shall have a side slope of not less than one vertical to
one and one-half horizontal (1:11/2). The top of all fills shall extend at least twelve inches (12") on either side of the walk
to be constructed thereon. While compacting, the subgrade shall be thoroughly wetted and shall be maintained in that
condition until the concrete is deposited. (Ord. 690 § 41)
17-6-9: FORMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 705/923
Forms shall be of wood, free from warp and not less than one and three-fourths inches (13/4") in thickness, or metal,
firmly held to line and grade with the upper edge of the form corresponding to the finished grade of the walk. All mortar
and dirt shall be removed from forms previously used. Division lines shall be plainly marked on both side forms to locate
the position of cross forms for joints and to give the dividing line to be cut through with the groover. Metal cross forms
one-eighth (1/8) to three-sixteenths (3/16) of an inch thick shall be used to separate the blocks. They shall be cut to the
cross section of the walk and provided with a square lug on each end to fit a notch in the side forms. Cross forms shall
be set perpendicular to the surface of the walk, five feet (5') apart and at right angles to the side forms. Wooden forms
shall be wetted and metal forms shall be oiled before any concrete is deposited against them. (Ord. 690 § 5)
17-6-10: LIMITATION ON AREA OF BLOCKS:
No block of the walk shall contain more than thirty six (36) square feet. (1998 Code)
17-6-11: EXPANSION JOINTS:
Premoulded expansion joints, one-half inch (1/2") thick, of bitumen with a fibre matrix, shall be placed at intervals of not
over fifty feet (50') and at all four (4) sides of the square formed by intersecting walks, between curbs and walks, and
between sidewalks and buildings and other rigid structures. Care shall be taken to install transverse expansion joints at
right angles to side forms and perpendicular to the surface of the walk. (Ord. 690 § 5)
17-6-12: CEMENT SPECIFICATIONS AND TESTS:
A. Specifications And Tests: All cement used in the construction of sidewalks shall be Portland cement, which shall
conform to the "Standard Specifications and Test for Portland Cement of the American Society for Testing Materials,
(Serial Designation C9-25)". Samples for testing shall be furnished in such manner and at such times as required by
the City Council. The cement shall be kept dry and under cover until used and any cement exposed to the weather
after testing shall not be used. Any cement rejected by the Council after inspection shall be removed from the line of
work at once. (Ord. 690 § 6)
B. Aggregate:
1. Fine Aggregate: Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand having clean, hard, strong, durable uncoated grains,
free from injurious amounts of dust, lumps, soft or flaky particles, shale alkali, organic matter, loam or other
deleterious substances. The sand shall be of such size that it shall all pass through a three-eighths inch (3/8")
sieve, at least fifteen percent (15%) shall be retained on the No. 8 sieve and the finest modulus shall not exceed
three and twenty one-hundredths (3.20). (1998 Code)
2. Course Aggregate: Course aggregate shall consist of gravel, crushed stone or other approved inert materials
having clean, hard, strong, durable, uncoated particles, free from injurious amounts of soft, friable, thin, elongated
or laminated prices, alkali, organic or other deleterious matter. Course aggregate shall have not more than ten
percent (10%) finer than the No. 4 sieve and the maximum size shall not exceed three-fourths of an inch (3/4").
Aggregate shall be stored to avoid inclusion of foreign materials. Frozen aggregate or aggregate containing lumps
of frozen materials shall be thawed before using. (Ord. 690 § 6)
17-6-13: WATER FOR CONCRETE:
Water for concrete shall be from the City water supply or other approved source. (Ord. 690 § 6)
17-6-14: GRADES AND LINES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 706/923
A. Conform To Ordinance: All work during its progress and upon its completion shall conform truly to the lines and
grades for the work to be established by ordinance.
B. Conform To Profile: The top of the sidewalk grade edge, being the inner or property line edge of the walk, shall be as
shown on the profile therefor. The elevations given thereon shall be measured in feet and decimal parts thereof
above the datum plane of the City.
C. Grade Changes: At all points where there is a sharp change of grade, the grades shall be connected by a vertical
curve, but in no case shall the length of the curve exceed one hundred feet (100') or its middle ordinate exceed eight
inches (8").
D. Adjustment Of Grades To Existing Walks: All grades shall be adjusted to existing concrete walks to allow smooth and
even passage from the new to the old work. (Ord. 690 § 7)
17-6-15: MIXING OF CONCRETE:
A. Proportions: The concrete shall be mixed in the proportions by volume of one part Portland cement, two (2) parts fine
aggregate and three (3) parts course aggregate.
B. Measuring Area Of Bagged Cement: One sack of cement (94 pounds net) shall be considered one cubic foot.
C. Ratio Of Water To Cement: Water for mixing sidewalk cement shall not exceed six and one-fourth (61/4) gallons per
cubic foot of cement.
D. Measurement Of Materials: All sidewalk ingredients including water shall be accurately measured.
E. Use Of Approved Batch Mixer Required: All ingredients for preparing sidewalks shall be mixed in an approved batch
mixer not less than one minute after all materials are in the drum. (Ord. 690 § 9)
17-6-16: PATTING CONCRETE IN PLACE:
In laying sidewalks, the subgrade shall be wetted and the concrete deposited the full length and width of the forms.
Concrete shall be handled from the mixer to place as rapidly as practicable and in a manner that will prevent segregation
of the ingredients. It shall be deposited in the forms as nearly as practicable in its final position to avoid rehandling. (Ord.
690 § 9)
17-6-17: PUDDLING; CONSISTENCY OF CONCRETE:
Concrete as it is deposited shall be puddled with suitable toolsuntil forms are completely filled. The consistency of the
concrete shall be such that it can be puddled into the corners and angles of forms without excessive spading and without
segregation or excess accumulation of water or laitance on the surface. (Ord. 690 § 9)
17-6-18: TAMPING AND STRIKING OFF:
After tamping, the concrete shall be struck off with a template riding on the side forms. (Ord. 690 § 9)
17-6-19: FINISHING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 707/923
The surface shall be finished with a wooden float, leveling off any high sports and filling depressions and working excess
water over the side forms after which it shall be carefully checked with a straight edge. The edges at joints and sides
shall be rounded with a edger having a radius of one-fourth of an inch (1/4"). (Ord. 690 § 9)
17-6-20: CROSSWALKS:
A. Location Of Crosswalks: At all places where the walks intersect unpaved roads, streets or alleys, crosswalks shall be
constructed instead of the ordinary sidewalks.
B. Extent Of Crosswalks: Crosswalks shall extend across the entire width of all alleys and from curb line edge to curb
line edge across all roads and streets, the curb line edge referred to being the outer or road side edge of the walks on
either side of the street. (Ord. 690 § 9)
17-6-21: CONSTRUCTION OF OWN WALKS BY PROPERTY OWNERS:
If a property owner shall desire to construct his own sidewalk, and if at the time such property is not included in any
proposed sidewalk improvement district, such property owner shall first secure the services of the Director of Public
Works in establishing the grade of such sidewalk. All such work shall be done under the supervision of the Director of
Public Works, unless specific direction to the contrary is made by the City Council. (Ord. 690 § 8; Ord. 1504 Art. V § 3)
17-6-22: STREET DIRT:
In the work of construction of sidewalks and crosswalks where it is necessary to make a fill in the preparation of the
subgrade or sub-base, in no instance shall the dirt be removed from any part of the street or alley and used in making
such fill for subgrade. (Ord. 690 § 10)
17-6-23: DIRT FROM LINE OF WALK:
Dirt taken out of the line of the walks to be constructed where a cut is necessary may be used in cases of fills for
subgrade. (Ord. 690 § 10)
17-6-24: FREEZING WEATHER:
In freezing weather, suitable means shall be provided for maintaining the concrete at a temperature of at least fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) for seventy two (72) hours or more after placing or until the concrete has thoroughly
hardened. The methods of heating the materials and protecting the concrete shall be approved by the City Council. Salt,
chemicals or other foreign materials shall not be mixed with the concrete for the purpose of preventing freezing. No
concrete shall be deposited upon a frozen subgrade. (Ord. 690 § 10)
17-6-25: PROTECTING CONCRETE WHILE SETTING:
A. Covered And Kept Wet: Immediately after the surface of a concrete walk is finished and the concrete has set
sufficiently to prevent marring, it shall be covered with burlap or canvas and kept wet by sprinkling for at least seven
(7) days.
B. Wheeled Traffic Prohibited: No walk or crosswalk shall be subjected to wheeled traffic for at least fourteen (14) days.
(Ord. 690 § 10)
17-6-26: REMOVAL OF FORMS; BANKING NEW WALKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 708/923
After a concrete walk has set sufficiently, side forms shall be carefully removed and the earth shall be graded up against
the edges of the sidewalks and crosswalks. (Ord. 690 § 10)
17-6-27: TEMPERATURE OF CONCRETE WHEN DEPOSITED:
Concrete when deposited to make a walk shall have a temperature of not less than fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) and
not more than ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F). (Ord. 690 § 10; 1998 Code)
17-6-28: REMOVAL OF FLOAT MARKS:
Float marks shall be removed from new concrete walks by brushing the surface with a soft bristled brush. (Ord. 690
§ 10)
17-6-29: PROTECTION OF WALK WHEN WORK SUSPENDED; REMOVAL OF EXCESS
CONCRETE:
When work on a concrete walk is suspended, a bulkhead shall beplaced at right angles to the side forms and
perpendicular to the surface at the end of the slab to form a vertical joint. Any excess of concrete shall be removed from
the subgrade before starting work. (Ord. 690 § 10)
17-6-30: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO DIRECT ALL WORK:
The work on walks shall, at all times, be under the direction of the Director of Public Works, unless specific direction to
the contrary is made by the City Council. (Ord. 1504 Art. V § 3)
17-6-31: STANDARDS OF WORK GENERALLY:
All work on walks shall be done in a thorough and workmanlike manner to the satisfaction of the Council. (Ord. 690 § 11)
17-6-32: PROTECTION OF WORK IN PROGRESS:
During the progress of work, walks shall be properly barricaded and protected against injury. (Ord. 690 § 11)
17-6-33: CONTRACTOR TO BEAR LOSS FROM INJURY:
The contractor shall bear all loss from injured walks under construction. (Ord. 690 § 11)
Chapter 7
PROCEDURE FOR EXTENSION OF STREET SYSTEM
17-7-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish policy and procedure for the extension and improvement, through
construction and reconstruction, of the street system of the city by the cooperation and participation of the city and
abutting property owners. (Ord. 73-9 § 1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 709/923
17-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the meanings opposite them:
AVENUE: Shall be synonymous with street for the purpose of this chapter.
COLLECTOR STREET: Any street that is designed to provide for a flow of traffic from several minor streets to a major
street.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround at the other end.
FORCE ACCOUNT: Work performed by city work crews.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A public or private marginal access roadway or paved parking lot containing necessary driveways or
trafficways located along the frontage of a multiple family, business or industrial zoning district which have regulations
pursuant to the zoning ordinance or other ordinances of the city of Carbondale for establishing minimum distance points
of access to the street and the elimination of parking of automobiles on such streets.
LOCAL STREET: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties. (Local street as defined in this chapter is
not to be confused with local street as defined in section 17-8-2 of this title.)
MAJOR STREET: A street designed for heavy traffic and of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic artery
for intercommunication between communities in the vicinity of the city.
SECONDARY STREET: A street or road located outside the city limits of the city of Carbondale. ("Secondary street" as
defined in this chapter is not to be confused with "secondary street" as defined in section 17-8-2 of this title.)
STREET: The public street right of way or easement. (Ord. 73-9 § 2)
17-7-3: LIMITATIONS:
A. The procedure established in this chapter is applicable to the construction and reconstruction only of collector streets,
cul-de-sacs, and local streets, which shall be referred to henceforth in this chapter as street. (Ord. 73-9 § 3)
B. The procedure for the construction or reconstruction of streets as set forth in this chapter does not apply to
subdividers and developers, or those engaged in the subdivision or development of new housing units within or
outside the corporate limits of the city. The construction or reconstruction of streets in newly subdivided areas shall
be controlled by the subdivision ordinance (title 15, chapter 8 of this code) of the city. (Ord. 2013-21)
17-7-4: INITIATION OF ACTION:
At the request of a citizen who owns property abutting a street in the city, or by a motion of the city council, a resolution
shall be adopted by said council establishing the area to be benefited by the proposed improvement, and establishing a
time, place and location of a public hearing to determine whether or not said improvement should be constructed. (Ord.
73-9 § 4)
17-7-5: STUDY AND NOTICE BY CITY:
After passage of the aforementioned resolution, the city shall complete the following study and serve the following notice:
A. Proposed Improvement: The city manager shall have a study made of the proposed improvement and shall have an
estimate of the proposed improvement prepared;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 710/923
B. Notice Of Hearing: The director of planning shall notify in writing, the owner, mortgagee or lienholder, as shown by the
land records of the recorder of deeds of the county of Jackson, of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing.
Notice shall be served on said owner, mortgagee, or lienholder by mailing, by certified mail, said notice to the last
known address of said parties as indicated by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county of Jackson.
Proof of mailing shall be sufficient proof of receipt of notice for the purpose of this chapter. Notice will be served upon
said parties at least fourteen (14) days prior to said hearing. (Ord. 73-9 § 5)
17-7-6: PUBLIC HEARING:
At the public hearing established by the aforementioned resolution, council will determine whether:
A. There is a need for the proposed improvement;
B. Other real property included in the benefited area is able to bear the necessary assessment, which will be made
subject to the terms of special assessments as set forth below;
C. Whether owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the real property abutting the proposed improvements are opposed
to said improvement.
Based on these factors, council shall determine whether or not the proposed improvement should be completed.
(Ord. 73-9 § 6)
17-7-7: DETERMINATION OF COST:
If council decides that the proposed improvement should be completed, the cost thereof shall be determined as follows:
A. Force Account: If said improvement is completed by the city by force account, the cost shall be as follows: The cost of
materials used in making said improvement; plus the rental cost of the equipment used; plus the labor cost to cover
fringe benefits, administration and overhead; less the salvage value of anything removed or acquired in making said
improvement.
B. Contract: If the improvement is performed by contract with the city, the cost shall be as follows: The actual cost to the
city for all work done in the completion of said improvement. (Ord. 73-9 § 7)
17-7-8: PAYMENT OF COST:
A. Payment By City: The city shall pay:
1. Fifty percent (50%) of the cost of street base and surface;
2. One hundred percent (100%) of engineering design and inspection costs;
3. One hundred percent (100%) of the cost for storm sewers (if storm sewers are required);
4. One hundred percent (100%) of right of way acquisition (if necessary);
5. One hundred percent (100%) of any and all legal fees relating directly to said construction or reconstruction.
B. Special Assessment: A special assessment shall be applied equitably to each parcel of real property abutting the
constructed or reconstructed street based on the following costs:
1. Fifty percent (50%) of the street base and surface cost;
2. One hundred percent (100%) of the curb and gutter construction;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 711/923
3. One hundred percent (100%) of the sidewalk abutting costs (if required). (Ord. 73-9 § 8)
17-7-9: STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
All construction of improvements made pursuant to this Chapter shall be built according to the standards adopted by
ordinance of the City. (Ord. 73-9 § 9)
17-7-10: NONEXCLUSIVE PROCEDURE:
The procedures for the construction or reconstruction of streets as set forth in this Chapter are not exclusive procedures.
The City Council may, at its discretion, engage in any public improvement. In any event where there is funding available
through any Federal program, the City Council may construct or reconstruct any street within the City. If such Federal
funds do not cover one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of said construction or reconstruction, the City Council may
apportion said cost between the property owner and the City as set forth in the procedures established by this Chapter.
Any construction or reconstruction or improvement of any kind decided upon pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
Chapter shall be begun and completed pursuant to a specific ordinance covering the proposed improvement. (Ord. 73-9
§ 10)
Chapter 8
STREET CONSTRUCTION AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
17-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of Sections 17-8-1 through 17-8-8 of this Chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and standards to
guide the proper design of public improvements in subdivisions within the City and the area contiguous to and within one
and one-half (11/2) miles of the City in order to promote the public safety, health, convenience and welfare of the citizens
of the City (Ord. 73-4 § 1)
17-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of Sections 17-8-1 through 17-8-8 of this Chapter, the following initials, when used herein, shall have the
following meaning:
ADT: Average daily traffic.
CBR: California bearing ratio.
IBR: Illinois bearing ratio.
LOCAL: A street being located within the City limits of the City of Carbondale.
SECONDARY: A street or road located outside the City limits of the City of Carbondale. (Ord. 73-4 § 2)
17-8-3: MINIMUM PAVEMENT WIDTHS FOR STREETS WITH CURBS AND GUTTERS:
A. One Thousand Vehicles Per Day Or Less:
1. If the current ADT at the time of the completion of the improvement on a local street, consists of one thousand
(1,000) vehicles per day or less, and there is no parking allowed on said street, the minimum width for such street
must be twenty four feet (24'), which width shall be determined by measuring from the face of the curb on one side
of the street to the face of the curb on the other side of the street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 712/923
2. If the current ADT, at the time of the completion of the improvement on a local street, consists of one thousand
(1,000) vehicles per day or less, and parallel parking is allowed on one side of the street, the minimum width for
such street must be twenty eight feet (28'), which width shall be determined as set forth in subsection A1 of this
Section.
3. If the current ADT, at the time of the completion of the improvement on a local street, consists of one thousand
vehicles (1,000) vehicles per day or less, and parallel parking is allowed on both sides of the street, the minimum
width for such street must be thirty four feet (34'), which width shall be determined as set forth in subsection A1 of
this Section.
B. One Thousand To Five Thousand Vehicles Per Day:
1. If the current ADT, at the time of the completion of the improvement on a secondary street, consists of one
thousand (1,000) to five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day, and there is no parking allowed on said street, the
minimum width for such street must be twenty six feet (26'), which width shall be determined as set forth in
subsection A1 of this Section.
2. If the current ADT, at the time of the completion of the improvement on a secondary street, consists of one
thousand (1,000) to five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day, and parallel parking is allowed on one side of the
street, the minimum width for such street must be thirty feet (30'), which width shall be determined as set forth in
subsection A1 of this Section.
3. If the current ADT, at the time of the completion of the improvement on a secondary street, consists of one
thousand (1,000) to five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day, and parallel parking is allowed on both sides of the
street, the minimum width for such street must be thirty six feet (36'), which width shall be determined as set forth
in subsection A1 of this Section.
C. Five Thousand Vehicles Per Day: If the current ADT exceeds five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day, the width shall
be as set forth in State Department of Transportation Division of Highways Bureau of Design Highway Standards,
and the Department of Transportation Administrative Manual, which are hereby incorporated herein and made a part
hereof. (Ord. 73-4 § 3)
17-8-4: MINIMUM PAVEMENT THICKNESS:
A. The Manual for the Structural Design of Portland CementConcrete Pavements in Illinois, and the Manual of
Instructions for Structural Design of Bituminous Pavement on Projects Involving Motor Fuel Tax and Federal Aid
Secondary Funds, all as published by the State of Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, are
incorporated herein, made a part hereof, and are hereby adopted as the City standards for computing the minimum
pavement thickness which will be approved for any subdivision. The traffic data required for the analysis will be jointly
arrived at by the developer's engineer and the City Engineer. The CBR or IBR values required for the analysis may
be based on soil classification samples or a reasonable estimate may jointly be arrived at by the developer's engineer
and the City Engineer. The developer's engineer shall make the required computations for pavement determination
and thickness in accordance with the Manual, and the developer may choose the most economical combination
which meets all of the requirements set forth in the Manual for the class of street being designed. Any extra
requirements imposed by the City for extra thickness or width shall be paid for by the City. Any joint City/developer
project shall require an agreement approved by the City Council prior to any work being done on the project.
B. If the City Engineer and the developer's engineer are unable to agree on the CBR or IBR values, the City Engineer
and the developer's engineer shall appoint a third engineer to make soil classification and to determine the CBR or
IBR values. (1998 Code)
17-8-5: STANDARDS:
The State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, Bureau of Design Highway Standards are incorporated
herein, made a part hereof and are hereby adopted as the City standards for streets and other public improvement. (Ord.
73-4 § 5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 713/923
17-8-6: POLICIES:
The State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Administrative Policy
Manual is incorporated herein, made a part hereof, and is hereby adopted as the City policy manual on items relating to
streets, highways, and their appurtenances. (Ord. 73-4 § 6)
17-8-7: STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROAD AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION:
The State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction is incorporated herein, made a part hereof, and is hereby adopted as the City standards specifications for
road and bridges construction. (Ord. 73-4 § 7)
17-8-8: STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR WATER AND SEWER CONSTRUCTION:
The Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, published by the Illinois Society of
Professional Engineers, is incorporated herein, made a part hereof, and is hereby adopted as the City minimum
specifications for water and sewer main construction. (Ord. 73-4 § 8)
17-8-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who constructs any public improvement or portion thereof in violation of the provisions of Sections 17-8-1
through 17-8-8 of this Chapter shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 73-
4 § 9; Ord. 97-166; 1998 Code)
17-8-10: STREET CONSTRUCTION WHERE CURBS AND GUTTERS REQUIRED:
Where combination concrete curbs and gutters are to be constructed, the following sections of the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction adopted January 2, 1952 by the State Department of Public Works and
Buildings, Division of Highways, and all current revisions thereto, shall apply:
Shoulders and parkways - section 24 and 26
PCC sidewalks (5" thick and 4'0" wide) section 87
Combination concrete curbs and gutters (30' from face to face of curbs) - section 81
Storm sewers Type 1 - section 68
Catch basins, manholes, inlets - section 76
Crushed stone base course Type "B", 7" in compacted thickness - section 27
Bituminous surface treatment for gravel or crushed stone bases
Class A, Sub-Class A-3 - section 35
Circular arc crown - minimum 4"
Prior to the construction of any storm sewers, a complete study of the drainage area, leading into such proposed storm
sewers, shall be made and storm sewer sizes determined.
Two (2) copies of plans of all proposed street improvements, including storm sewer design, shall be submitted to and
approved by the City prior to the beginning of any construction. (Ord. 1052 § 1)
17-8-11: STREET CONSTRUCTION; RURAL TYPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 714/923
Where the proposed street construction is to be a rural type, the following sections of the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction adopted January 2, 1952 by the State Department of Public Works and Buildings, Division
of Highways, and all current revisions thereto shall apply:
Shoulders and parkways - section 24 and 26
Pipe culverts, Type 1 - section 59
Crushed stone base course, Type "B", 7" in compacted thickness (minimum width - 20' surface) - section 27
Prior to the installation of any pipe culverts, a complete study of the drainage area, leading into such proposed pipe
culverts, shall be made and pipe culvert sizes determined. Pipe culvert Type 1, 12" inside diameter by 16' long, shall be
considered as the minimum size for private driveways. A pipe culvert of at least the minimum size shall be installed for
each private driveway.
Pipe culverts Type 1, 15" inside diameter by 32' long shall be considered as the minimum size for all crossroad culverts.
All pipe culverts shall be standard strength reinforced concrete culvert pipe.
Rural type street improvements shall also conform to the following as minimum dimensions for construction:
Surface width (traveled portion) 20'0" with a 4" circular arc crown. Shoulder width, 4'0" on each of traveled portion of
surface. (Shoulders to slope from edge of surface 3/4" per foot).
Ditches - Slope on street size 4:1, back slope 2:1.
Two (2) copies of plans of all proposed street improvements, including pipe culvert design, shall be submitted to and
approved by the City prior to the beginning of any construction. (Ord. 1052 § 1)
17-8-12: STORM SEWER CONSTRUCTION:
A. Prior to the construction of any storm sewers, a complete study of the drainage area, leading into such proposed
storm sewers, shall be made and storm sewer sizes determined.
B. Except for storm sewer drainage under driveway entrances, all storm sewer construction shall be of standard strength
concrete prior or vitrified clay tile.
C. No storm sewer shall hereafter be accepted by the City for future maintenance unless and until the subdivision
developershall have first submitted to the City Council their plat of said subdivision showing location, size and
construction of the storm sewer system in said subdivision. (Ord. 1153 § 1)
17-8-13: NOTIFICATION TO CITY PRIOR TO ACCEPTANCE:
A. Streets Or Sidewalks: No streets or sidewalks shall hereafter be accepted by the City for future maintenance unless
and until the subdivision developer shall have first notified the City Council in writing that the developer desires the
City to accept said streets and sidewalks for future maintenance and unless and until the City has determined that
said streets and sidewalks meet the specifications as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 1152 § 1)
B. Sanitary Sewer Or Sewers: No sanitary sewer or sewers shall hereafter be accepted by the City for future
maintenance unless or until the builder or subdivision developer shall have first notified the City Council in writing that
the developer or builder desires the City to accept said sanitary sewer or sewers for future maintenance, and unless
and until the City has determined that said sanitary sewer or sewers meet the specifications and are functioning
properly. (Ord. 1163 § 1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 715/923
Chapter 9
STANDARDS FOR EXTENSION OF STREET LIGHTING SYSTEM
17-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to establish standards which must be met prior to the erection of new street
lamps and other necessary apparatus and equipment which will extend or increase the street lighting system of the City.
(Ord. 73-8 § 1)
17-9-2: CITY MANAGER'S AUTHORITY:
The City Manager is hereby authorized, subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, to order from the
appropriate electrical energy furnishing company authorized to do business within the City, the increase or extension of
the street lighting system of the City. (Ord. 73-8 § 2)
17-9-3: AUTHORIZATION OF EXTENSIONS:
The City Council shall, by resolution, annually, authorize the number of locations at which extensions to or increases in
the street lighting system of the City may be made. (Ord. 73-8 § 3)
17-9-4: BUDGET:
The City Council shall, by its annual budget ordinance, establish an account for the extension of the street lighting
system of the City. (Ord. 73-8 § 4)
17-9-5: STANDARDS:
The City Manager may, upon the request of any citizen, or at his own discretion, and subject to the number of new
locations authorized by resolution, and subject to the availability of funds in the street lighting account of the budget of
the City, order an increase or extension of the street lighting system of the City if the proposed location of the increase or
extension of the street lighting system meets the standards set forth herein. The standards for the purpose of this
Section shall be deemed metfor the proposed location if said location contains at least six (6) of the following eleven (11)
elements:
A. Housing: Concentration of housing in the area contiguous to the proposed location does not consist of a mobile home
park, and contains more than one building or structure for every six hundred (600) square feet of space within a
radius of thirty (30) lineal feet from the proposed location.
B. Large Trees: The area within a radius of three hundred (300) lineal feet from the proposed location contains a
concentration of large trees.
C. Public Buildings: The area within a radius of three hundred (300) lineal feet from the proposed location contains a
church, school or other public building.
D. Railroad Crossing: A railroad crossing is within three hundred (300) lineal feet of the proposed location.
E. Traffic Record: The traffic record of the proposed location, and in an area within a radius of three hundred (300) lineal
feet thereof, indicates that more than one accident has occurred within such area within twelve (12) months from the
date of the investigation of said location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 716/923
F. Crime Record: The crime record at the proposed location, and in an area within the radius of five hundred (500) lineal
feet thereof, indicates that more than one criminal offense has been committed within twelve (12) months from the
date of the investigation of said location.
G. Main Thoroughfare: The proposed location is at the intersection of a main thoroughfare.
H. Bus Stop: The proposed location is at a bus stop.
I. Fire Alarm Box: If the proposed location is at a fire alarm box.
J. Street Light: The proposed location does not have a street light within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
location.
K. Pedestrian Traffic: Pedestrian traffic by the proposed location consists of five hundred (500) or more pedestrians per
day. (Ord. 73-8 § 5)
17-9-6: COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
The standards contained herein must be met prior to the time the City Manager may order the extension of the street
lighting system of the City, are in no way binding or controlling upon the City Council, and said Council may, at any time,
by ordinance, extend the street lighting system of the City. (Ord. 73-8 § 6)
Chapter 10
TREES, BUSHES AND SHRUBS
17-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and the words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUSH: A low densely branched shrub.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The diameter of a tree measured at fifty four inches (54") above the ground.
HERITAGE TREE: Any tree having an eighteen inch (18") or larger dbh.
PERSON: A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
PLANT: A living organism of the kind exemplified by trees, shrubs, herbs, grasses, ferns, and mosses, typically growing
in a permanent site, absorbing water and inorganic substances through its roots, and synthesizing nutrients in its leaves
by photosynthesis.
PUBLIC PLACE: Public street right of way and city owned land or property.
SHRUB: A woody perennial plant smaller than a tree with several main perennial stems arising at or near the ground.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to
such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
TREE: A wood plant having one erect perennial stem (trunk) at least three inches (3") in diameter with a mature height of
at least thirteen feet (13') planted in a public or private place, except where otherwise indicated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 717/923
TREE SIZES (ORNAMENTAL, SMALL, MEDIUM, AND LARGE): Ornamental trees have an ultimate height of less than
twenty feet (20'). Small trees have an ultimate height of twenty (20) to thirty feet (30') or a fifteen (15) to twenty five foot
(25') spread; medium trees have an ultimate height of thirty (30) to fifty feet (50') or a thirty (30) to forty foot (40') spread;
large trees have an ultimate height of greater than fifty feet (50') or over a forty foot (40') spread.
TRIMMER AND CUTTER: A tree trimmer and cutter means any person who for a fee engages in any manner in pruning,
trimming, cutting, bracing or removal of trees whether the trees in question are diseased or not diseased. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-2: AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER OR HIS DESIGNEE:
The city manager or his designee shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all trees, bushes, shrubs or other
plants, and grassy areas planted or growing in public places.
A. Preserve Or Remove: The city manager or his designee shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to plant, trim,
spray, preserve and remove trees, bushes, shrubs or other plants and grassy areas in public places to ensure safety
or preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public places.
B. Order To Preserve Or Remove: The city manager or his designee shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to
order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees, bushes, shrubs or plants upon private property when he shall
find such action is necessary to protect historic significance, protect heritage trees, ensure public safety or to prevent
the spread of disease or insects to trees, bushes, shrubs or plants in public places or on privately owned land.
C. Supervision: The city manager or his designee shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to supervise all work
done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
D. Uniform Plan: It shall be the public policy of the city to plant trees in accordance with a uniform plan to be determined
by the city manager or his designee along rights of way of all new or reconstructed streets, and where other public
improvements cause trees to be removed.
E. Issue Conditional Permit: The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions to
the grant of a permit hereunder. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-3: PUBLIC PLACES; PERMITS REQUIRED:
No person shall plant, set out, trim, spray, preserve or remove trees, bushes, shrubs or other plants in public places
without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the city manager or his designee. Any person granted a
permit to cut down or trim a tree in a public place shall remove all the debris at his own expense.
A. Application Data: The application required herein shall state such information as the city manager or his designee
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder.
B. Standards For Issuance: The city manager or his designee shall issue the permit provided for herein when he finds
that the desired action or treatment is necessary and that the proposed method and workmanship are satisfactory.
C. Regulations For Planting In A Public Place: Work done under a permit issued hereunder shall be performed in strict
accordance with the terms hereof, and with the following regulations established for the planting, trimming and care
of the trees, bushes and shrubs in public places:
1. Trees must not be less than one inch (1") in diameter of trunk one foot (1') above the ground.
2. No tree shall be placed so as, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, to cause a traffic hazard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 718/923
3. The city forestry division shall maintain a list of prohibited and a list of acceptable trees to be used when planting
trees in a public place. This list will consist of trees currently deemed satisfactory by the city manager or his
designee. The city's forestry division will maintain both prohibited and approved tree lists for public places and
make these lists readily available to the general public. Other trees may be allowed if approved by the city's
forestry division.
4. No tree shall be planted where the clear space between the curb and the sidewalk is less than four feet (4'). Small
trees shall be planted a minimum twenty feet (20') apart, medium trees a minimum thirty feet (30') apart and large
trees a minimum forty feet (40') apart except in special plantings designed by an Illinois licensed landscape
architect and approved by the city manager or his designee.
5. No tree shall be planted where the soil is too poor to ensure growth of such tree unless the owner excavates a
suitable hole of not less than thirty six (36) cubic feet and replaces the material removed with suitable loam or top
soil.
6. No tree, bush or shrub shall be planted nearer than four feet (4') from the curb line or the sidewalk unless a special
permit is granted by the city manager or his designee.
7. No tree, bush or shrub shall be planted or be allowed to remain untrimmed so as to be an obstruction to vision
within a triangular space at a street or alley corner between the heights of three feet (3') and fifteen feet (15') above
the established street grade. The street grade is measured at the intersection of the centerlines of the intersecting
streets, or street and alley pavements; and the triangular space is determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2)
points measured twenty five feet (25') equidistant from the meeting point of the edges of the traveled ways of the
two (2) streets, or street and alley.
8. No medium or large tree varieties are allowed to be planted under overhead utility lines.
9. No spiking with metal spurs or gaffs shall be used to climb live trees for any purpose other than tree removal or
human rescue.
10. It shall be unlawful for any person to place rocks or debris between the trunk and the drip line of any tree in a
public place.
D. Regulations For Removal In A Public Place: Work done under a permit issued hereunder shall be performed in strict
accordance with the terms hereof and with the following regulations established for the removal of trees, bushes and
shrubs in a public place:
1. Unlawful To Remove Trees: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any tree on city right of way without
written permission from the city manager or his designee.
2. Charge For Removing Trees: If any person removes any tree located on the city right of way, the person shall pay
to the city an amount equal to the value of the tree. The value of the tree shall be determined in accordance with
the most recent "Guide For Plant Appraisal", as published by the International Society Of Arboriculture or its
successor publication. This cost may be waived by the city manager or his designee if it is determined the tree
removal shall be in the best interest of the city.
3. Dead Trees: Any dead tree located in a public place shall be completely removed, including the stump and any
exposed roots. The city may require the replacement of trees removed from public places. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-4: GROWING A TREE, BUSH, SHRUB OR PLANT:
A. Duties Of Owner: It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree, bush, shrub or plant within a public place, or
responsible for trees, bushes, shrubs or plants growing on property abutting public places supporting trees, bushes,
shrubs or plants, or on other private property:
1. To trim trees, bushes, shrubs or plants so as not to cause a hazard to public places or interfere with the proper
lighting of public highways by the streetlights, as so that the minimum clearance of any portion overhanging a
public right of way or sidewalk shall be eight feet (8').
2. To treat or remove any tree, bush, shrub or plant so diseased or insect ridden to constitute a hazard to trees or
plants in public places.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 719/923
3. To remove any tree or limb of a tree that has become likely to fall.
4. To trim trees, bushes, shrubs, or plants so that they do not obstruct passage on any portion of any sidewalk.
5. Not to allow to grow any vegetation, alternative vegetation, trees, bushes or shrubs which are otherwise prohibited
by law, including, but not limited to, noxious weeds as prohibited by the Illinois noxious weed law.
6. Not to plant any tree, bush or shrub within four feet (4') of the public right of way line or sidewalk.
B. Obstruction Or Danger To Traffic Or Passage: The city manager or his designee may trim or remove any tree, bush,
shrub, or plant so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be done away with. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-5: PROCEDURE UPON ORDER TO PRESERVE OR REMOVE:
When the city manager or his designee shall find it necessary to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees,
bushes, shrubs, or plants upon private property as authorized in section 17-10-2 of this chapter, he shall serve a written
order to correct the dangerous condition upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for its
existence.
A. Method Of Service: The order required herein shall be served in one of the following ways:
1. By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible.
2. By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion upon the premises.
3. By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation.
4. By mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the owner of the premises, by registered mail.
B. Time For Compliance: The order required herein shall set forth a time limit for compliance, dependent upon the
hazard and danger created by the violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or public property, the city
manager or his designee shall have the authority to require compliance immediately upon service of the order.
C. Appeal From Order: A person to whom an order hereunder is directed shall have the right, within twenty four (24)
hours of the service of such order, to appeal to the city council by filing written notice of such appeal to the city
manager. The city council shall review such order and appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting and render its
decision thereon. Unless the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to
whom directed. No person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within the time directed
after an appeal shall have been determined.
D. Failure To Comply: When a person to whom an order is directed fails to comply within the specified time, the city
manager or his designee shall remedy the condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost
thereof to the person to whom the order is directed. The person remedying a condition under a contract made
hereunder shall be authorized to enter premises for that purpose.
E. Notice Of Lien: If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of a statement
therefor from the city manager or his designee, a notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred shall be
recorded in the following manner: The city shall file notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds, Jackson
County, Illinois. Such notice of lien shall contain a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service and the date or dates when
said costs and expenses were incurred. Such notice shall be under oath and shall be filed within sixty (60) days after
the costs and expenses are incurred. Such liens are assessed to recover the expenses incurred by the city and shall
not serve as an exemption from any penalties imposed for the violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-6: ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES, BUSHES, SHRUBS OR PLANTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 720/923
Except as authorized herein, no person shall:
A. Damage Or Remove Trees, Bushes, Shrubs Or Plants: Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree, bush,
shrub or plant in a public place, or injure the bark;
B. Pick Flowers Or Seeds: Pick the flowers or seeds of any tree, bush, shrub or plant in a public place;
C. Attach Any Contrivance: Attach any rope, wire, sign, or other contrivance to any tree, bush, shrub or plant in a public
place;
D. Injure Or Impair: Dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or
usefulness of any public place;
E. Allow Contact With Harmful Substance Or Electricity: Cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in
contact with any tree, bush, shrub, or plant in a public place or allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is
harmful to such trees, bushes, shrubs or plants to come in contact with them.
F. Topping Of Trees: Cause or allow the topping of any tree in the city of Carbondale. Trees severely damaged by storms
or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions may be exempted as authorized by the city
manager or his designee.
G. Removal Of Trees: Except as provided in section 17-10-9 of this chapter, remove, allow, or cause to be removed any
heritage tree without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or his designee; said permit shall include the
requirement to replant an appropriate replacement tree, as approved by the city forestry division, on the same
property upon which the heritage tree was removed within six (6) months of the heritage tree removal date.
Replacement trees shall be minimum one inch (1") diameter of trunk at twelve inches (12") above the ground.
Removal of multiple heritage trees shall require multiple replacement trees as determined appropriate by the city
manager or his designee. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-7: TREE TRIMMER AND CUTTER LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as provided in section 17-10-9 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to act or operate as a tree
trimmer and/or cutter within the corporate limits of the city of Carbondale without obtaining a license prior thereto. A
license shall not be required of any public service utility company employee or city employee doing such work in the
pursuit of their public service endeavors. However a license is required for any contractor or subcontractor that is hired
by any public service utility company or the city to perform tree trimming and/or cutting work. The city clerk will maintain
and make a list of licensed tree trimmers and cutters available to the general public.
A. Application: Any person desiring to become a tree trimmer and cutter in the city of Carbondale shall apply to the city
clerk in writing for a license. At a minimum the application shall state the name and address of the applicant; whether
the applicant is an individual, partnership, firm or corporation; the number, make and style of vehicles to be used by
the applicant in carrying on the business of tree trimmer and cutter; and copies of other required documentation and
license fees as required herein.
B. License Period And Fee: The license period shall run from January 1 through December 31 of each year. The annual
fee for licensure shall be due on or before December 1 of the preceding year and shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
annually. Applications for licenses may be submitted and approved any time during the license period; however
license fees shall not be prorated. Persons initially applying for a license on or after September 1 of a given year shall
not be required to pay an additional fee for the first year of licensure; this does not apply to license renewals.
C. Certification Requirement: All licensees shall possess a valid state of Illinois emerald ash borer (EAB) compliance
agreement signed and numbered by the Illinois department of agriculture.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 721/923
D. Insurance Required: No person shall be issued a license until the applicant furnishes the following insurance policies
or certificates of insurance:
1. Public liability insurance in the sum of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury to each
person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury for each accident and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage for each accident. Said insurance shall cover operations
including the applicant's own direct work, work performed by subcontractors and automobiles and motor vehicles
used in the business.
2. A certificate showing that the applicant's agents and employees are protected by workers' compensation insurance
as required by law.
Such policy and/or certificate shall provide that it may not be canceled by the insurer except after ten (10) days'
written notice to the city clerk, and if such insurance is so canceled and the licensee shall fail to replace the same
with another policy conforming to the provisions of this section, said licensee shall also be automatically suspended
until such insurance shall have been replaced and proper documentation provided to the city clerk.
E. Vehicle License And Markings: As applicable all vehicles and equipment shall be properly licensed. All vehicles and
equipment shall be clearly marked with the company name and telephone number.
F. Removal And Disposal Of Debris: After completion of any work on public or private property, the licensee shall clean
the work site and remove all wood and debris from the property and public rights of way. Licensees are responsible
for the legal disposal of all debris; debris resulting from the work of a licensed tree trimmer or cutter may not be left
on private or public property for pick up and disposal by the city. Debris infected with the emerald ash borer (EAB)
must be disposed of according to the Illinois department of agriculture guidelines. At the written direction of the
property owner, the licensee may leave wood that is suitable for firewood; provided however that the property owner
shall store such firewood as required elsewhere in this code.
G. Written Estimate Required: A copy of a written estimate shall be provided to the property owner for approval prior to
the performance of any work. This estimate shall include the name, address and phone number of the tree trimmer
and cutter, a detailed description of all services or work to be performed and the total estimated cost of the services
to be provided. In the event that a determination is made that the actual charges for the services will exceed the total
written estimate by ten percent (10%) or more, the customer shall be immediately notified, in writing, of the new
charges. A customer so notified may authorize or cancel the service. The customer shall be responsible for payment
of services provided; in no event shall a customer be required to pay more than the amount of the original written
estimate plus ten percent (10%) of the original written estimate if the customer did not receive written notification of a
change in the estimate.
H. Deposit: A tree trimmer and cutter may not require a deposit in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the written estimate for
said work as outlined in subsection G of this section.
I. License Suspension Or Revocation: The city manager is authorized to suspend or revoke a tree trimmer and cutter
license in conformity with the provisions of this section.
1. No tree trimmer and cutter license shall be suspended or revoked until after an administrative hearing before the
city manager has been held. The licensee shall be given no less than five (5) days' written notice of the hearing,
said notice shall include the place and time of the hearing.
2. The city manager may after notice of hearing suspend or revoke a tree trimmer and cutter license for any of the
following reasons:
a. The licensee has violated any state or federal laws or city ordinances regulating or relating to the tree servicing
business.
b. The wilful making of any false statement as to a material fact in the license application or renewal.
c. Suspension or revocation of the legal status of the licensee such as the right to transact business in the state of
Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 722/923
d. Failure to pay any fees or taxes due the city of Carbondale. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-8: PRIVATE PROPERTY SHADE TREE INCENTIVE PROGRAM:
Under the direction of the city manager or his designee the city shall encourage the planting of shade trees within the
front yards of streets where the boulevard area between the street and sidewalk is not sufficient to properly sustain
shade tree growth. This shall be accomplished by entering into an agreement with the property owner for the planting
and maintenance of said trees; at a minimum the agreement shall have the following conditions:
A. A private property owner shall apply to the city to participate in this program.
B. Upon the concurrence of the city manager or his designee that a need for shade trees exists on the subject property;
a formal written agreement between the city and property owner shall be entered into.
C. In consultation with the property owner, the city forestry division shall determine the specific variety of shade tree to
be planted.
D. The maximum distance a tree can be planted shall be fifteen feet (15') from the street right of way line.
E. The property owner shall grant the city permission to enter onto their private property and shall indemnify the city from
any damages that may be caused during the tree planting process.
F. The city will purchase and plant the agreed upon shade tree for the property owner.
G. Trees will only be planted during the fall and spring planting seasons as determined appropriate by the city forestry
division.
H. The property owner shall reimburse the city for the actual cost of the tree and planting materials, not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per tree. The cost of labor and equipment shall be the responsibility of the city.
I. The city shall provide the property owner with directions on how to properly water, care for, and maintain the tree.
Newly planted trees require proper care, including watering, mulching and fertilizing for at least three (3) years.
J. The property owner shall be responsible for all future maintenance and upkeep of the tree and agrees to ensure that
the tree receives proper care and watering for the first three (3) years.
K. The property owner agrees to not cause the removal of any tree planted under this program without first obtaining the
written approval of the city manager or his designee.
L. The city reserves the right to limit the number of shade trees that can be planted in any season and agrees to maintain
and keep a list of applications on file based on a first come first served basis.
M. Should the property upon which a tree was planted change ownership during the first three (3) years after the tree
was planted; the seller and/or seller's agent shall inform the buyer of the requirements and conditions set forth herein.
(Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-9: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 723/923
The following exemptions apply to the requirements of this chapter:
A. A tree trimmer and cutter license shall not be required for the following tree work:
1. The minor pruning of bushes, shrubs, or ornamental trees incidental to performing lawn maintenance and/or
landscaping on private property.
2. Removal or trimming and cutting of trees on private property that are less than ten inches (10") dbh.
3. Pruning, trimming, and cutting of branches that do not require the use of a mechanical lift, bucket truck, climbing
and roping, or other similar equipment or operation.
B. Heritage tree removal, permitting and replacement:
1. Subsection 17-10-6G of this chapter shall not be applicable to properties in the following zoning districts:
a. AG - general agriculture.
b. F - forestry.
c. RR - rural residential.
2. Subsection 17-10-6G of this chapter shall not be applicable when clearing one acre or more of property for
development. (Ord. 2015-22)
17-10-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each occurrence shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2015-22)
Chapter 11
NUMBERING BUILDINGS AND STREETS; NAMING STREETS
17-11-1: UNIFORM SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering properties and buildings and an official system of street
names in the City as shown in the exhibits:
A. Street And Number Designation System Base Line Map.
B. Map - Block Lines For Addresses East And West.
C. Map - Block Lines For Addresses North And South.
D. Street And Number Designation System Address Maps.
These exhibits and all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter by reference,
and filed in the Planning Division Office. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-2: CONFORMITY TO UNIFORM SYSTEM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 724/923
All buildings within the corporate limits of the City shall hereafter be identified by reference to the uniform numbering
system adopted herein, provided all existing numbers of property and buildings not now in conformity with provisions of
this Chapter shall be changed to conform to the system herein adopted on or before October 7, 1975, as deemed
necessary by the City Council and so directed to be carried out by the City Manager. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-3: DESIGNATION OF AVENUES AND STREETS:
All newly platted streets running in a north-south direction shall be hereinafter designated as avenues. All newly platted
streets running in an east-west direction shall hereinafter be designated streets. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF BASE LINES:
The base lines for the City are hereby established as follows and as identified on the Map entitled "Street and Number
Designation System Base Line Map", which Map is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though set
out in full. Said Map shall be available in the office of the City Clerk.
A. East-West Segments: The baseline dividing the City into east-west segments shall be:
1. The half section lines separating the east and west halves of sections 4 and 9 in Carbondale Township to a point
where a westbound ICGRR spur is separated from the mainline of the ICGRR, hereinafter identified and referred to
as Point A.
2. From Point A south, the ICGRR mainline running in a north-south direction through the City to a point within the
present City limits north of Pleasant Hill Road where U.S. Route 51 proceeds south in a westerly direction,
hereinafter identified and referred to as Point B.
3. From Point B south following U.S. Route 51 to the center point of section 33 in Carbondale Township, hereinafter
identified and referred to as Point C.
4. From Point C south, the half section lines separating the east-west halves of section 33 in Carbondale Township
and section 4 in Makanda Township.
B. North-South Segments: The baseline dividing the City into north-south segments shall be:
1. The east-west quarter section lines separating the north-south halves of the north halves of section 24 in
Murphysboro Township, and section 19 in Carbondale Township to the intersection of West Sunset and Tower
Road in the City, hereinafter identified and referred to as Point D.
2. From Point D east, following West Sunset to the intersection of Emerald, hereinafter identified and referred to as
Point E.
3. From Point E north, following Emerald to the intersection of West Main, hereinafter identified and referred to as
Point F.
4. From Point F east, following Old West Main to the intersection of West Main, hereinafter identified and referred to
as Point G.
5. From Point G east, following West Main and East Main to the intersection of Lewis, hereinafter identified and
referred to as Point H.
6. From Point H south, following Lewis to the intersection of East Walnut, hereinafter identified and referred to as
Point I.
7. From Point I east, following East Walnut to the half section centerline separating the east-west halves of section 23
of Carbondale Township, hereinafter identified and referred to as Point J.
8. From Point J east, following the east-west quarter section lines separating the north-south halves of the north
halves of section 23 and 24 in Carbondale Township. (Ord. 74-80)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 725/923
17-11-5: DESIGNATION OF NORTH-SOUTH, EAST-WEST DIVISIONS:
All avenues north of the north-south baseline as shown on the "Street and Number Designation System Base Line Map"
running generally in a northerly direction shall be considered "north" avenues and likewise all avenues south of this
baseline running generally in a southerly direction shall be considered "south" avenues. All streets east of the east-west
baseline running generally in an easterly direction shall be considered "east" streets and likewise all streets west of the
baseline and running generally in a westerly direction shall be considered "west" streets.
A. Each building north of the north-south baseline and facing an avenue running in a northerly direction shall carry a
number and address indicating its location north of said baseline.
B. Each building south of the north-south baseline and facing an avenue running in a southerly direction shall carry a
number and address indicating its location south of said baseline.
C. Each building west of the east-west baseline and facing a street running in an easterly direction shall carry a number
and address indicating its location east of said baseline.
D. Each building west of the east-west baseline and facing a street running in a westerly direction shall carry a number
and address west of said baseline.
E. All buildings on diagonal streets/avenues shall be numbered the same as buildings on northerly and southerly streets
if the diagonal runs more from the north to the south, and the same rule shall apply on easterly and westerly streets if
the diagonal runs more from the east to the west. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-6: STREET NUMBERING REGULATIONS:
A. Maps Adopted By Reference: The numbering of buildings on each street/avenue shall begin at the baseline. All
numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one address for each twenty five feet (25') of frontage along the
street/avenue. Block lines, indicating the points at which addressed numbers shall change from one hundred (100) to
the next higher hundred, more particularly set forth on the map of "Block Lines From Addresses East And West" and
the map of "Block Lines For Addresses North And South" which are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as though set out in full. Said Maps shall be available in the office of the City Clerk.
B. Odd And Even Numbers: All buildings on the south side of east-west streets and all buildings on the east side of
north-south avenues shall bear odd numbers, and likewise all buildings on the north side of the east-west streets and
all buildings on the west side of north-south avenues shall bear even numbers.
C. Dwellings With One Main Entrance: Multi-family dwellings and mobile home courts having only one main entrance
shall be assigned only one number, and separate apartments and mobile homes shall be assigned a letter or number
designation or combination thereof, following a logical pattern, in addition to the number assigned to the main
entrance. Multi-family dwellings or mobile home courts having more than one entrance shall be numbered by a
continuation of street/avenue number and letter designation following a logical pattern and as designated by the
planning division.
D. Apartment Complexes: The internal numbering of large apartment complexes shall be in a logical pattern, including:
1. Street/avenue address.
2. Building letter or number.
3. Apartment number or letter.
E. Mobile Home Complexes: The internal numbering of mobile home complexes shall be in a logical pattern, including:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 726/923
1. Street/avenue address.
2. Mobile home letter or number.
F. Other Buildings: All buildings facing streets/avenues not extending through to the baseline shall be assigned the same
relative numbers as if the said street/avenue had extended to the said baseline. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-7: NUMERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Placement Of Numerals:
1. Numerals indicating the official number of each building or each front entrance to such building shall be
conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door so that the number can be seen
plainly from the street/avenue line.
2. Numerals indicating the official number of each building or each front entrance shall be placed on any roadside
mailboxes required by the United States postal service. (Ord. 74-80)
B. Size And Material Of Numerals: The numerals used on structures shall be not less than four inches (4") in height and
shall be of durable and clearly visible materials. (Ord. 2014-21)
17-11-8: NUMBER DESIGNATION SYSTEM ADDRESS MAPS:
For the purpose of facilitating the correct numbering of all properties within the city, the "Street And Number Designation
System Address Maps" showing the proper numbers of all houses or other buildings fronting upon all streets, avenues,
or public ways shall be kept on file in the office of the planning division. These maps shall be open to inspection by all
persons during the office hours of the planning division. Duplicate copies of such maps shall be furnished to the finance
department, building and neighborhood services division, department of public works, fire department, police department
and city clerk's office. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-9: DUTY OF PLANNING DIRECTOR:
It shall be the duty of the planning director to inform any party applying therefor, of the number or numbers belonging to
or embraced within the limits of any said lot or property as provided in this chapter. In case of conflict as to the property
number to be assigned to any building, the planning director shall determine the number of such building. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-10: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
Whenever any house, or structure shall be erected or located in the city after the establishment of a uniform system of
house and building numbering has been completed, in order to preserve the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the
houses, numbers as designated by the planning director for said property shall be fastened upon said building as
provided by this chapter. No building permit shall be issued for any house, building, or structure until the owner has
procured the official number of the premises. Final approval of any occupancy permit for any structure erected after
October 7, 1974, shall be withheld by the building and neighborhood services division until permanent and proper
numbers have been affixed to said structure. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-11: NEW SUBDIVISION:
Every subdivision plat submitted to the city for approval, after October 7, 1974, shall show the proposed names of any
and all streets/avenues. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with
the name of any existing street; unless the proposed street is an extension of or in alignment with an existing street, in
which case the duplication shall be mandatory (subsection 15.8.7.2Q of this code). All approved subdivision plats shall
show a street/avenue and building number for each lot and these shall be approved as to conformity with this chapter by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 727/923
the planning division. In all cases, local postal officials, City Finance Department, Building and Neighborhood Services
Division and Department of Public Works shall be advised of street numbers approved for the subdivision by the
Planning Division. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-12: EXTENSION OF SYSTEM:
The street number system shall be extended into newly developed areas and annexed areas according to the following
pattern:
A. Existing block lines shall be extended indefinitely in all directions.
B. Where no block lines now exist, there shall be eight (8) block lines for both the north-south and east-west lengths of
each surveyed land section.
C. A block line shall occur on the average of every six hundred sixty feet (660') in every surveyed land section.
D. There shall be at least one block line in every one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250').
E. There shall be no more than one block line in every five hundred feet (500').
F. Block lines shall follow streets wherever possible until such street deviates to such an extent where it is no longer a
logical destination for a block line.
G. At such time that the following roads are annexed by the City or at such time that the system is extended into the
unincorporated areas surrounding the City, the following block lines are hereby designated. All other block lines shall
be developed in respect to these designations.
Boskeydell Road 3500 South
Chautauqua Road 1100 South
Country Club Road 3900 West
County Line 2800 East
Dillinger Road at Route 51 2400 North
Lake Road 1600 North
New Era Road 2300 West
Pleasant Hill Road 1900 South
Reed Station Road 2400 East
Striegel Road 1100 North
Tower Road 2900 West
Wood Road 3300 West
(Ord. 74-80)
17-11-13: AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 728/923
The City Council, by ordinance, may change, rename, or name an existing or newly established street/avenue within the
limits of said City at any time after the adoption of this Chapter. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-14: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS:
All new street avenue signs as they are placed shall have the appropriate compass designation and block number
attached thereto. (Ord. 74-80)
17-11-15: PENALTY:
Whoever shall fail to comply with any provision of this Chapter within one year of the passage of this Chapter or whoever
shall affix to or display upon any house or building any such numbers other than those assigned to it, shall be fined not
less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any
provision of this Chapter is committed or continued. (Ord. 74-80; Ord. 97-166; 1998 Code)
Chapter 12
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES WITHIN THE CITY
RIGHTS OF WAY
17-12-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way
within the city of Carbondale's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the
integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city of Carbondale rights of way and the city of Carbondale as a
whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the city of Carbondale intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the city
of Carbondale and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the city of Carbondale's utilities and of other utilities
lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the city of Carbondale's residential
neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the rights of way within the jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale. A facility lawfully established prior to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 729/923
effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license, permit or similar
agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city of Carbondale, in its discretion and as limited by law, may
require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city of Carbondale rights of way. Utilities that are not required
by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city of Carbondale enter into such an agreement. In
such an agreement, the city of Carbondale may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications
provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the city of Carbondale, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension
thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the city of Carbondale and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are
in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with
the requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent
possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The city of Carbondale shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this
chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city of
Carbondale so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city of Carbondale to regulate
its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92
Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 730/923
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber
optic devices.
CITY: The city of Carbondale.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant
vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area.
The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are
specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Carbondale.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement,
demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city of Carbondale director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a
material adverse effect on the use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the
following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or
structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles
or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of
the right of way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city of Carbondale city engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FHWA: Federal highway administration.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber
optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes,
cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under
this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the city of
Carbondale.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer,
pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by
control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other
characteristics, is determined by the city of Carbondale director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 731/923
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not
limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway"
includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to
time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC
pursuant to the Illinois cable and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MUTCD: FHWA "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", as amended from time to time.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 17-12-4 and 17-12-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not
limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch
gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city of Carbondale. If no time period is specified,
the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city of Carbondale has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the city of Carbondale.
"Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal city of Carbondale property that is not specifically
described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include city of Carbondale buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 732/923
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and
all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to
another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for
sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 17-12-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and
providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices
and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of
local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary
two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable,
fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive
service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a
group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part
of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end
communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as
defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city of Carbondale through an
open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and
following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way
used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the
excavated material. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the city of Carbondale shall register on January 1 of each year with the
director of public works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the
name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the
utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in section 17-12-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2014-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 733/923
17-12-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within any city of Carbondale right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a
new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially increases the amount of area or
space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the city of Carbondale's director of public works and obtaining a permit from the city of Carbondale
therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and
shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may designate those
portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized
representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address,
and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants,
if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the
facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the
work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work
proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city of Carbondale:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent
with the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property
and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without
limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The
intended response shall include notification to the city of Carbondale and shall promote protection of the safety
and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the city of Carbondale finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such
drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations. Said plans accurately
show existing right of way lines, topographic features, existing utilities and the like at a maximum scale of one inch
equals thirty feet (1" = 30');
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 17-12-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 17-12-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 17-12-21 of this chapter); and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city of Carbondale.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection
C of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the
subject of the permit application:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 734/923
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television
service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and
necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has
elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating
pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of
public water supplies, have been satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois
environmental protection agency, division of water pollution control, other local or state entities with jurisdiction
have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum
working pressure, and the design standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction
period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted
by the utility in writing to the city of Carbondale within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits
pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus ten
cents ($0.10) per linear foot of utility line construction. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility
that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee act. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be
examined by the city of Carbondale's director of public works within a reasonable time after filing; said time normally
being fifteen (15) to forty five (45) days after receipt of the permit application. If the application does not conform to
the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city of Carbondale's director of
public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the city of Carbondale director of
public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city of Carbondale's director of public works shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction
of the city of Carbondale's director of public works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in
full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional City Of Carbondale Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications
retailer shall notify the city of Carbondale that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other
documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city of Carbondale not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring
excavation. The city of Carbondale's director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which
the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the city of Carbondale's director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to
the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city of Carbondale by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b) twenty five (25)
days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the city of Carbondale, where a permit is required for work pursuant to
section 17-12-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city of Carbondale an application
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 735/923
for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be
constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional City Of Carbondale Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video
Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and
video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after submission to the city of Carbondale,
unless otherwise acted upon by the city of Carbondale, provided the holder has complied with applicable city of
Carbondale codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the city of Carbondale authorizes a
permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter on city of Carbondale rights of way, and
does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have
an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction
is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to
attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit
at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the
city of Carbondale with such city of Carbondale representatives in attendance as the city of Carbondale deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special
considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of
other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city of Carbondale does not excuse the
permittee from complying with other requirements of the city of Carbondale and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the
plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of
drawings or plans to the city of Carbondale within ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The
revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations
approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be
treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 17-12-21 of this chapter. If the city of Carbondale denies the
request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so
that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility
occupying right of way or constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability
insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the city of Carbondale, and its elected and
appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1
and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground
hazard (commonly referred to as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 736/923
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per
accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then
such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess,
and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary
policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the city of
Carbondale within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the city of Carbondale.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverage: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated
until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City of Carbondale, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the City of Carbondale City Manager of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of Carbondale of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days
prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the city of Carbondale evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
subsection A of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the naming of additional insured under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of
subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city of Carbondale
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements
required under subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the
workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the city of Carbondale and
any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this
section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable
policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold
the city of Carbondale and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 737/923
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result
from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers,
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by
this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations
hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the city of Carbondale, its officials, officers,
employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The
security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city of Carbondale occasioned by the permittee's failure to
comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city of Carbondale issued
pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the city of Carbondale may
pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform
that the city of Carbondale must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure
to perform or complete, and all other payments due the city of Carbondale from the permittee pursuant to this
chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city of Carbondale in the form, at the permittee's election, of
cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the city of Carbondale, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the city of Carbondale. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at
a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the city of Carbondale and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city of Carbondale of any amounts covered by
it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the city of Carbondale and within the state of Illinois at which it can be
drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to
restore the right of way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as
determined by the city of Carbondale's director of public works, and may also include reasonable, directly related
costs that the city of Carbondale estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the
city of Carbondale, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of
locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of
restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city of Carbondale's director of public works may, in the exercise of
sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of
the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The city of Carbondale, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for,
and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city of Carbondale for such amount within the fourteen (14) day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 738/923
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the city of Carbondale for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city of Carbondale
has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city of Carbondale determines can be remedied by an
expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the city of Carbondale that any amount
has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to
the permittee by the city of Carbondale, upon written request for said withdrawal to the city of Carbondale, provided
that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection C of
this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall
be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time
after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the city of Carbondale for failure by the permittee to
comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the city of Carbondale to the
extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the city of Carbondale as a result of said
revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city of Carbondale with respect to the security fund are in addition to all
other rights of the city of Carbondale, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the city of Carbondale
may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city of Carbondale shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. City Of Carbondale Right To Revoke Permit: The city of Carbondale may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the rights of way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city of Carbondale shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and
the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of
revocation or suspension from the city of Carbondale, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the city of Carbondale with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city of Carbondale, the deficiencies stated in the written notice,
providing written proof of such correction to the city of Carbondale within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 739/923
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
and restore the rights of way to the satisfaction of the city of Carbondale providing written proof of such removal to
the city of Carbondale within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city of Carbondale may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this
subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city of Carbondale may issue
a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of
this section, the city of Carbondale or its designee may, at the option of the city of Carbondale: 1) correct the
deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or
equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance,
deem them abandoned and property of the city of Carbondale. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city of
Carbondale for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city of Carbondale no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of
ownership of any facility in the right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility
shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the
new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or
allows it to remain on the city of Carbondale's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new
owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound
engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT
publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook";
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations"; and
9. FHWA "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 740/923
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles
and standards required by this chapter, the city of Carbondale director of public works shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the city of
Carbondale director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The city of Carbondale's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's
"Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for
protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely
block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the
approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to section 17-12-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that
are brought to the utility's attention by the city of Carbondale. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility
facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With City Of Carbondale Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the city of
Carbondale director of public works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the city of Carbondale's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city of Carbondale's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with
the use of the right of way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights
and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on
such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of
the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway
only if:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 741/923
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two
feet (2') behind the face of the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of
four feet (4') outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') of the right of way line or as near as possible to
the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a
highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than six feet (6') from and parallel
to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without
disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way
line as practicable and not more than four feet (4') from the right of way line and any above grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') of the right of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb
lines of city of Carbondale highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as
encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation
of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or
drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the
centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway
only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and
communication lines" (83 Ill. adm. code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone;
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided; and
d. Direct building to building connections are expressly prohibited; at least one intermediate pole shall be required
when crossing rights of way.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a
highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The city of Carbondale may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an
underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the
type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current
federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 742/923
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city of Carbondale may require that facilities be located
within particular rights of way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The city of Carbondale may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The city of Carbondale may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the
greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable
designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated
that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not
limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are
completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees
of risk and such installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure
supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for
facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk
to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The city of Carbondale may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual
quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or
terrain features visible to the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not
impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 2014-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 743/923
17-12-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum
distance specified by the city of Carbondale director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for
boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits
are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed
upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") in diameter shall be accomplished
with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the
following pipe by more than one inch (1").
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished
by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city of Carbondale to be
preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with
the applicable portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for
pipeline testing. Only one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the city of Carbondale director of public works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as
required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the
excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated
material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not
allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled
to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the city of Carbondale
to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth,
and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular
backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible
to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the
director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of
the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion
of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under
section 17-12-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular
material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the director of public works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 744/923
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with
bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city of Carbondale.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or
resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or
unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The
casing shall be continuous either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city of Carbondale.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No
aboveground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the
highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless
continuous pipe or city of Carbondale approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted
only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a
type approved by the city of Carbondale. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation
method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig,
encasement may be eliminated only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair
and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide
that construction does not disrupt the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided as required by the director of public works and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches
Communication, cable or video service
lines
18 to 24 inches (as determined by city of Carbondale)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection (minimum 36 inches per
IEPA standards)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or
drainage line
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection (per applicable IEPA
standards)
7. Minimum Horizontal And Vertical Separation From City Facilities And Utilities: Minimum separation shall be
provided and maintained from city facilities and utilities as directed and required by the director of public works.
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within city of Carbondale rights of way shall be
constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 745/923
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled "rules for construction of electric power
and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation
so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order
to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or b) the
installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the
current year, also known as snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city of Carbondale. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops,
excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than
electric power or communication lines may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening
for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained,
and operated in a city of Carbondale approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of natural and other gas by
pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable
sections of ANSI standard code for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines,
storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" and IEPA standards.
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when
permitted within a right of way, shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') in width beyond
the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad,
or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of the
director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area.
The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the
accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois commerce commission, or the standards
established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 746/923
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval
of the city of Carbondale director of public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and during installation in a manner
to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the city of
Carbondale.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city of Carbondale shall identify any hazardous
materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the city of Carbondale, be required to be
discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such
operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would
result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital
utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the city of Carbondale, the hours of construction shall be seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city of Carbondale shall contact JULIE
and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to
be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city of Carbondale will make its permit records available to a utility for the
purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city of Carbondale
or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and
additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the city of Carbondale as permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right
of way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall
not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a
permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work
will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall
be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city of Carbondale will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula
developed by the International Society Of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city of Carbondale may require the removal and
replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city of Carbondale may require that special measures be
taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 747/923
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any
trees, shrubs or vegetation in the city of Carbondale for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation
control. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city of Carbondale, a utility shall, at its own expense,
protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city of
Carbondale improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city of Carbondale in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city of Carbondale, any
utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable
law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city of Carbondale retains the right and privilege to cut or move
any facilities located within the rights of way of the city of Carbondale, as the city of Carbondale may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the
municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the city of Carbondale, the utility
shall notify the city of Carbondale within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the city of Carbondale may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city of Carbondale director of public works determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city of
Carbondale does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
city of Carbondale, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after
any portion of the rights of way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all
to the satisfaction of the city of Carbondale. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of
roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the city of Carbondale director of public
works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other
requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the city of Carbondale
director of public works for good cause shown. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 748/923
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for
the utility in a manner satisfactory to the city of Carbondale and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a
permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps
to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of
signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency
is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and
lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the city of Carbondale director of public works or his
or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the
emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the city of Carbondale police shall be notified
immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the
least inconvenience to the traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city of Carbondale a description of the repairs undertaken
in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in
writing to the city of Carbondale director of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The city of Carbondale director of public works shall decide whether a variance is
authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city of Carbondale director of public works may authorize a variance only if
the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line)
create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to
be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a
variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the city of Carbondale
director of public works may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a
variance, made by the city of Carbondale director of public works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the
right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal
shall be submitted in writing to the city of Carbondale clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The city council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the
council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The city
council shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 2014-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 749/923
17-12-22: RECORD DRAWINGS AND FACILITY MAPS:
All entities, companies, persons and the like who construct or are permitted to construct facilities located within the rights
of way of the city of Carbondale shall provide record drawings for all facility construction. Said record drawings shall be
at a scale not to exceed one inch equals thirty feet (1" = 30') and shall be provided to the city in both hard copy and
digital format as determined appropriate by the director of public works. Record drawings shall include field measured
dimensions and depths of constructed facilities from existing pavements, curbs, poles, and other such landmarks.
Record drawings shall be submitted to the city within thirty (30) days of the completion of construction and prior to the
release of any surety funds.
All entities, companies, persons and the like who have facilities located within the rights of way of the city of Carbondale
shall provide maps of their facilities to the city on or about January 1 and July 1 of each year. Said maps shall show the
general location of their facilities within the city rights of way, including all underground and aboveground lines and
appurtenances. It is understood that the city will hold this information confidential and shall only use it for internal
purposes and shall not release said maps to the public or other agencies. Maps shall be provided in digital format as
determined appropriate by the director of public works. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city of
Carbondale will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its
duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city of Carbondale's costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative
agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city of Carbondale. Sanctions
may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for
enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-1)
17-12-25: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 2014-1)
Chapter 13
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
17-13-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and
collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on
property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
B. Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto
that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 750/923
C. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with
the requirements of this chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations. (Ord. 2018-22)
17-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the
provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized
national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a
request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review
of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or
adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as
defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC
153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites
that are either: a) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper
of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and
determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the
Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation program that
meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in
length, fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer
than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the City in public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the City to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or
organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or
a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting,
police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 751/923
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility
easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include City-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is
located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6)
cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively
no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for
electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communications network, including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: a) the
structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities,
coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State
that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or
utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services
provider for the application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made
available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or selfsupporting;
billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 2018-22)
17-13-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review,
except as provided in subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to
zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in
property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the City to collocate a small wireless facility. An
application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and
requirements:
1. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the City, together with the
City's Small Cell Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural
engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the
location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 752/923
wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should
include a depiction of the completed facility;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the
Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the
application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to
the best of the applicant's knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity
other than the City, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of
such pole to the proposed collocation.
2. Application Process: The City shall process applications as follows:
a. Priority: The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
b. Existing Utility Pole Deadlines: An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the
application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the
applicant shall notify the City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application
or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
chapter.
c. New Utility Pole Deadlines: An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a
new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve
or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the
applicant shall notify the City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application
or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
chapter.
d. Application Denial: The City shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the
collocation requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure
be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole
or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific Code provisions or application conditions on
which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the revised application once within
thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 753/923
shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application
or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall require
the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the City's review period.
The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised
application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
e. Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility
on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement,
provided by the City for the initial collocation on a Municipal utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent
approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant
shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
3. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the City shall determine
whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the City fails to provide
notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated
in the City's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the City.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant
provides the missing information.
4. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City; or
b. A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
City shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the
same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may remove small wireless facility collocations
from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has
been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The City may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
6. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit
shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the
new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes or any provision, condition or requirement
contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable City
Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
7. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the
City by personal delivery at the City's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or
by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
C. Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
1. Public Safety Space Reservation: The City may reserve space on Municipal utility poles for future public safety
uses, for the City's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a
small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate
both uses.
2. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless
facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter.
The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contractors that perform work in connection with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 754/923
its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and
governmental standards and regulations.
3. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of the small
wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable
interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the
FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed
by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in
a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum
established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is
not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
4. Zones Where Collocation Shall Not Occur: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on City
utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety
zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications
space on the City utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and
"electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
5. Complying With Public Safety: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code
provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
6. Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable
for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a
City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to
other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
7. Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this subsection C, a wireless provider shall not be required to
collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate
multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a
small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that the small wireless facility be
collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the
proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable
terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional
material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the applicant shall provide written certification describing
the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this
paragraph.
8. Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the
utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may
not exceed the higher of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 755/923
a. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless
facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within three hundred
feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way
within the jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
b. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
9. Height Exceptions Waiver: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above
height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for an
administrative waiver in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth below:
a. The City Manager or his designee may grant an administrative waiver of the above height restrictions if all of the
following findings are met:
(1) It is in the best interest of the citizens of Carbondale,
(2) The placement of the facility would not cause an obstruction, or interfere with the rights of adjoining property
owners, and
(3) It would be in conformity with the design standards for the approved zoning district.
10. Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a
contract between the City and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
11. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in
applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for
exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
12. Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations
concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that
addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
13. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred
eighty (180) days after issuance of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this period
or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul
availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the
issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation
does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
D. Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
1. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single
small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small
wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
2. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility
addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
3. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall
be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
4. The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. Routine maintenance;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 756/923
b. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or
smaller if the wireless provider notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and
includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with application requirements in
this section; or
c. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on
cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
5. Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic
patterns or require lane closures.
E. Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the City or another unit of local government
that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the
consent of the property owner;
2. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public
park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of
facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit
of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
3. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter
Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities
Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this
chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being
used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public
Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or b) to obtain any required
permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities
subject to this chapter.
F. Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of
small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles, that
are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the City's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions
contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates,
fees and terms that the City makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the
installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City that it opts to accept such
rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the
small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the City's utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the City before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
If a wireless provider previously approved to install a small cell facility does not have an existing agreement with the
City, the wireless provider is subject to the annual recurring rate in subsection G of this section.
G. Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless
facility on a City utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or 2) the
actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the City utility pole.
If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00)
payable on or before the 30th day of January of the year succeeding the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on 30th day of January thereafter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 757/923
H. Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after
receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the City to the owner at the last
known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such
notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment
agreement for Municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other
law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of the City. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord.
2018-22)
17-13-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Jackson County, Illinois, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the City shall allow the collocating person to collocate
on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal utility pole, with rates
to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 2018-22)
17-13-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or
property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City improvements or
right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising
out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify
or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its
employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the City with respect
to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 2018-22)
17-13-6: INSURANCE:
A. The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
1. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
2. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
3. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the City improvements or rights-of-way to
afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of City improvements or rights-ofway,
including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
B. The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and
provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy prior to the
collocation of any wireless facility.
C. A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the
City. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the
requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits
required by the City. (Ord. 2018-22)
17-13-7: SEVERABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 758/923
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be given effect
without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable.
(Ord. 2018-22)
Title 18
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS, PENALTIES
18-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this title shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the Illinois vehicle
code except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition set forth in another section of this
title and applicable to that section or a designated part thereof is applicable. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-1-2: PENALTIES:
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any person who violates any provision of this title shall be subject to a fine of not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 2
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
18-2-1: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-2-2: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICER:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer, fireman or
uniformed adult school crossing guard invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-2-3: FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER:
Any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having been given a visual or audible signal by a peace officer directing
such driver or operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, wilfully fails or refuses to obey such direction, increases the speed
of his vehicle, extinguishes the lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer, is in violation of this title. The
signal given by the peace officer may be by hand, voice, siren, red or blue light; provided, the officer giving such signal
shall be in police uniform, and, if driving a vehicle, such vehicle shall display illuminated oscillating, rotating, or flashing
red or blue lights which when used in conjunction with an audible horn or siren would indicate the vehicle to be an official
police vehicle. Such requirement shall not preclude the use of amber or white oscillating, rotating or flashing lights in
conjunction with red or blue oscillating, rotating or flashing lights. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-2-4: PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TITLE; EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 759/923
A. Applicability: The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the
drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or any other
political subdivision of the state, except as otherwise provided in this section and subject to such specific exceptions
as set forth in this title with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
B. Responding To Emergency: The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or
when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to, but not upon returning from a
fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. The driver
of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
1. Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be required and necessary for
safe operation;
3. Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as not to endanger life or property;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
C. Proper Signals Of Emergency: The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle, other than a police
vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of either an audible signal when in motion or visual signals
meeting the requirements set forth in the Illinois vehicle code.
D. Due Regard For Safety: The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor do such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-2-5: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL
DRAWN VEHICLES:
Every person riding an animal or driving an animal drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their
very nature can have no application. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS
18-3-1: OBEDIENCE TO AND REQUIRED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed or
held in accordance with the provisions of this title, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this title.
B. It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across private property to avoid an official traffic control
device.
C. No provision of this title for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged
violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic
control devices are required, such section shall be effective although no devices are erected or in place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 760/923
D. Whenever an official traffic control device is placed or held in position approximately conforming to the requirements
of this title and purports to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such device, such device shall be
presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or direction of lawful authority, and comply with the
requirements of this title, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
E. The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic control signal on which no signal facing such vehicle is illuminated shall
stop before entering the intersection in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a stop sign. (Ord. 2015-
29)
18-3-2: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights or color lighted arrows,
successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special
pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians
as follows:
A. Green Indication:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at
such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right of
way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such
signal is exhibited.
2. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously
enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted
by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians
lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
3. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the
sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Steady Yellow Indication:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal or yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related
green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter. Vehicles
should immediately slow down and make every reasonable attempt to stop at a clearly marked stop line, or before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection.
2. Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow signal or yellow arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian
control signal as provided in section 18-3-3 of this chapter, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
C. Steady Red Indication:
1. Except as provided in subsection C3 of this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.
2. Except as provided in subsection C3 of this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter
the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make a
movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication permitting the movement indicated by the red
arrow is shown.
3. Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter
the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street onto a one-way street, after stopping as required
by subsection C1 or C2 of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 761/923
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
the driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the right of way
to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
4. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 18-3-3 of this chapter, pedestrians
facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
D. Signal Placement Other Than At Intersections: In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained
at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking on the pavement
indicating where the stop shall be made or, in the absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the
signal. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-3-3: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" or the illuminated symbols of a
walking person or an upraised palm are in place such signals shall indicate as follows:
A. Walk Or Walking Person Symbol: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of
the signal, and shall be given the right of way by the drivers of all vehicles.
B. Don't Walk Or Upraised Palm Symbol: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal,
but any pedestrian who has partly completed his crossing on the walk signal or walking person symbol shall proceed
to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or flashing.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-3-4: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow sign is used in conjunction with a traffic control device, it should require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
A. Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red light is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop
at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none,
then a point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making
a stop at a stop sign.
B. Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow light is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles
may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
C. Exception: This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching
railroad grade crossings shall be governed by chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-3-5: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS OR ADVERTISING:
A. Imitation Of Signs: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with
the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
B. Advertising Upon: No person may place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic
sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 762/923
C. Nuisance Declared: Every such prohibiting sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the
city is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-3-6: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS:
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official
traffic control device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-3-7: UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES AND STRUCTURES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully injure or damage any public highway, street bridge, or culvert, or to wilfully
damage or injure or remove any sign, signpost, or structure upon or used or constructed in connection with any public
highway or street for the protection thereof or for protection or regulation of traffic thereon by any wilfully unusual,
improper or unreasonable use thereof, or by wilfully careless driving or use of any vehicle thereon, or by the wilful
mutilation, defacing, destruction, or removal thereof. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-3-8: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGNS OR MARKERS:
The Illinois department of transportation and the city, with reference to traffic control signs, signals, or markers owned by
the department or city, are authorized to indicate the ownership of the signs, signals, or markers on the back of such
devices in letters not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") or more than three-fourths inch (3/4") in height, by use of a metal
stamp, etching, or other permanent means and, except for employees of the department or city, police officers,
contractors and their employees engaged in a construction contract approved by the department or city, it is unlawful for
any person to possess such sign, signal, or marker so identified. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 4
ACCIDENTS
18-4-1: ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES:
A. Responsibility To Stop And Remain At Scene: The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting
in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as
close thereto as possible, and shall then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of the
accident until the requirements of section 18-4-3 of this chapter have been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made
without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
B. Duty To Report: Any person who has failed to stop or to comply with said requirements shall, within three (3) hours
after such motor vehicle accident, or, if hospitalized and incapacitated from reporting at any time during such period,
within forty eight (48) hours after being discharged from the hospital, report the place of the accident, the date, the
approximate time, the driver's name and address, the registration number of the vehicle driven, and the names of all
other occupants of such vehicle, at the police department near the place where such accident occurred. No report
made as required under this subsection shall be used directly or indirectly, as a basis for the prosecution of any
violation of subsection A of this section.
C. Definition: For purposes of this section, "personal injury" shall mean any injury requiring immediate professional
treatment in a medical facility or doctor's office. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-4-2: ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 763/923
The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such motor vehicle accident, or as close
thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event, shall remain at the scene of the accident until the
requirements of section 18-4-3 of this chapter have been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-4-3: DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID:
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage
to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give the driver's name, address, registration number,
and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and shall upon request and if available exhibit such driver's license to
the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any
person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the
carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.
B. If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this provision is in condition to receive and understand such
information and no police officer is present, such driver after rendering reasonable assistance shall forthwith report
such motor vehicle accident at the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority, disclosing the information
required by this section. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-4-4: DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY:
The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a motor vehicle accident with any vehicle which is
unattended, or other property, resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall immediately stop and shall
then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other property of the driver's name,
address, registration number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or shall attach securely in a conspicuous
place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a written notice giving the driver's name, address, registration number,
and owner of the vehicle the driver was driving and shall without unnecessary delay notify the nearest office of a duly
authorized police authority and shall make a written report of such accident when and as required in section 18-4-5 of
this chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-4-5: DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT:
A. Generally: The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident within this city, resulting in injury to
or death of any person, or in which damage to the property of any one person, including himself in excess of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is sustained, shall as soon as possible but not later than ten (10) days after such
accident forward a written report of such accident to the proper authority.
B. School Bus Involved: Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in this city, caused by a collision, a sudden
stop, or otherwise, resulting in any property damage, personal injury or death and whenever an accident occurs
within fifty feet (50') of a school bus in this city resulting in personal injury to or the death of any person while awaiting
or preparing to board the bus or immediately after exiting the bus, the driver shall as soon as possible but not later
than ten (10) days after the accident, forward a written report to the department of transportation. If a report is also
required under subsection A of this section, that report and the report required by this subsection shall be submitted
on a single form.
C. Supplemental Report: The police or investigating law enforcement agency may require any driver, occupant or owner
of a vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided in this section or section 18-4-8 of this
chapter, to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient in the opinion of the secretary of state
or the police or investigating law enforcement agency and may require witnesses of the accident to submit written
reports to the police or investigating law enforcement agency. The report may include photographs, charts, sketches,
and graphs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 764/923
D. Failure To Report; Notification: Should the police or investigating law enforcement agency learn through other reports
of accidents required by law of the occurrence of an accident reportable under this chapter and the driver, owner, or
witness has not reported as required under subsection A, B, or C of this section, or section 18-4-8 of this chapter,
within the time specified, such person is not relieved of the responsibility and the police or investigating law
enforcement agency shall notify such person by first class mail directed to his last known address of his legal
obligation. However, such notification is not a condition precedent to impose the penalty for failure to report as
provided in subsection E of this section.
E. Suspension Of License: The secretary of state shall suspend the driver's license, or any nonresident's driving
privilege, of any person who fails or neglects to make report of a traffic accident as herein required by any other law
of the state. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-4-6: IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF ACCIDENT:
A. Responsibility Of Driver: The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident described in section
18-4-5 of this chapter shall, if no police officer is present, give notice of the accident by the fastest available means of
communication to the local police department if such accident occurs within the city.
B. Driver Seriously Injured: Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an
accident as required in subsection A of this section and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the
accident capable of doing so, that occupant must give notice as required in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2015-
29)
18-4-7: FALSE ACCIDENT REPORTS OR NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false information, knowing or having reason to believe that such information
is false, when providing information in an oral or written report as required by this chapter. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-4-8: FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT:
Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required written accident report and if there was
another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the motor vehicle accident capable of making a written report, such
occupant shall make or cause to be made such written report. If said driver fails for any reason to make such report, the
owner of the vehicle involved in such motor vehicle accident shall, as soon as practicable, make said report to the police
department. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 5
TRANSPORTING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AND RECKLESS DRIVING
18-5-1: TRANSPORTING OR POSSESSING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN MOTOR VEHICLE:
A. Driver Responsibility; Exception: Except as provided in subsection C of this section and in subsection 2-4-9A4 of this
code, no driver may transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger area of any motor
vehicle upon any street or highway in this city except in the original container and with the seal unbroken.
B. Passenger Responsibility; Exception: Except as provided in subsection C of this section and in subsection 2-4-9A4 of
this code, no passenger may carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within any passenger area of any motor
vehicle upon any street or highway in this city except in the original container and with the seal unbroken.
C. Chartered Transportation; Driver And Passenger Responsibility: This section shall not apply to the passengers on a
chartered bus when it is being used for purposes which chartered buses are ordinarily used or on a "motor home or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 765/923
mini-motor home" as defined in the Illinois vehicle code. However, the driver of any such vehicle is prohibited from
consuming or having any alcoholic liquor in or about the driver's area. Any evidence of alcoholic consumption by the
driver shall be prima facie evidence of such driver's failure to obey this section.
D. Buses Chartered For School Purposes: The exemption applicable to chartered buses under subsection C of this
section does not apply to any chartered bus being used for school purposes. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-5-2: RECKLESS DRIVING:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle with a wilful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-5-3: DRAG RACING:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle as a participant in drag racing. "Drag racing" means the act of two
(2) or more individuals competing or racing on any street or highway in this city in a situation in which one of the motor
vehicles is beside or to the rear of a motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to prevent
the competing driver from passing or overtaking, either by acceleration or maneuver, or one or more individuals
competing in a race against time on any street or highway in this city. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-5-4: SQUEALING OR SCREECHING TIRES:
A. Excessive Tire Noise: No person shall operate any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause or allow to be emitted
squealing, screeching or other such noise from the vehicle's tires due to rapid acceleration or excessive speed
around corners or other such reason.
B. Exception: This section shall not apply to the following conditions:
1. An authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator; or
2. The emergency operation of a motor vehicle when avoiding imminent danger; or
3. Any raceway, racing facility or other public event, not part of a highway, sanctioned by the appropriate
governmental authority. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 6
GENERAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS
18-6-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. Due Care Required: No vehicle may be driven upon any street or highway of this city at a speed which is greater than
is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the street or highway, or endangers the
safety of any person or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed
limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection,
approaching and going around a curve, approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway,
or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway
conditions. Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or
entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
B. Obedience To Posted Speed Limit: No person may drive a vehicle upon any street or highway at a speed which is
greater than the applicable maximum speed limit legally established and posted as required by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 766/923
C. Maximum Speed Limit Established:
1. Unless some other speed restriction is established and posted, the maximum speed limit for all vehicles within the
city is:
a. Thirty (30) miles per hour; and
b. Fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley.
2. These limits are in effect without posting, and any change in them in a particular area shall be effective only when
signs giving notice of the limit are erected at the proper place or along the proper part or zone of the highway or
street. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-6-2: SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS:
A. School Zones: On a school day when school children are present and so close thereto that a potential hazard exists
because of the close proximity of the motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of
twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public thoroughfare where
children pass going to and from school.
B. Effective Times Established: For the purpose of this section, a school day shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
shall conclude at four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
C. Proper Posting Of School Zones: This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted upon the
streets and highways under their respective jurisdiction and maintained by the city wherein the school zone is
located. Such signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the
school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school days when school children are present. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit the use of electronic speed detecting devices within five hundred feet (500') of signs within a
special school speed zone indicating such zone, as defined in this section, nor shall evidence obtained thereby be
inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding provided the use of such device shall apply only to the enforcement of
the speed limit in such special school speed zone.
D. Mandatory Minimum Fine: A violation of any part of this section shall result in a mandatory minimum fine of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in addition to any costs or charges connected with the prosecution of such violation.
Any such violation shall be a mandatory conviction, with no disposition of supervision. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-6-3: MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement
of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of a vehicle or in compliance with law. (Ord. 2015-
29)
18-6-4: SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT WHILE IN CONSTRUCTION ZONE:
A. A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a construction or maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the
posted speed limit whether workers are present or not.
1. Electronic Speed Detecting Devices: Nothing in this chapter prohibits the use of electronic speed detecting devices
within five hundred feet (500') of signs within a "construction or maintenance speed zone" indicating the zone, as
defined in this section, nor shall evidence obtained by use of those devices be inadmissible in any prosecution for
speeding, provided the use of the device shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in the construction
or maintenance speed zone.
2. Definition: As used in this section, a "construction or maintenance speed zone" is an area in which the department,
toll highway authority, or local agency has posted signage advising drivers that a construction or maintenance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 767/923
speed zone is being approached, or in which the department, authority, or local agency has posted a lower speed
limit with a highway construction or maintenance speed zone special speed limit sign after determining that the
preexisting established speed limit through a highway construction or maintenance project is greater than is
reasonable or safe with respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance speed zone.
3. Penalty: A person who commits a first violation of this section shall pay a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00), a second or subsequent violation shall be a minimum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
2015-29)
Chapter 7
DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OVERTAKING AND
PASSING
18-7-1: DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTION:
A. Vehicles Hold To Right; Exception: Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half
of the roadway, except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such
movements;
2. When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the center of the roadway;
provided, any person so doing shall yield the right of way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard;
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
4. Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;
5. Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon,
the driver on whose right is the wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other vehicle.
B. Overtaking And Passing: Upon all roadways a vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time
and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right hand lane available for traffic, or as close
as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
C. Turning; Obedience To Traffic Control Devices: Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway,
except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the
roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection A2 of
this section. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a
left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-2: PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width
for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main
traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-3: OVERTAKING A VEHICLE ON LEFT:
The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those
limitations, exceptions, and special rules otherwise stated in this title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 768/923
A. Remain In Passing Lane Until Clear Of Overtaken Vehicle: The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right
side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. In no event shall such movement be made by driving
off the pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.
B. Give Right Of Way: Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle
shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
C. Cycles: The driver of any two (2) wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left of any vehicle proceeding in the
same direction, pass upon the right of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed
lane of traffic available to permit such passing maneuver safely. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-4: WHEN OVERTAKING ON RIGHT IS PERMITTED:
A. Vehicles With Three Or More Wheels: The driver of a vehicle with three (3) or more wheels may overtake and pass
upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
1. When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
2. Upon a street or roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of vehicles
moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle.
3. Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the
roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving vehicles.
B. Cycles: The driver of a two (2) wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any other vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless the unobstructed pavement to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less
than eight feet (8').
C. Safety Requirement: The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under
conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
D. Limitations To Overtaking On The Right: Vehicles shall be driven on a roadway, and shall only be driven on the
shoulder for the purpose of stopping or accelerating from a stop while merging into traffic. It shall be a violation if
while merging into traffic and while on the shoulder, the vehicle passes any other vehicle on the roadway adjacent to
it. Nothing in this section shall apply to an authorized emergency vehicle, to any authorized transit bus, to any farm
tractor or implement of husbandry, to any service vehicle while engaged in maintenance of the highway or related
work, or to any authorized vehicle within a designated construction zone. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-5: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON LEFT:
No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless authorized by the provisions of this title and unless such left side is clearly
visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any
vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as
practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from
the opposite direction, before coming within two hundred feet (200') of any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-6: FURTHER LIMITATIONS ON DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER OF ROADWAY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 769/923
A. No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
1. When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed
within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction;
2. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing;
3. When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
B. The limitations in subsection A of this section do not apply upon a one-way roadway nor upon a roadway with
unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction nor to the driver
of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway when such movement can be made with safety.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-7: NO PASSING ZONE:
A. No Passing Zone Established: The state department of transportation and the city are authorized to determine those
portions of any highway under their respective jurisdictions where overtaking and passing or driving on the left of the
roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the
beginning and end of such zones, and when such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily
observant person every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
B. Obedience To Signs And Markings: Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone as set forth in
subsection A of this section, no driver may at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within the no passing
zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no passing zone throughout its length.
C. Exceptions: This section does not apply under the conditions described in subsection 18-7-1A2 of this chapter, nor to
the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. The pavement striping designed to
mark the no passing zone may be crossed from the left hand lane for the purpose of completing a pass that was
begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the driver's direction of travel. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-8: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS:
A. Authority To Establish: The state department of transportation and city, with respect to highways and streets under
their respective jurisdictions, may designate any highway, roadway, part of a roadway or specific lanes upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic control
devices.
B. Obedience Mandatory: Upon a roadway so designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the
direction designated at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic control devices.
C. Respect Dividers Or Barriers: Whenever any highway has been divided into two (2) or more roadways by leaving an
intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, every vehicle must be driven only upon the right hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another
roadway by official traffic control devices or police officers. No vehicle may be driven over, across, or within such
dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an opening in the physical barrier, or dividing section, or space, or
at a crossover or intersection as established by public authority.
D. Exception: The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved noncurbed dividing space unless prohibited by an
official traffic control device. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-9: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 770/923
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in
addition to all other consistent herewith shall apply:
A. Travel Within Lanes: A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be
moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made safely.
B. Use Of Turn Lanes: Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for two-way movement of
traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in
the same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left
turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the
vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic control devices. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-7-10: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
A. Establish Safe Distance: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable
and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
B. Attention To Towing Vehicles: The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a
roadway outside of a business or residence district and which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and
occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle
from overtaking and passing any vehicle or combination of vehicles.
C. Caravans Or Motorcades: Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in
a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space
between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such
space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 8
TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS ON STOPPING AND TURNING
18-8-1: REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
A. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge
of the roadway.
B. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the
left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction
upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection
to the left of the center of the intersection.
C. Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official
traffic control devices:
1. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
2. A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or
when preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 2015-29)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 771/923
18-8-2: LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS:
A. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement
can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
B. No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near
the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either
direction within five hundred feet (500'). (Ord. 2015-29)
18-8-3: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with
reasonable safety. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-8-4: WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED:
A. Conditions Necessary To Commence Turning: No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in
proper position upon the roadway as required in section 18-8-1 of this chapter or turn a vehicle to enter a private road
or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until
such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
B. Left Or Right Hand Turns: A signal or intention to turn right or left when required must be given continuously not less
than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning within a business or residence district, and
such signal must be given continuously not less than the last two hundred feet (200') traveled by the vehicle before
turning outside a business or residence district.
C. Stopping Or Decreasing Speed: No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving
an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when
there is opportunity to give such a signal.
D. Lane Changes; Hazard Lights: Electric turn signal devices must be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes
or start from a parallel parked position but must not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled vehicle or
flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear. However, such
signal devices may be flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring usual care in approaching, overtaking, and passing.
E. Method Of Signaling: Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and
arm or by an electric turn signal device.
F. Hand Signals: All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the
following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally.
2. Right turn: hand and arm extended upward.
3. Stop or decrease of speed: hand and arm extended downward. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 9
RIGHT OF WAY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 772/923
18-9-1: APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTIONS:
A. Yield Right Of Way: When two (2) vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways at approximately
the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left must yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
B. T Intersections: The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a highway from a highway which terminates at
the intersection, not otherwise regulated by this title or controlled by traffic control signs or signals, shall stop, yield,
and grant the privilege of immediate use of the intersection to another vehicle which has entered the intersection from
the nonterminating highway or is approaching the intersection on a nonterminating highway in such proximity as to
constitute a hazard, and after stopping may proceed when the driver may safely enter the intersection without
interference or collision with the traffic using the nonterminating highway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-9-2: TURNING LEFT:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall
yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-9-3: ENTERING STOP CROSSWALKS:
Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or flashing red signals are in place at a plainly
marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk, and
pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of way over vehicles so
stopped. Drivers of vehicles having so yielded the right of way to pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at
an intersection shall also yield the right of way to pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection. (Ord. 2015-
29)
18-9-4: ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION:
A. Stop Intersections: Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another roadway or which is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection, but said driver having so yielded
may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
B. Yield Intersections: The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line,
but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
C. Collision Prima Facie Evidence: If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with the movement
of other vehicles after driving past a yield right of way sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield right of way. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-9-5: MERGING TRAFFIC:
At an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 773/923
roadways is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with another vehicle.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-9-6: ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-9-7: OPERATION UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A. Yield; Move To Right; Stop: Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible
and visual signals meeting the requirements of this title, or a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible or visual signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection
and shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the emergency vehicle, stop and remain in such position until
the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. Emergency Vehicle Responsibility: This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
C. Approaching An Emergency Vehicle: Upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, when the
authorized emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately flashing red, red and white, blue, or red and
blue lights or amber or yellow warning lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle shall:
1. Proceeding with due caution, yield the right of way by making a lane change into a lane not adjacent to that of the
authorized emergency vehicle, if possible with due regard to safety and traffic conditions, if on a highway having at
least four (4) lanes with not less than two (2) lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle; or
2. Proceeding with due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if
changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe.
As used in this subsection, "authorized emergency vehicle" includes any vehicle authorized by law to be equipped
with oscillating, rotating, or flashing lights under section 12-215 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended, while the
owner or operator of the vehicle is engaged in his or her official duties.
D. Violation; Penalty: A violation of any part of this section shall result in a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) in addition to any costs or charges connected with the prosecution of such violation. Any such violation
shall be a mandatory conviction, with no disposition of supervision. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-9-8: APPROACHING HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE AREA:
A. Signaled Work Zone: The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any authorized vehicle or pedestrian
actually engaged in work upon a highway within any highway construction or maintenance area indicated by official
traffic control devices.
B. Signaled Work Vehicles: The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any authorized vehicle obviously and
actually engaged in work upon a highway whenever the vehicle engaged in construction or maintenance work
displays flashing lights.
C. Flagger: The driver of a vehicle shall stop if signaled to do so by a flagger or a traffic control signal and remain in such
position until signaled to proceed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 774/923
D. Violation; Penalty: A violation of any part of this section shall result in a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) in addition to any costs or charges connected with the prosecution of such violation. Any such violation
shall be a mandatory conviction, with no disposition of supervision. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 10
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
18-10-1: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
A. A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device specifically applicable to the pedestrian,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian control signals provided in chapter 3 of this title, but at all other
places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. (Ord.
2015-29)
18-10-2: RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
A. Driver Responsibility: When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
B. Pedestrian Responsibility: No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the
path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
C. Overtaking Or Passing At Crosswalks: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
D. Obedience To Signs Or Signals: Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or at a
plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers shall yield right of way to pedestrians as set forth in section
18-9-4 of this title. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-3: CROSSING OTHER THAN AT CROSSWALKS:
A. Jay Walking: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Refusal To Use Safe Crossing: Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. Crosswalks To Be Used: Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians
shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
D. Diagonal Crossing: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic
control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 775/923
E. Stay Within Markings: No pedestrian shall walk through an underpass or overpass roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within a designated walking area. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-4: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding other provisions of this title, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian or any person operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power upon any roadway and shall
give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or
any obviously confused, incapacitated, or intoxicated person. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-5: BLIND, HEARING IMPAIRED OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PEDESTRIAN RIGHT OF
WAY:
The driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to yield the right of way to any person who is sight impaired, hearing
impaired, physically handicapped or who is carrying a clearly visible cane or accompanied by a support or guide dog.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-6: MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS:
Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be
subject to all the duties applicable to a pedestrian. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-7: USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS:
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-8: SOLICITING RIDES, BUSINESS OR CONTRIBUTIONS:
A. Rides: No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.
B. Business: No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment or business from the occupant
of any vehicle.
C. Contributions: No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any
vehicle. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-9: WALKING UPON HIGHWAYS:
A. Available Sidewalks To Be Used: Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrians to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Shoulder Use: Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on
a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.
C. Outer Edge; Left Hand Side: Where neither a sidewalk nor shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway,
shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 776/923
D. Yield To Vehicles: Except as otherwise provided in this section, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right of
way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-10: RIGHT OF WAY ON SIDEWALKS:
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian on any sidewalk. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-11: YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of an audible signal and visual signals or
of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right of way
to the authorized emergency vehicle. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-10-12: RAILROAD SIGNALS:
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or
bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 11
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
18-11-1: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN:
A. Maintain Distance From Tracks: Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, such
person must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of
danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not
less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The
foregoing requirements shall apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a
railroad train;
3. A railroad train approaching a highway crossing emits a warning signal and such railroad train, by reason of its
speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard;
4. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing;
5. A railroad train is approaching so closely that an immediate hazard is created.
B. Respect Barriers Or Gates: No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at
a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
C. Penalty: A violation of any part of this section shall result in a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in
addition to any costs or charges connected with the prosecution of such violation. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-11-2: CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS:
A. Enumerated: The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing a railroad track or tracks at grade, stop
such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail and, while so stopped, shall
listen and look for the approach of a train and shall not proceed until such movement can be made with safety:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 777/923
1. Any "second division vehicle" (as defined in the Illinois vehicle code) carrying passengers for hire;
2. Any school bus carrying a school child;
3. Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state law to be placarded when carrying as a cargo or part of a
cargo "hazardous material" as defined in the hazardous materials transportation act. After stopping as required in
this section, the driver shall proceed only in a gear not requiring a change of gears during the crossing, and the
driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
B. Exception: This section shall not apply at any railroad grade crossing where traffic is controlled by a police officer or
flag person.
C. Penalty: A violation of any part of this section shall result in a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in
addition to any costs or charges connected with the prosecution of such violation. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-11-3: STOP AND YIELD SIGNS:
A. Stop Intersections: Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection, or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
then at the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
B. Yield Intersections: The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before
entering the crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection roadway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-11-4: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road or driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately
prior to driving into the sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event
there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at a point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 12
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
18-12-1: ENFORCEMENT OF PARKING ORDINANCES:
A. Issue Citations: All police officers and any other officer of the city, who is otherwise authorized to issue citations for
violations of this chapter, shall immediately issue a citation to the owner or operator of a vehicle whenever that
vehicle is parked in a location or manner prohibited by this chapter. Any city official from the building and
neighborhood services division is hereby authorized to issue citations to the owner or operator of any vehicle which is
parked in violation of this chapter. If the owner or operator of a vehicle parked in violation of this chapter is not
present to accept the citation, the citation shall be placed on the vehicle.
B. Citation Response Time: If the city's citation is not satisfied within fourteen (14) days, the city will send notice of said
citation to the registered owner of the vehicle as shown by the records of the Illinois secretary of state.
C. Filed In County Court; License Suspension: If the citation is not satisfied within thirty (30) days, the city may cause a
complaint to be filed in Jackson County circuit court. The city, where appropriate, may utilize the procedures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 778/923
established in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 concerning the suspension of a person's driver's license for
outstanding parking tickets.
D. Authority To Impound Or Tow: Nothing in this section shall prevent or limit the city's authority to impound or tow
vehicles pursuant to this chapter or to file a complaint sooner as provided for in this title.
E. Owner Liability: In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place in violation of any provision of this
chapter, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation of a provision
hereof, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at that time the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or left the vehicle in
violation of this section. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-2: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
A. Enumerated: No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk;
2. In front of a public or private driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
5. On a crosswalk;
6. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
7. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the
side of a roadway;
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite
the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
9. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing;
10. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance of any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly posted;
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic;
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street;
13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
14. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
B. Specific Parking Prohibitions:
1. Parking In Streets And Alleys Not To Obstruct Traffic: No person shall park a motor vehicle within a street or alley
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within a street or alley in
such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
2. Parking On Right-Of-Way Prohibited: No person shall park a motor vehicle on real property situated between the
sidewalk and the roadway, or upon any land dedicated for right-of-way for road or street purposes unless said area
is paved, and unless signs indicate that parking is permitted at said locations.
3. Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited: No person shall park a motor vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 779/923
a. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
b. Washing, greasing, repairing, or maintaining such vehicles, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency.
4. Parking More Than Seventy Two Hours Prohibited: No person shall park a motor vehicle on any street for a period
of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
5. Parking Of Certain Commercial Vehicles On Residential Streets Prohibited: Parking of commercial vehicles in
excess of four (4) tons is prohibited on residential streets.
a. No person shall park, stop, or stand a commercial vehicle or any combination thereof with weight in excess of
four (4) tons on any street at any place other than a street so designated for said parking by the City.
b. The operator of a commercial vehicle with a weight in excess of four (4) tons shall not stop such vehicle upon
any street in any place except for the purpose of loading or unloading, and except in the case of an emergency.
6. Front Yards Of One-, Two-, Three- Or Four-Unit Dwellings: For the purpose of this section, "front yard" shall have
the definition as set forth in title 15 of this Code. (Ord. 2015-29)
C. Authority Of City Manager To Establish Temporary No Parking Zones During Emergencies And Special Events:
1. The City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized to establish temporary no parking areas during a special
event or during an emergency.
a. A special event shall be any event that includes, but is not limited to, residential block parties, festivals, sporting
events, parades, or carnivals. (Ord. 2017-04)
18-12-3: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING A SNOW EMERGENCY:
A. Automatic Declaration: A snow emergency shall be automatically declared to exist within the City limits whenever
there is an accumulation of snow and ice in excess of two inches (2") at which time a parking prohibition shall
automatically become effective throughout the City in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Snow Routes Kept Clear: During a snow emergency, parking on any portion of such street(s) designated and
permanently marked as a snow route is prohibited. A vehicle that is parked and/or left unattended when there is an
accumulation of snow and ice in excess of two inches (2") shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section by
the person in whose name the vehicle is registered. The parking prohibition under this section shall be terminated as
those streets designated as snow routes become substantially clear of snow and ice, edge to edge, for the length of
an entire block. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden
by any other provision of the law.
C. Posting Of Routes: The City Manager is hereby authorized to post permanent signs on each street designated as a
snow route with the wording "Snow Route No Parking - When Accumulation Exceeds Two Inches". Streets
designated as snow routes in subsection F of this section constitute those streets which will be given primary
attention during snow removal operations.
D. Authority To Ticket: The Police Department and other duly authorized City employees are hereby authorized to ticket
pursuant to subsection 18-12-2A14 of this chapter any vehicle(s) parked and/or unattended in violation of this section
and, if the Maintenance and Environmental Services Manager or Director of Public Works deems it necessary to
effectuate snow removal operations on some or all of the designated snow routes, have the vehicle(s) removed and
relocated pursuant to subsection 18-12-10A1 of this chapter. Any registered owner of a vehicle in violation of this
section shall be liable for all fines and costs resulting from the removal, relocation and storage of said vehicle(s).
Upon notice from the Maintenance and Environmental Services Manager or Director of Public Works, the Police
Department shall cause the towing of vehicle(s) and keep a registry of all towed vehicles and points or areas of
relocation so as to assist the vehicle owners in locating the relocated vehicles.
E. Exemptions: On street metered parking zones along designated snow routes are exempt from this parking prohibition
except between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless notification is made by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 780/923
posting temporary special signs notifying the public at least two (2) hours prior to the specific date and time that
clearing operations will occur in the zones specified with the wording "Snow Route No Parking - When Accumulation
Exceeds Two Inches - Effective (enter date & time)". Violations of this section shall be deemed the same and treated
the same as violations of other items in this section.
F. Snow Routes: The streets or portions of streets listed below within the corporate limits of Carbondale are hereby
designated as snow routes and constitute those streets which will be given primary attention during a snow
emergency:
Airport Road New Era Road to west City limits
Alveria Drive Tower Road to west end
Beadle Drive Robinson Circle to Striegel Road
Billy Bryan Street Sycamore Street to Willow Street
Bridge Street Sycamore Street to Rigdon Street
Cedar Court Striegel Road to north end
Cedarview Lane Main Street to Cindy Street
Charles Road Illinois Avenue (Hwy. 51 N.) to New Era Road
Chautauqua Street Oakland Avenue to west City limits
Cherry Street Oakland Avenue to Illinois Avenue
Chestnut Street Wall Street to Washington Street
Clinic Drive Beadle Drive to end of City maintenance (+/- 1,050 feet)
College Street Poplar Street to Lewis Lane
Deer Lake Drive East Kent Drive to south end
Deer Lake Drive West Kent Drive to south end
Dianne Lane Striegel Road to north end
Dillinger Road Illinois Avenue (Hwy. 51 N.) to east City limits
Dixon Street Freeman Street to Old West Main Street
Dogwood Road Giant City Road to east City limits
Dorthella Street Lynda Drive to Walnut Street
Emerald Lane Chautauqua Street to Main Street
Fisher Street Wall Street to Washington Street
Forrest Street Mill to Walnut
Freeman Street Emerald Lane to Oakland Avenue
Giant City Road South City limits to north end
Gladys Drive Rendleman Road to north end
Glenview Drive Sycamore Street to Chautauqua Street
Glopen Larsue to Vercliff
Grand Avenue Illinois Avenue to Giant City Road
Greg Lane Sunset Drive to Kent Drive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 781/923
Illinois Avenue North City limits to south City limits (including connectors to University
Avenue)
Industrial Park Road Illinois Avenue (Hwy. 51 N.) to Oakland Avenue
Jackson Street University Avenue to Wall Street
Johnson Street Valley Road to Chautauqua Street
Kent Drive Parrish Lane to west end
Knight Street Wall Street to R A Stalls Avenue
Lake Road Main Street (Hwy. 13 W.) to west City limits
Lake Road (east end) New Era Road to west City limits
Larsue Drive Giant City Road to Glopen Street
Laurel Lane Oakland Avenue to Willow Street (south intersection)
Lewis Lane Rendleman Road to Park Street
Lynda Drive Dorthella Street to Cedarview Lane
Main Street East City limits to west City limits (including connectors to Walnut Street)
Main Street Frontage Road North
McKinney Avenue to Giant City Road
Main Street Frontage Road South
McKinney Avenue to east end of City maintenance
Mall Entrance Road Giant City Road to U-Mall parking lot
Marion Street College Street to Dillinger Road
McKinley Street Sycamore Street to North Street
McKinney Avenue Rendleman Road to Main Street Frontage Road South
McLafferty Road Chautauqua Street to Pleasant Hill Road
McRoy Drive Dillinger Road to south end
Mill Street Oakland Avenue to Wall Street
Miller Court McRoy Drive to west end
Murphysboro Road Main Street (Hwy. 13 W.) to west City limits
New Era Road Main Street (Hwy. 13 W.) to north City limits
Oak Street Springer Street to Wall Street
Oakland Avenue Chautauqua Street to Charles Road
Old West Main Street Glenview Avenue to Main Street
Park Street Wall Street to east City limits
Park Street (east end) Giant City Road to west City limits
Parrish Lane Kent Drive to Murphysboro Road
Pinewood Drive All west of Tower Road
Pleasant Hill Road Wall Street to west City limits
Poplar Street Sycamore Street to Mill Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 782/923
R A Stalls Avenue Fisher Street to Knight Street
Reed Station Parkway Veterans Parkway to east end
Reed Station Road Walnut Street to north City limits
Rendleman Road Lewis Lane to McKinney Avenue
Rigdon Street Oakland Avenue to Bridge Street
Robinson Circle Murphysboro Road to end of City maintenance (+/- 830 feet)
Springer Ridge Road Pleasant Hill Road to south City limits
Springer Street Main Street to Willow Street
Striegel Road New Era Road to west City limits
Sunny Acres Road Giant City Road to east end
Sunset Drive Greg Lane to Glenview Drive
Sycamore Illinois Avenue to Main Street
Tower Road Murphysboro Road to Chautauqua Street
University Avenue Chestnut Street to Mill Street
Valley Road Freeman Street to Walkup Street
Verclif Drive Giant City Road to Glopen Street
Veterans Parkway Reed Station Parkway to Main Street (IL Route 13)
Walkup Street Valley Road to Johnson Street
Wall Street Knight Street to Pleasant Hill Road
Walnut Street Oakland Avenue to east City limits
Washington Street Fisher Street to Grand Avenue
West Walnut Street Dixon to Glenview
Westridge Drive Murphysboro Road to Westridge Place
Westridge Place Beadle Drive to west end
Willow Street Laurel Lane to Billy Bryan Street
Willow Street Oakland Avenue to Illinois Avenue
Willow Street Wall Street to Washington Street
Wood Road Main Street (Hwy. 13 W.) to south City limits
G. Non-Snow Routes: Other streets, alleys, or roadways will be addressed after the designated snow routes are clear as
directed by the City Manager or his/her designee.
H. Intergovernmental Agreements: The City Manager is hereby authorized to enter into intergovernmental agreements
with Township, County and/or State officials to facilitate snow removal. The authority granted herein shall extend only
to exchange of snow removal service and shall not include payments to other governmental agencies. (Ord. 2018-43)
18-12-4: HANDICAPPED PERSONS; PARKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 783/923
A. Designation Of Parking Space For Handicapped Persons:
1. The City Manager is hereby authorized to designate parking spaces for physically handicapped persons pursuant
to the following conditions:
a. The designated parking spaces shall be located where manmade barriers are less substantial than other
locations in the City so that physically handicapped persons will have the most accessible parking spaces
available.
b. No more than four (4) such designations shall be made on any one side of the street within one City block within
a distance of three hundred (300) linear feet along any street, whichever is less.
c. The designation of parking spaces may be made in each Municipal parking lot, provided, however, that no more
than two (2) such spaces, nor more than ten percent (10%) of the spaces available in any one lot, whichever is
greater, may be so designated.
d. The City will, when space allows, construct handicapped parking spaces pursuant to the requirements of the
standard specifications for facilities for the handicapped which is authorized under Illinois Compiled Statutes, a
copy of which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
B. Handicapped Persons; Parking Privileges; Exemptions:
1. A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a handicapped person, pursuant to the applicable sections of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction, state, district, territory or foreign
country upon which is displayed a registration plate, special decal or device issued by the other jurisdiction
designating the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person shall be exempt from the payment of parking
meter fees and exempt from any statute or ordinance imposing time limitations on parking, except limitations of
one-half (1/2) hour or less on any street or highway zone, or any parking lot or parking place which is owned,
leased or owned and leased by a municipality or a municipal parking utility; and shall be recognized by State and
local authorities as a valid license plate or parking device and shall receive the same parking privileges as
residents of this State; but such vehicle shall be subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no
standing" zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and
loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, whereby such
motor vehicle shall be moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location designated by
the officer. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates or special decal or device specified in this section or
applicable sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped
person or disabled veteran may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place specifically
reserved for such vehicles by the posting of an official sign as provided in subsection A of this section. Parking
privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration plates, special
decal or device were issued and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the disabled person
is present.
2. Such parking privileges granted by this section are also extended to motor vehicles of not for profit organizations
used for the transportation of handicapped persons when such motor vehicles display the decal or device issued
pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code.
3. No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to this section or where an official sign
controlling such area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
C. Special Decals For Handicapped Parking: The design, size, color and placement of a handicapped motorist decal or
device shall be determined by the administrative rules of the secretary of state. The decal or device shall be the
property of such handicapped individual or organization and may be used by that person or organization to designate
and identify a vehicle not owned or displaying a registration plate as provided in the Illinois vehicle code to designate
when the vehicle is being used to transport said handicapped person or persons, and thus is entitled to enjoy all the
privileges that would be afforded a handicapped licensed vehicle. Handicapped decals or devices issued and
displayed pursuant to the Illinois vehicle code or this section shall be recognized and honored.
D. Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places Reserved For Handicapped Persons:
1. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates or decals issued to a
"handicapped person" as defined by the Illinois vehicle code as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any private or public off street parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 784/923
facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated under this section, for motor vehicles
bearing such registration plates. Any motor vehicle bearing a handicapped license plate or handicapped parking
decal or device containing the international symbol of access issued to handicapped persons by any local authority,
state, district, territory or foreign country shall be recognized by state and local authorities as a valid plate or device
and receive the same parking privileges as residents of this city.
2. Any person owning or operating any public or private off street parking facility may, after notifying the police
department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked
within a stall or space reserved for use by the handicapped which does not display handicapped registration plate
or a special decal or device as required under this section.
3. Violation of the provisions of this section shall result in a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or
storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this section. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-5: PARALLEL PARKING; ANGLE PARKING; ONE-WAY ROADWAYS:
Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such
vehicle parallel with and within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb, or if there is no curb, with and within twelve
inches (12") of the edge of the roadway, except:
A. On streets marked for angle parking vehicles shall park at the angle indicated by such marks, and
B. A vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the
roadway in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the
right hand curb or edge of the roadway, or its left hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the left hand curb or edge
of the roadway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-6: DESIGNATION OF LOADING ZONES:
A. Posting Signs: The city council hereby authorizes the city manager to determine the location of passenger and freight
curb loading zones, and to place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same, and stating the hours during
which the provisions of this section are applicable. By the same authority, such loading zones may be changed or
discontinued. Such loading zones may be established on the request of any person, provided that person meets the
conditions set forth herein:
1. Commercial:
a. The property owned or leased by the applicant must be inaccessible except from the abutting street which must
run in front of the property;
b. The property must be used for commercial or business purposes, as "commercial" and "business" are defined in
the zoning ordinance of the city (title 15 of this code) or amendments thereto;
c. A business or commercial operation for which the property is used, must be of a nature which requires frequent
loading and unloading at the location.
2. Noncommercial: That the property in question has a frequent need to load or unload people and such a designated
area is necessary to provide a safe environment for this purpose.
B. Establishing, Maintaining Zones; Fees: Loading zones shall not be established until the applicant has paid to the city
an amount equal to the cost of establishing and maintaining the loading zone on an annual basis. This amount shall
be based upon the revenue which is received by the city from the space for which a loading zone is being requested.
The amount of the revenue shall be calculated by the finance department and shall be paid to the city annually in
advance on May 1 of each year. Failure to pay the amount of establishing and maintaining the zone shall be cause
for revocation. Applications made after May 1 of each year shall be subject to a prorated annual fee with any part of a
month being considered as one month, for the remainder of the year through April 30. The amount of establishing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 785/923
and maintaining the zone shall be computed annually, and that amount shall be provided to the applicant on April 1 of
each year.
C. Zone Designation Revocation: The designation of a loading zone may be revoked upon occurrence of any of the
following events:
1. Failure of the property to meet the standards set forth in this section;
2. Failure to pay the amount of establishing and maintaining the zone by May 1;
3. Violation of any of the other provisions of this section.
D. Use Of Zones; Time Limit:
1. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours which the provisions of this section are applicable. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading
materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
2. The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a loading zone for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor
vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such zone.
E. Numbering Of Zones: The zones as designated by the city manager shall be numbered consecutively, and shall be
transferable from person to person, but not from location to location. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-7: PARKING OF MOTORCYCLES1:
It shall be lawful to permit the parking of up to four (4) motorcycles in a single marked parking space upon the streets of
the city, regardless of whether or not said marked parking space shall provide for diagonal or parallel parking, provided,
however, that each motorcycle shall be parked within a marked stall within said marked parking space, and provided
further, that said motorcycles shall in all instances be parked with the rear wheel thereof toward the street curb.
However:
A. In the event that more than one motorcycle is parked in a single marked and metered parking space, all motorcycles
in the parking space shall be in violation of this chapter for overtime parking where the time on the parking meter
shows expired.
B. In the event that more than one motorcycle shall park in a marked stall within a marked parking space, each
motorcycle shall be ticketed for double parking. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-8: PENALTY FOR ILLEGAL PARKING:
A. Any person who violates any provision of sections 18-12-1 through 18-12-11 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
in an amount not less than seven dollars ($7.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), except that any
person who violates subsection 18-12-4D of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). Said fines shall be in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal, storage and
impoundment of any vehicle in accordance with section 18-12-10 of this chapter. Persons who violate section 18-12-
14 of this chapter shall be subject to a maximum fine of not more than thirty five dollars ($35.00).
B. Any person may settle any claim the city may have against that person for a violation of sections 18-12-1 through 18-
12-9, 18-12-11, and 18-12-14 of this chapter by making payment in accordance with the following schedule to the
finance department:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 786/923
SETTLEMENT SCHEDULE
If Paid
Within 2
Business
Days
Of
Violation
If Paid
Between
3 And 13
Business
Days
Of
Violation
If Paid On Or
After
13 Business
Days
But Prior To
Filing Of
Complaint
Overtime parking violations:
Subsection 18-12-9C and section 18-12-11 of this chapter $ 7.00 $ 10.00 $ 20.00
Illegal parking violations:
Sections 18-12-1 through 18-12-9, except subsections 18-12-4D
and 18-12-9C of this chapter
10.00 15.00 20.00
Subsection 18-12-4D of this chapter 250.00 250.00 250.00
Section 18-12-14 of this chapter 35.00 35.00 35.00
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-9: ON STREET PARKING AND PARKING LOTS:
A. Designation Of Paid Parking Zones: The area within the city that is south of Willow Street, north of Pleasant
Hill/Reservoir Road, east of Oakland Street, and west of Wall Street is hereby authorized to be a paid parking zone.
The city manager is hereby authorized to install parking meters and/or parking ticket machines at such locations
within the paid parking zone as is necessary and reasonable to regulate and control traffic and parking in order to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the public.
B. Payment For Parking Within Paid Parking Zone:
1. Procedure: Except as provided for in subsection B2 of this section, when any motor vehicle is parked or left in any
space which is within the paid parking zone at which there is a parking meter or a parking ticket machine, the driver
or person in charge of such motor vehicle shall immediately pay the correct sum of money into the appropriate
machine. If there is a parking meter adjacent to the space in which the motor vehicle is parked, the driver or person
in charge of the motor vehicle shall deposit into the meter a United States coin or coins in the denomination
indicated on the parking meter unless the parking meter indicates that there is time which has not yet expired; in
which case, the driver or person in charge of the motor vehicle may purchase additional time by inserting
appropriate coins. If there is a parking ticket machine located in the parking lot within the paid parking zone, the
driver or person in charge of the motor vehicle shall purchase a ticket by depositing into the parking ticket machine
a United States coin or coins in the amount posted on the parking ticket machine; the driver or person in charge of
the motor vehicle shall place such ticket on the dashboard of the vehicle so that the ticket and the date and time on
the ticket may be conspicuously viewed from the exterior of the vehicle.
2. No Enforcement During Certain Days: The paid parking zones within the city of Carbondale shall not be enforced
by the city of Carbondale, and in addition, shall have such meters or ticket machines officially covered or marked
with a "bag" during the following days: from the seventh day before the first official day of fall semester session of
Southern Illinois University Carbondale up to and including the fifth day after the first official day of fall semester
session of Southern Illinois University Carbondale. A driver or person in charge of the motor vehicle who parks
within a paid parking zone at which there is a parking meter or parking ticket machine which displays an official
"bag" over the meter or machine by the city of Carbondale, Illinois, shall not be required to pay the parking meter or
ticket machine. This subsection B2 shall not apply to any paid parking zones which are subject to a lease
agreement between the city of Carbondale and a private property or business owner, unless the private property or
business owner requests otherwise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 787/923
C. Parking Violation:
1. Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is a violation for any driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle to
park or leave such vehicle in a space within a paid parking zone without paying the appropriate amount of money
as indicated by the parking meter or, in the case of certain parking lots, the parking ticket machine.
2. Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is a violation for any driver or person in charge of any motor vehicle
parked or left in a space within a paid parking zone to leave such vehicle in such place after the parking time on
either the parking meter or the parking ticket, as the case may be, has expired and not immediately purchase more
parking time by depositing an additional coin or coins into the parking meter or parking ticket machine.
D. Vehicles To Be Properly Parked: Every vehicle which is parked or left in a paid parking zone shall be parked between
the white lines marked upon the pavement if the space is located on any street, or between the white lines marked
upon the pavement in a parking lot, or if a parking lot does not have any white lines on the pavement, then directly in
front of the bumper block or parking curb provided. It is unlawful to park or leave any vehicle in a paid parking zone
where the vehicle occupies more than one space.
E. United States Coins Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter or parking ticket
machine any coin other than one minted by the United States government.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any foreign coin, any slug, or any object
other than the United States coins indicated by the directions on the parking meter or parking ticket machine.
F. Damage To Parking Meters Or Parking Ticket Machines Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, injure, jam with inappropriate coins or objects, break, steal from, or
tamper with any parking meter or parking ticket machine.
2. Any person in violation of subsection F1 of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) and not greater than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
G. Parking Permits:
1. Parking Lot Permits: The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized and empowered to issue parking
permits for a fee by the week, month or annually to applicants for certain city operated off street parking lots. Said
permits may be for rental of specific parking spaces or stalls by lease agreement, or for general parking by
business permit, at any stall in a specifically designated parking lot. Said permits may be issued for multiple
designated parking lots (not to exceed 2 lots) for an additional fee.
2. Special Permits: The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized and empowered to issue special parking
permits by the month or annually to other local, state or federal governmental units and/or utilities for a fee for
parking privileges at any stall in the city except for those parking stalls or spaces rented by lease agreement as
aforementioned.
3. Railroad Permits: The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized and empowered to issue railroad
permits to the Illinois Central Railroad Company or its designee, to be used in the city operated parking lot adjacent
to the Illinois Central Railroad/Amtrak depot in the city. These railroad permits may be reissued by said railroad to
its customers for a fee for use only on said lot and are valid only for the date(s) as specified by the railroad on said
permit. The railroad will issue to its customers these parking permits and the railroad will in turn remit all such
charges to the city.
4. Courtesy Permits: The city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized and empowered to issue temporary
courtesy parking permits, without fee, not to exceed six (6) days, for conventions and other business, civic and
community meetings and activities for parking privileges at any stall in the city except for those parking stalls or
spaces rented by lease agreement as aforementioned.
5. Fees: The city council, by resolution, shall set appropriate fees for the parking lot permits, special permits, and
railroad permits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 788/923
6. Display Of Permits:
a. All permits shall be issued on a decal, card, or tag which shall designate the number of the permit, and the
parking lot or lots and time period for which the permit is issued. All such permits shall be clearly displayed on
the lower left rear window corner of the motor vehicle for which the permit is issued.
b. The display of a valid permit shall excuse the holder of such permit from the obligation of paying a parking meter
or parking ticket machine for parking in the parking lot for which the permit is issued.
c. A permit for one parking lot shall not be valid for any other parking lot.
H. Jurisdiction Over Operations And Enforcement:
1. The finance department shall operate, supervise, and control parking in all paid parking zones.
2. The finance department, the police department, and the building and neighborhood services division shall have
authority to enforce the provisions of this section.
I. Days And Hours Of Enforcement:
1. The driver or any person in charge of any motor vehicle which is parked or left in any space within a paid parking
zone for which there is a parking meter or a parking ticket machine, shall pay for parking within that space between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday, inclusive, unless
otherwise noted on either the adjacent parking meter or parking ticket machine.
2. The requirement to pay for parking in the paid parking zone shall not exist on any Sunday, or any holiday, or at any
time when the parking meter adjacent to the space in which a motor vehicle may be parked is hooded pursuant to
the direction of the city manager.
J. Fifteen Minute Free Parking Meters:
1. The city manager, at his discretion, may order the installation within a paid parking zone of parking meters which
provide free parking for fifteen (15) minutes before the driver of or the person in charge of a motor vehicle must pay
for parking.
2. It is the intent of the city council that a driver or any person in charge of a motor vehicle parked in a space adjacent
to a parking meter described in subsection J1 of this section shall be entitled to only one 15-minute free parking
period before having to pay for parking in that space.
3. Any person who shall attempt to evade the intent of the city council as described in subsection J1 of this section
more than once to obtain free parking for two (2) or more consecutive fifteen (15) minute periods shall be deemed
to have violated subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-10: TOWING AND IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS:
A. Circumstances Precipitating Towing And Impounding: In addition to any authority granted under state law, the city
manager of the city of Carbondale, through his designee, is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed and
to impound or cause to be impounded, by an agent authorized to tow vehicles by written contract with the city, any
vehicle under the following circumstances:
1. Parking Violation Causing Hazard: Any vehicle which is parked upon a public place in violation of any of the
provisions of sections 18-12-2 through 18-12-5 of this chapter and is determined to be a hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
2. Unattended Vehicle: Any vehicle which is left unattended upon or under any public bridge, viaduct, or causeway, or
in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
3. Unattended Vehicle Causing Hazard/Obstruction: Any vehicle which is left unattended upon a public street and is
so parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 789/923
4. Disabled Vehicle: Any vehicle upon a public street which is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and
the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury or otherwise incapacitated to such an extent as to
be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
5. Law Enforcement Authority: Any vehicle found on any public street or highway which may be removed or
impounded by any law enforcement official in accordance with state law.
6. Regulating Parking Areas By Contract: Any vehicle which is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter upon any property over which the city has been empowered to regulate parking and traffic by contract
pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-209.
7. Three Or More Violations: Any vehicle which is in violation of any provision of this title and has no less than three
(3) outstanding parking tickets which are not pending in city court.
8. Handicap Violation: Any vehicle which is parked in violation of subsection 18-12-4D of this chapter (handicap
violation).
9. Public Safety Hazard: Any vehicle which is parked upon public or private property which is determined to be
interfering with or causing a hazard to public safety.
10. Street Maintenance: Any vehicle which is parked upon public property, including city owned property, which
removal of such is necessary to perform street maintenance, repair and/or construction.
11. Snow Removal Route: Any vehicle towed or impounded in accordance with section 18-12-3 of this chapter (snow
route removal).
12. Inoperable Or Unlicensed Vehicle: For purposes of this subsection A12, "inoperable motor vehicle" shall mean
any motor vehicle from which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine,
wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being
driven under its own motor power and "unlicensed vehicle" shall mean any vehicle not bearing a current license
plate.
a. Any inoperable or unlicensed vehicle parked on private property, removed in accordance with title 17, chapter 3
of this code.
b. Any inoperable or unlicensed vehicle parked on public property, including city owned property, for a period of
time greater than twelve (12) hours.
13. Public Health, Safety Or Welfare: Any vehicle which is parked upon public property, including city owned property,
which removal of such is deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety and/or welfare.
14. Parked More Than Seventy Two Hours: Any vehicle which has been parked on a street in excess of seventy two
(72) hours, or parked in violation of city ordinance in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
15. Additional Compliance: All tow trucks operating within the city of Carbondale shall fully comply with the
requirements set out in subsection 5-13-3A of this code. (Ord. 2015-29)
16. City Manager Established No Parking Zones: Any vehicle parked in an area declared no parking due to an
emergency or a declaration by the city manager or his designee. Any registered owner of a vehicle in violation of
this section shall be liable for storage of said vehicle. (Ord. 2017-04)
B. Public Or Private Parking Owner Or Operator Authority: Any person or local authority owning or operating any private
or public parking facility may, after notifying the police department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest
garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by the handicapped which
does not display handicapped registration plates, decal or device as required under this title. The owner or operator
of the vehicle shall be responsible for any costs or charges connected with the impoundment, removal and storage of
any motor vehicle in violation of section 18-12-4 of this chapter.
C. Conditions For Release: A vehicle removed or impounded by the city as set forth herein shall be released to the
person entitled to possession thereof when the costs connected with such removal, impoundment, and if applicable,
storage has been paid in full or a bond posted with the city or the clerk of the circuit court, and all outstanding parking
tickets, for which the time period to contest has expired, have been paid in full.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 790/923
D. Immobilization Device: In lieu of towing and/or impounding any vehicle pursuant to subsection A of this section, a
police officer or city parking attendant may attach an immobilization device commonly known as the "denver boot" to
immobilize the vehicle. Any vehicle immobilized by the city through the use of such immobilization device shall be
released to the person entitled to possession thereof when one of the following conditions has been met:
1. After a cash bond in an amount equal to the minimum fine or fines and an immobilization device removal fee to be
set by the city manager for the removal of the immobilization device has been posted with the city or the clerk of
the circuit court; or
2. After settlement by the parking violator of all claims which the city has against such violator in accordance with the
schedule in section 18-12-8 of this chapter and by paying an immobilization device removal fee to be set by the city
manager for the removal of the immobilization device.
E. Authority To Move Vehicle: No person shall move or cause to be moved any vehicle which has an immobilization
device attached thereto except as authorized by a police officer or the city parking attendant.
F. Removal Of Immobilization Device: No person shall remove or cause to have removed from any vehicle an
immobilization device placed thereon by a police officer or the city parking attendant.
G. Violation; Penalty: Any person who is found to have violated subsection E or F of this section shall be fined in an
amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
2015-29)
18-12-11: TIME PARKING:
A. Two Hour Parking: The city manager in consultation with the public works director, is hereby authorized to establish
certain areas within the city presently being used for parking purposes to be utilized for two (2) hour parking
purposes. Said area shall be clearly designated by appropriate signs.
B. Obedience To Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to park in violation of said signs or to allow their vehicle to
remain in said parking zone for a period of time in excess of the time limit indicated on said signs.
C. Violators To Be Cited: The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce said subsection, and to
authorize the issuance of citations by city parking attendants.
D. Towing Provisions Apply: The provisions of section 18-12-10 of this chapter concerning the towing of vehicles shall
also apply to vehicles parking in violation of the provisions of this section, if all the provisions contained in section 18-
12-10 of this chapter have been met. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-12: SENIOR CITIZEN PARKING PERMIT:
A. Definition: For the purposes of this section, a "senior citizen" shall be defined as any person who is sixty (60) years of
age or older.
B. Eligible Spaces: The city manager, or his designee, is authorized and empowered to issue senior citizen parking
permits for a fee for parking privileges at any metered stall in the city, except for the following:
1. Parking stalls or spaces designated as handicapped parking stalls.
2. Parking stalls or spaces rented by lease agreement.
3. Overnight parking within those lots designated by signage for Amtrak customer parking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 791/923
4. Where an official sign controlling such area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
C. Qualifying Agencies Or Persons: A senior citizen parking permit may be issued to any senior citizen or agency that
provides transportation services for "senior citizens", as that term is defined in subsection A of this section.
D. Proof Of Requirements Met: Each applicant shall submit satisfactory proof that the individual meets the minimum age
requirements and such other information required by the city to enforce this section.
E. One Permit Limit; Replacement: No more than one senior citizen parking permit shall be issued to an individual
licensed vehicle by the city, except that if that person certifies that the permit originally issued has been lost, stolen or
destroyed, then that person shall be issued a replacement senior citizen parking permit for said licensed vehicle.
F. Nontransferable: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the person in whose name and license plate the senior
citizen parking permit has been issued to, or another member of the same household who also qualifies for a senior
citizen parking permit, to use such senior citizen parking permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lease, give,
assign or transfer to another person, a senior citizen parking permit.
G. Location On Vehicle: For the purpose of this chapter, the senior citizen parking permit shall not be considered
properly displayed unless it is placed on the left side (driver's side) of the vehicle dashboard or visor and is visible
through the front windshield of the vehicle.
H. False Information: It shall be unlawful to provide false information, knowing or having reason to believe that such
information is false, when applying for a senior citizen parking permit.
I. Fee: The fee for the senior citizen parking permit shall be eight dollars ($8.00) per year.
J. Issuance Plate: Each senior citizen parking permit may be issued for up to a maximum of two (2) license plates that
are registered to the same owner. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-13: RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMUTER VEHICLE: A motor vehicle, other than a "resident vehicle" as defined in this subsection.
MOTOR VEHICLE: An automobile, truck, recreation vehicle, motorcycle, or other motor driven or self-propelled form
of transportation.
OWNER OR RESIDENT: A person who has at least a one-fourth (1/4) interest in a parcel of real property or dwelling
thereon, or a person who holds a valid, enforceable tenancy in property and/or dwelling which is within a residential
parking permit area.
RESIDENT VEHICLE: A motor vehicle parked in a residential area which is owned or controlled by the resident or
guest thereof.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT/RESIDENCE: A dwelling, house, or building in which a person lives and resides on
a daily basis for a majority of the months out of each year.
RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA: A contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public streets,
roadways and highways or parts thereof primarily abutted by residential property or residential and nonbusiness
property (such as schools, parks, churches, hospitals and nursing homes) where parking upon portions or all of a
public street, roadway or highway within a residential area is limited unless the vehicle properly displays a valid
residential parking permit authorized by this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 792/923
B. Establishment Authorized: The city council may, following the procedures set forth in subsection C of this section,
establish a residential parking permit area upon a portion or all of a designated street, limiting parking on designated
streets to the residents of such area and their guests.
C. Criteria For Establishment:
1. No residential parking permit area shall be established unless the following criteria exist:
a. A petition is filed with the city clerk from the owners or residents of at least seventy five percent (75%) of the
residential dwelling units within a proposed residential parking permit area;
b. The land abutting at least one side of a street segment designated as the residential parking permit area is
zoned R-1 and used for single-family residential purposes;
c. The streets in the area contained in the residential parking permit area are adversely impacted by the parking of
commuter vehicles;
d. That there are reasonable and generally acceptable alternate areas for which displaced vehicles may relocate,
or other modes of transportation to be utilized; and
e. That residents of the residential parking permit area are willing to accept the restrictions of this section.
D. Procedure:
1. Upon the filing with the city clerk of a petition from the owners or residents of at least seventy five percent (75%) of
the residential dwelling units within a proposed residential parking permit area, the city clerk shall refer the petition
to the city manager.
2. The city manager shall notify by first class mail all owners and residents of property within and adjacent to the
proposed residential parking permit area of the filing of said petition, the intent to designate the residential area as
a residential parking permit area, and the time, date and location at which said petition shall be considered during a
public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall state the purpose, time and location of the public hearing at which
the proposed residential parking permit area shall be discussed. Such notice shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
3. Following the public hearing, the city council may establish said area by the adoption of an ordinance designating
all or a portion of the area considered during the public hearing as a residential parking permit area.
4. Upon the passage of an ordinance by the city council to designate a residential parking permit area, the city
manager shall mail to every residence within the designated residential parking permit area a total of four (4)
parking permits and a notice of designation that shall inform the residents in the designated area of:
a. The existence, location, and designation of the residential parking permit area;
b. The parking restrictions applicable to all vehicles in curbside parking spaces along public streets and highways
in the designated area that do not properly display a parking permit authorized by this section; and
c. The procedures regarding the use and display of such parking permits.
E. Posting Of Residential Parking Permit Area: Following the city council's affirmative vote to designate a residential
parking permit area, appropriate parking signs shall be erected in the designated area.
F. Issuance Of Permits:
1. Upon the implementation of this section, which establishes a designated area as a residential parking permit area,
each residence shall receive, by first class mail from the city manager, four (4) residential parking permits for
vehicles owned or controlled by the resident and/or his guests. Said permits shall be issued to each residence
within a residential parking permit area and shall remain valid until October 1, 1999. All permits issued on or after
October 1, 1999, shall remain valid for a period of two (2) years and shall expire on October 1 of every odd
numbered year, or sooner if other provisions of this section warrant such termination. It shall be the responsibility of
the parking permit holder to obtain renewed permits through the parking division of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 793/923
2. Upon a showing of hardship or other just cause, the city manager may increase the number of parking permits
issued to any residence if such increase is shown to further the goals of the residential parking permit process.
3. No parking permit shall be issued to any person who does not reside on a regular basis, or is not a guest, at a
residence within the designated residential parking permit area.
G. Display Of Permits: All vehicles parking on the street in a residential parking permit area shall display a valid
residential parking permit. Such permit shall be hung from the rearview mirror in a manner so as to be easily visible
from outside the vehicle.
H. Use Of Parking Permits; Violations:
1. A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a parking space within a designated residential parking permit
area. A parking permit shall not authorize the standing or parking of any vehicle in such places and during such
times when the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited or set aside for specified types of vehicles,
and shall not excuse the observance of any traffic regulation.
2. Whenever the criteria of the residential parking permit area is no longer met, either due to a change in the impact
of parking, interest of residents, or change of occupancy in a residential dwelling unit, each resident or guest of the
residential dwelling unit affected by such change shall immediately surrender any parking permits in his possession
to the city manager.
3. A parking permit shall remain valid either until the resident ceases to reside within the designated residential
parking permit area or until the expiration or termination of the permit pursuant to applicable provisions of this
section, whichever comes first.
4. Parking permits provided to a guest of a resident within a residential parking permit area shall remain valid for the
guest's vehicle only during such time as such person remains a guest of the resident.
5. A parking permit shall be valid only in the residential parking permit area for which it is issued.
6. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to represent in any fashion that a vehicle is entitled to a parking
permit authorized by this section when it is not so entitled. The display of a parking permit on a vehicle not entitled
to such a parking permit shall constitute such a representation.
7. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to duplicate, or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a parking
permit authorized by this section. It also shall be a violation of this section for any person to display on any vehicle
such a duplicate parking permit.
I. Exemptions:
1. Whenever metered parking is in effect in any portion of a residential parking permit area, the parking spaces
controlled by meters shall be excepted from the provisions of this section so long as the control by meters
continues.
2. The provisions of this section shall not supersede the provisions of this code and state laws relating to parking by
disabled persons.
3. The following vehicles are specifically exempted from the parking restrictions imposed by this section:
a. A motor vehicle owned by or operated under contract to a utility when used in the construction, operation,
removal or repair of utility property or facilities or engaged in authorized work in the designated residential
parking permit area.
b. A motor vehicle identified as owned by or operated under contract to a federal, state, or local governmental
agency and being used in the course of official business.
c. An authorized emergency vehicle as defined by state law.
J. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not less than fifteen dollars
($15.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that a violation continues to occur shall be
considered a separate offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 794/923
K. Revocation Of Permit: In addition to the penalties provided above for violation of this section the city manager or the
city manager's designee may revoke the residential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this
section, and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall surrender such permit to the city manager or the city
manager's designee. Failure to surrender a revoked residential parking permit when requested to do so shall
constitute a separate violation of this section.
L. Termination: The city council may terminate a residential parking permit area when it is determined to be in the best
interest of the city, or upon receipt of a petition signed by at least seventy five percent (75%) of the residential
dwelling units within such area which has been filed with the city clerk. Notice will be provided in accordance with
subsection D of this section. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-14: PARKING OF VEHICLE WITH EXPIRED REGISTRATION:
No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street, highway, or roadway a vehicle upon which is displayed
an Illinois registration plate or plates or registration sticker after the termination of the registration period for which the
registration plate or plates or registration sticker was issued or after the expiration date set under section 3-414 or 3-
414.1 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-12-15: TOWING AND IMPOUNDING VEHICLES INVOLVED IN A CRIME:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively:
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER: Officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a
minimum of three (3) years.
BUSINESS DAY: Any day in which the offices of city hall are open to the public for a minimum of eight (8) hours.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES: Any substance as defined and included in the schedules of article II of the Illinois
controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/201 et seq., and cannabis as defined in the cannabis
control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
DRIVING A VEHICLE BY PERSON SUBJECT TO WARRANT: Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person
against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges that the driver
violated section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code.
DRIVING ON A SUSPENDED OR REVOKED LICENSE, PERMIT, OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR
VEHICLE: Any offenses as defined in section 5/6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
303; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation
(parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing.
DRIVING ON AN EXPIRED LICENSE: Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired license, in violation of
section 5/6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, if the period of expiration is greater
than one year.
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, DRUGS AND/OR INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS: Any offenses
as defined in section 5/11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.
DRIVING WITHOUT A LICENSE OR PERMIT: Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever
having been issued a license or permit due to a person's age.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Any equipment, products and materials as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/2.
FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE A POLICE OFFICER: Any offenses as defined in section 5/11-204 or 11-
204.1 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204 and 204.1.
LEAVING THE SCENE OF A PERSONAL INJURY OR PROPERTY DAMAGE ACCIDENT: Any offenses as defined
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 795/923
in sections 5/11-401, 5/11-402, and 5/11-403 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-401, 402
and 403.
LEVEL 1 ADMINISTRATION FEE: Four hundred dollars ($400.00).
LEVEL 2 ADMINISTRATION FEE: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
MISDEMEANOR: Any misdemeanor offense as defined by an Illinois statute or title 14, "Offenses And Penalties", of
this code.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans,
motorcycles, and motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD/INTERESTED PERSON: The recorded title holder(s) or lienholder(s) of the motor vehicle as
registered with the secretary of state, state of Illinois, or is not registered in Illinois, the particular state where the
motor vehicle is registered.
PRELIMINARY HEARING OFFICER: The chief of police, deputy chief of police or the chief of police designee.
THEFT OFFENSE: Any offense in violation of article 16 of the criminal code, chapter 720 of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
TRAFFIC VIOLATION: Any offense as defined by the Illinois vehicle code or this title.
WEAPONS OFFENSE: Any of the following offenses contained within article 24 of chapter 720 of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes: 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1, 24-1.1, 24-1.2, 24-1.25, 24-1.5, 24-1.6, 24-2.1, 24-2.2, 24-
3, 24-3.1, 24-3.2, 24-3.3, 24-3.4, 24-3.5, 24-3.6 and 24-3A.
B. Motor Vehicle Impoundment: Pursuant to article II, chapter 11 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.7, the city of Carbondale (the "city") shall follow the procedures set forth herein when impounding
vehicles (with the exception of those vehicles impounded pursuant to section 18-12-10 of this chapter) and imposing
reasonable administrative fees, payable to and collected by the city, related to its administrative and processing costs
associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage, and
release of the vehicle. The administrative fees imposed herein by the city shall be uniform for all similarly situated
vehicles and are in addition to any other penalties or fees that may be assessed by a court of law for the underlying
violations, or by a person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
C. Violations Authorizing Impoundment (Excepting Impoundment Under Section 18-12-10 Of This Chapter):
1. Any motor vehicle, operated with the express or implied permission of the owner of record/interested person, that
is used in connection with the following violations shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the city, and the
owner of record of said motor vehicle or its agent, shall be liable to the city for a level 1 administrative fee, as
provided for in this section, in addition to any fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other criminal
penalties assessed by a court of law for the underlying offense as hereinafter provided:
a. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a
motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the criminal code of Illinois; or
b. Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any
combination thereof, in violation of section 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code; or
c. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of a
felony offense in the cannabis control act; or
d. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of
the Illinois controlled substances act; or
e. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony offense in
violation of section 24-1 (unlawful use of weapons), 24-1.5 (reckless discharge of a firearm), or 24-3.1 (unlawful
possession of firearms and firearm ammunition) of the criminal code of Illinois; or
f. Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant
to section 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 796/923
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with
emission testing; or
g. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, or attempting to solicit cannabis or a controlled substance,
as defined by the cannabis control act or the Illinois controlled substances act; or
h. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony offense in
violation of article 16 (theft offenses) of the criminal code of Illinois; or
i. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any other felony offense in
violation of the criminal or vehicle codes of Illinois.
2. Any motor vehicle, operated with the express or implied permission of the owner of record/interested person that is
used in connection with the following violations, including arrest warrants, but not including those violations listed in
subsection C1 of this section, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the city, and the owner of record or
its agent, shall be liable to the city for a level 2 administrative fee, as provided for in this section, in addition to any
fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle and any other criminal penalties assessed by a court of law for the
underlying offense as hereinafter provided:
a. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a misdemeanor violation
of the cannabis control act; or
b. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a misdemeanor offense in
violation of article 16 (theft offenses) of the criminal code of Illinois; or
c. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor
offense in violation of the criminal or vehicle codes of Illinois; or
d. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois
vehicle code if the period of expiration is greater than one year.
D. Seizure And Impoundment:
1. Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment
pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a facility controlled or
approved by the city. This section shall not apply if the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time
and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was
discovered or reasonably should have been discovered.
2. The city shall notify, or make a reasonable attempt to notify, the owner of record/interested person or any person
who is found to be in control of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the
fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner's right to an administrative hearing to be conducted under this
section.
3. The city shall also provide a notice that the motor vehicle will remain impounded pending the completion of an
administrative hearing, unless the owner of record/interested person of the vehicle posts with the city a bond equal
to the administrative fee as provided by this section and pays for all towing and storage charges. Whenever the
owner of record/interested person of a vehicle seized pursuant to this section requests, in writing, hand delivered to
the police department, a preliminary hearing on probable cause within twelve (12) hours after the seizure, a
preliminary hearing officer shall conduct such preliminary hearing within seventy two (72) hours after the seizure,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The owner of record/interested person at the time of the alleged
offense shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the
preliminary hearing officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the
commission of any crime described as a level 1 or level 2 administrative fee offense, the preliminary hearing officer
shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section unless the owner of
record/interested person posts with the city a cash bond in the amount of the level 1 or level 2 administrative fee
offense, plus fees for towing and storing the vehicle. If the preliminary hearing officer determines that there is no
such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees.
E. Administrative Hearing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 797/923
1. Within ten (10) days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section, the city shall notify by
personal service or by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record/interested person, the right
to a hearing before the administrative hearing officer, along with the date, time and location of the hearing, to
challenge whether a violation of this section has occurred. The owner of record/interested person shall also be
notified of the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section unless the owner of
record/interested person posts with the city a cash bond in the amount of the level 1 or level 2 administrative fee
offense, plus fees for towing and storing the vehicle. The hearing date must be scheduled and convened no later
than forty five (45) days after the mailing of the notice or issuance of the notice of hearing, when requested. The
owner of record/interested person and any other interested person(s) shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible.
2. If, after the hearing, the administrative hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the
motor vehicle was used in violation of this section, then the administrative hearing officer shall enter an order
finding the owner of record of the motor vehicle liable to the city for the applicable administrative fee.
3. If, after the hearing, the administrative hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of the evidence that
the motor vehicle was used in such a violation, the administrative hearing officer shall enter an order finding for the
owner and for the return of the motor vehicle, or the administrative fees if already paid.
4. If owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the owner of record/interested person shall be deemed to have
waived his or her right to a hearing. If the owner of record/interested person pays such administrative fee and the
motor vehicle is returned to the owner of record/interested person, no default order need be entered if the owner of
record/interested person was informed of his or her right to a hearing, in which case an order of liability shall be
deemed to have been made when the city receives the written waiver.
5. If a bond in the amount equal to the applicable administrative fee is posted with the police department, the
impounded motor vehicle shall be released to the owner of record/interested person. The owner of
record/interested person shall still be liable to the towing agent for any applicable towing fees.
6. If an administrative fee is imposed for a violation of this section, the bond will be forfeited to the city; however if a
violation of this section is not proven by preponderance of the evidence, the bond will be returned to the person
posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this section shall be held by the city until the administrative
hearing officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until the court of jurisdiction issues its orders.
7. All decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the Illinois
administrative review law.
F. Disposition Of Impounded Motor Vehicle:
1. An administrative fee imposed pursuant to this section shall constitute a debt due and owing the city.
2. A motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall remain impounded until:
a. The administrative fee is paid to the city and all applicable towing fees are paid to the towing agent, in which
case the owner of record/interested person shall be given possession of the motor vehicle;
b. A bond in an amount equal to the applicable administrative fee is posted with the police department and all
applicable towing fees are paid to the towing agent, at which time the motor vehicle will be released to the owner
of record/interested person; or
c. Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed or retrieved from the facility controlled or approved by the city within thirty
five (35) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written decision shall be deemed abandoned and
may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois motor vehicle code.
d. The administrative fee imposed by the city for impounded vehicles shall be in addition to any fees charged for
the towing and storage, or both, of an impounded vehicle. The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected
by and paid to the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle. The towing and/or storage
company shall be entitled to receive a fee from the owner of record/interested person entitled to possession of
any such vehicle prior to the release of the vehicle. The fee shall be to cover the cost of removing said vehicle
and, in addition, any fees for the cost of storage of the vehicle for each day or fraction thereof that said vehicle
remained at their storage facility in compliance with their practices. Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle
under this section shall be the same as those charged pursuant to section 5-13-2 of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 798/923
e. It shall be the duty of the towing or storage company in possession of the vehicle to obtain documentation issued
by the police department confirming compliance with the foregoing requirements and to retain photocopies of
that documentation in their files for a period of not less than twelve (12) months following release of said vehicle.
The foregoing information shall be made available to the authorities of the city for inspection and copying, upon
their request, by the towing or storage company. The towing or storage company is prohibited from releasing any
vehicle they may tow within the city until and unless they obtain the documentation as noted above.
f. The administrative fees established by this section are to be paid by the owner of record/interested person, or the
agents of the owner or record/interested person, of the vehicle involved in the incident leading to custodial arrest
regardless of whether that person was operating the vehicle at the time of the incident. Vehicles towed by the
police department for any reason other than those listed above shall be released to the owner of
record/interested person with no administrative fee charged by the city. The person purporting to be the owner of
record/interested person, or the agents of the owner of record/interested person, must present proof of
ownership, current proof of insurance and possess a valid driver's license prior to release.
g. Upon verifiable proof that the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time it was impounded; or if the
vehicle was operating as a common carrier including, but not limited to, taxicabs or buses and the violation
occurred without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle, the administrative fee shall be waived by
the city.
h. Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any administrative fee imposed under this section which
remains unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the
administrative review law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction. This section incorporates sections 4-201 through 4-214.1 of the Illinois vehicle code to the extent
they are consistent. Where a provision of this section differs from sections 4-201 through 4-214.1 of the Illinois
vehicle code, the provisions of this section shall be controlling. Enforcement and administration of this section
shall be consistent with the policies and procedures of section 4-201 through 4-215 of the Illinois vehicle code to
the extent that said policies and procedures do not directly conflict with the provisions of this section.
G. Establishment Of Restricted Revenue Account: All fees collected under this section shall be placed into a restrictive
revenue account within the city to be used for the purchase of police vehicles and equipment. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 13
EQUIPMENT OF VEHICLES
18-13-1: SCOPE AND EFFECT:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any
highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property
or which does not contain those parts or equipment as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-13-2: LIGHTS:
A. Motorcycles: When operated upon any highway or street in this city, every motorcycle shall at all times exhibit at least
one lighted lamp, showing a white light visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the direction the motorcycle is
proceeding. However, in lieu of such lighted lamp, a motorcycle may be equipped with and use a means of
modulating the upper beam of the headlamp between high and a lower brightness. No such headlamp shall be
modulated, except to otherwise comply with this title, during times when lighted lamps are required for other motor
vehicles.
B. Other Motor Vehicles; Exceptions: All other motor vehicles shall exhibit at least two (2) lighted headlamps, with at
least one on each side of the front of the vehicle, showing white lights, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, during the
period from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise, at times when rain, snow, fog, or other atmospheric
conditions require the use of windshield wipers, and at any other times when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of one
thousand feet (1,000'). Parking lamps may be used in addition to but not in lieu of such headlamps. Every motor
vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall also exhibit at least two (2) lighted lamps, commonly known as taillamps, which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 799/923
shall be mounted on the left rear and right rear of the vehicle so as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred
feet (500') in the reverse direction, except that a truck tractor or road tractor manufactured before January 1, 1968,
and all motorcycles need to be equipped with only one such taillamp.
C. Visibility Of License Plates: Either a taillamp or a separate lamp shall be so construed and placed as to illuminate with
a white light a rear registration plate when required and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to the
rear. Any taillamp or taillamps, together with any separate lamp or lamps for illuminating a rear registration plate, shall
be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-13-3: SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES:
A. Brake Lights Required; Antique Vehicle Provisions: Every vehicle other than an antique vehicle displaying an antique
plate operated in this state shall be equipped with a stop lamp or lamps on the rear of the vehicle which shall display
a red or amber light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear in normal sunlight and
which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot) brake, and which may but need not be incorporated with
other rear lamps. During times when lighted lamps are not required, an antique vehicle may be equipped with a stop
lamp or lamps on the rear of such vehicle of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer as original
equipment and in working order. However, at all other times, such antique vehicle must be equipped with stop lamps
meeting the requirements of this section.
B. Turn Signals Required; Antique Vehicle Provisions: Every motor vehicle other than an antique vehicle displaying an
antique plate shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device which shall indicate the intention of the driver to
turn to the right or to the left in the form of flashing lights located at and showing to the front and rear of the vehicle on
the side of the vehicle toward which the turn is to be made. The lamps showing to the front shall be mounted on the
same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a white or amber light, or any
shade of light between white and amber. The lamps showing to the rear shall be mounted on the same level and as
widely spaced laterally as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a red or amber light. An antique vehicle shall be
equipped with a turn signal device of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer as original equipment and
in working order.
C. Trailer And Semitrailer Turn Signals: Every trailer and semitrailer shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device
which indicates the intention of the driver in the power unit to turn to the right or to the left in the form of a flashing red
or amber light located at the rear of the vehicle on the side toward which the turn is to be made and mounted on the
same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable.
D. Distance Visible: Turn signal lamps must be visible from a distance of not less than three hundred feet (300') in
normal sunlight.
E. Exceptions To Turn Signals: Motorcycles and motor driven cycles need not be equipped with electric turn signals.
Antique vehicles need not be equipped with turn signals unless such were installed by the manufacturer as original
equipment. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-13-4: MIRRORS:
Every motor vehicle operated singly or when towing another vehicle, shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to
reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred feet (200') to the rear of such motor
vehicle. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-13-5: WINDSHIELDS:
A. Certain Window Applications Prohibited: No person shall drive a motor vehicle with any sign, poster, window
application, reflective material, nonreflective material or tinted film upon the front windshield. A nonreflective tinted
film may be used along the uppermost portion of the windshield if such material does not extend more than six inches
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 800/923
(6") down from the top of the windshield. Nothing in this section shall create a cause of action on behalf of a buyer
against a dealer or manufacturer who sells a motor vehicle with a window which is in violation of this section.
B. Exceptions: No window treatment or tinting shall be applied to the windows immediately adjacent to each side of the
driver, except:
1. On vehicles where none of the windows to the rear of the driver's seat are treated in a manner that allows less
than thirty percent (30%) light transmittance, a nonreflective tinted film that allows at least fifty percent (50%) light
transmittance, with a five percent (5%) variance observed by any law enforcement official metering the light
transmittance, may be used on the vehicle windows immediately adjacent to each side of the driver.
2. On vehicles where none of the windows to the rear of the driver's seat are treated in a manner that allows less
than thirty five percent (35%) light transmittance, a nonreflective tinted film that allows at least thirty five percent
(35%) light transmittance, with a five percent (5%) variance observed by any law enforcement official metering the
light transmittance, may be used on the vehicle windows immediately adjacent to each side of the driver.
3. On vehicles where a nonreflective smoked or tinted glass that was originally installed by the manufacturer on the
windows to the rear of the driver's seat, a nonreflective tint that allows at least fifty percent (50%) light
transmittance, with a five percent (5%) variance observed by a law enforcement official metering the light
transmittance, may be used on the vehicle windows immediately adjacent to each side of the driver.
4. This section shall not apply to window treatment, including, but not limited to, a window application, nonreflective
material, or tinted film, applied or affixed to a motor vehicle for which distinctive license plates or license plate
stickers have been issued pursuant to subsection (k) of section 3-412 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended and
is used in accordance with subsection (g) of 12-503 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended.
C. Suspended Objects Prohibited: No person shall drive a motor vehicle with any objects placed or suspended between
the driver and the front windshield, rear window, side wings or side windows immediately adjacent to each side of the
driver which materially obstructs the driver's view.
D. Windshield Wipers: Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles, shall be equipped with a device, controlled by the driver,
for cleaning rain, snow, moisture or other obstruction from the windshield; and no person shall drive a motor vehicle
with snow, ice, moisture or other material on any of the windows or mirrors, which materially obstructs the driver's
clear view of the highway.
E. Condition Of Windows; Rearview Mirrors: No person shall drive a motor vehicle when the windshield, side or rear
windows are in such defective condition or repair as to materially impair the driver's view to the front, side or rear. A
vehicle equipped with a side mirror on each side of the vehicle which are in conformance with this section will be
deemed to be in compliance in the event the rear window of the vehicle is materially obscured.
F. Exemptions:
1. Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to:
a. Motor vehicles manufactured prior to January 1, 1982; or
b. To those motor vehicles properly registered in another jurisdiction.
2. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any motor vehicle:
a. That is owned and operated by a person afflicted with or suffering from a medical illness, ailment or disease
which would require that person to be shielded from the direct rays of the sun; or
b. That is used in transporting a person when such person resides at the same address as the registered owner of
the vehicle and such person is afflicted with or suffering from a medical illness or disease which would require
such person to be shielded from the direct rays of the sun.
c. It must be certified by a physician licensed to practice medicine in Illinois that such person owning and operating
or being transported in a motor vehicle is afflicted with or suffers from such illness, ailment, or disease and such
certification must be carried in the motor vehicle at all times. The certification shall be legible and shall contain
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 801/923
the date of issuance, the name, address and signature of the attending physician, and the name, address, and
medical condition of the person requiring exemption. The information on the certificate must remain current and
shall be renewed annually by the attending physician.
d. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to motor vehicle stickers or other certificates issued by state or local
authorities which are required to be displayed upon motor vehicle windows to evidence compliance with
requirements concerning motor vehicles.
G. Older Vehicle Restrictions: Those motor vehicles exempted under subsection F1a of this section shall not cause their
windows to be treated as described in subsection A of this section after January 1, 1993. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-13-6: HORNS:
A. Audible Distance; Unlawful Noise: Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway or street shall be equipped
with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting a sound audible under normal conditions for a distance of
not less than two hundred feet (200'), but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonable loud or harsh
sound or whistle.
B. Exception: No vehicle, other than an authorized emergency vehicle, shall be equipped with any siren, whistle or bell.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-13-7: MUFFLERS:
Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the streets or alleys of this city shall at all times be equipped with an
adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual
noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass or similar device. No person shall
modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above
that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle, and such original muffler shall comply with all the
requirements of this section. (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 14
BICYCLES
18-14-1: APPLICATION OF RULES:
A. Generally: It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
B. Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-2: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES1:
Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those
provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-3: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
A. Use Of Seat: A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat
attached thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 802/923
B. Number Of Persons: No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may carry a child securely attached to his person in a backpack or
sling. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-4: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to
any vehicle upon a roadway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-5: POSITION OF BICYCLE AND MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLE ON ROADWAYS; RIDING ON
ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
A. Two-Way Roadways: Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway at less than the normal
speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable to the
right hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations:
1. When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction;
or
2. When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; or
3. When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or
moving vehicles, bicycles, motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width
lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right hand curb or edge. For purposes of this subsection, a
"substandard width lane" means a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to
travel safely side by side within the lane.
B. One-Way Roadways: Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way highway with two (2) or
more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-6: RIDING BICYCLES OR MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES ON ROADWAYS:
Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast, except on
paths or parts of roadways set aside for their exclusive use. Persons riding two (2) abreast shall not impede the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane subject to the provisions of
section 18-14-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-7: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the use of both hands in the
control and operation of the bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the handlebars at all
times. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-8: LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES:
A. Required And Optional Lights: Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which
shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and a red reflector on the
rear of a type approved by the Illinois vehicle code which shall be visible from all distances from one hundred feet
(100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 803/923
B. Sirens Prohibited: A bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren.
C. Brakes Required: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately control movement of and stop
and hold such bicycle.
D. Pedal Reflectors: No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that is not equipped with a reflex
reflector conforming to specifications prescribed by the Illinois vehicle code, on each pedal, visible from the front and
rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of two hundred feet (200').
E. Side Reflectors: No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not equipped with side reflectors. Such
reflectors shall be visible from each side of the bicycle from a distance of five hundred feet (500') and shall be
essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or amber to the front of the
center of the bicycle, provided the requirements of this section may be met by reflective materials which shall be at
least three-sixteenths inch (3/16") wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the
continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of such bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the
same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. Such reflectors shall conform to the specifications of the Illinois
vehicle code. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-9: LAMPS ON MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLES:
Every motorized pedalcycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white
light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the Illinois vehicle code which shall be visible from all distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred
feet (600') to the rear when in front of lawful, low powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a
red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. (Ord.
2015-29)
18-14-10: BICYCLE IDENTIFYING NUMBER:
A person engaged in the business of selling bicycles at retail shall not sell any bicycle unless the bicycle has an
identifying number permanently stamped or cast on its frame. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-11: INSPECTING BICYCLES:
A uniformed police officer may at any time upon reasonable cause to believe that a bicycle is unsafe or not equipped as
required by law, or that its equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, require the person riding the bicycle to stop
and submit the bicycle to an inspection and such test with reference thereto as may be appropriate. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-12: LEFT TURNS:
A. A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle intending to turn left shall follow a course described in subsection
18-8-1B of this title or in subsection B of this section.
B. A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle intending to turn left shall approach the turn as close as practicable
to the right curb or edge of the roadway. After proceeding across the intersecting roadway to the far corner of the
curb or intersection of the roadway edges, the bicyclist or motorized pedalcycle driver shall stop, as much as
practicable out of the way of traffic. After stopping, the person shall yield to any traffic proceeding in either direction
along the roadway such person has been using. After yielding, the bicycle or motorized pedalcycle driver shall
comply with any official traffic control device or police officer regulating traffic on the highway along which he intends
to proceed, and the bicycle or motorized pedalcycle driver may proceed in the new direction. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-13: TURN AND STOP SIGNALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 804/923
A. Except as provided in this section, a person riding a bicycle shall comply with section 18-8-4 of this title.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given not less than one hundred feet (100') traveled by
the bicycle before turning, and shall be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting to turn. A signal by hand and arm
need not be given continuously if the hand is needed in control or operation of the bicycle. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-14: BIKEWAY NETWORK:
A. Map On File: There is established within the city, an official bikeway network, as indicated by official signs or markings
designating the same. Said bikeway network shall be designated in accordance with the bikeway network map which
shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office.
B. Exclusive Bike Areas Designated: Where official signs or markings designate a particular area for the operation of
bicycles, no person shall operate a vehicle or use the area so designated except when operating a bicycle or when
otherwise required by law.
C. Bikeways Not Sidewalks: Any portion of any sidewalk designated by official signs or markings as part of the bikeway
network shall not be considered a sidewalk for the purposes of section 18-14-28 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-15: BICYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled in whole or in part by muscular power upon any
of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, described bike paths or networks, drainways/greenways path, or public highways within
the city without first obtaining a license therefor and having a tag or decalcomania placed thereon as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-16: ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION:
A. Application; Fee; Term: The city, under the supervision of the Carbondale police department shall issue, upon written
application, and upon payment of the required fees set forth within this code, a bicycle license. Such license shall
entitle the licensee thereunder to operate the bicycle for which the same is issued, upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys
and public highways within the city, for the duration of the licensing period for which it was originally issued. Licensing
periods shall begin on September 1 of each year and expire on August 31 two (2) years later.
B. University License Recognized: For the purpose of this chapter, a license or registration issued by Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale for a bicycle shall constitute a valid license, shall constitute compliance of license
requirements of this chapter, and shall be given full force and effect within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 2015-
29)
18-14-17: LICENSE FEES:
The fees to be paid for each bicycle licensed by the city shall be two dollars ($2.00) and shall be paid in advance.
A. License Fee Waiver: The city manager, or his designee, may waive the license fee requirement at his discretion for
special events or other just causes. The request for waiver must be submitted to the city manager's office fifteen (15)
days before the scheduled event, on a form approved by the city.
B. Lost Or Transferred License: When any license is lost or transferred from one person to another, an additional two
dollars ($2.00) shall be paid, and an application for lost or transferred license made to the city. (Ord. 2015-29)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 805/923
18-14-18: LICENSE TAG, DECALCOMANIA, AND REGISTRATION CARD:
The city shall provide each license which shall consist of tags, seals, or decalcomania, at the option of the city, having
registration numbers stamped thereon and indicating the expiration date of the license. It shall be the duty of the city to
have a license, as indicated by a tag, seal, or decalcomania, attached to each bicycle upon the issuance of the license,
and said indication of license shall at all times during the license period for which it is issued, remain so attached. At the
time of the issuance, the city shall issue to the person obtaining the license a registration card, which card shall bear the
license and registration number of such bicycle. The city shall keep a record of the date of issuance and expiration of
each license, the name and address of the person to whom the same is issued, and the number thereof, together with a
description of the bicycle licensed. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-19: PURCHASE OF NEW BICYCLES:
It shall be the duty of every dealer within the corporate limits of the city who sells a bicycle to furnish the purchaser
thereof with a bill of sale. Such bill of sale shall contain the following: a) the name and address of the person to whom
the bicycle was sold; b) the make, model and year of manufacture; c) serial number; and d) a general description of said
bicycle. The bill of sale must be retained by the purchaser and submitted to the city prior to registration for license as
hereinbefore required. It shall be an absolute prerequisite prior to the issuance of a license for a new bicycle. (Ord. 2015-
29)
18-14-20: SALE OR TRANSFERS TO BE REPORTED:
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers a bicycle previously licensed by the city to transfer to the
purchaser the registration card issued at the time of the licensing of said bicycle, and indicate thereon to whom the sale
or transfer has been made. It shall further be the duty of the purchaser of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of
registration thereof and license thereon to the city within five (5) days of said sale or transfer, and to pay the transfer fee
hereinabove provided. The person desiring to transfer a bicycle must purchase a new license, and pay the fee
hereinabove provided. No license shall be transferred from one bicycle to another. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-21: REMOVAL OF TAG FORBIDDEN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license, tag, seal, or decalcomania, during the
time in which such license is operative. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-22: REPAIR OF UNLICENSED BICYCLES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any repair work on any bicycle required to be licensed hereunder, which is not
properly licensed and registered as required by this chapter, and it shall be the duty of any such person to see that any
such bicycle has the city or university license, tag, seal or decalcomania thereon before doing any repair work thereon.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-23: INVESTIGATION OF LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
Before issuing any bicycle license or registering the ownership of a bicycle, the city shall use reasonable diligence in
ascertaining whether the facts set forth in the application for the license and registration are true and shall not issue a
license and register ownership unless satisfied that the applicant is the lawful owner of such bicycle or otherwise entitled
to have the same registered and licensed in his name. The same procedure shall be followed when applications for
transfer are made. In cases where licenses and registrations are applied for on bicycles licensed and registered for a
preceding year, the applicant shall be required to surrender the registration card for said preceding year, or by affidavit or
other method, satisfy the city that the same has been stolen, lost or misplaced. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-24: REFUSAL AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 806/923
If the city determines at any time that an applicant for a license and registration of a bicycle, or for the transfer of same,
is not the lawful owner of said bicycle, and is not entitled to have the same licensed and registered, it may refuse to issue
the license and to register the bicycle and make the transfer, and may, for a like reason, after notice of hearing thereon,
revoke the license and registration on any such bicycle. Such notice concerning revocation shall be served in person or
by registered mail, shall be in writing, shall give the holder of the license and registration at least three (3) days' notice of
the time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-25: FALSE STATEMENTS ON APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement either in his application for a license or
registration of a bicycle, or for the transfer of same, or any assignment thereof, or with intent to procure or pass title to
any such bicycle which he knows or has reason to believe has been stolen, or shall have in his possession any bicycle
which he knows or has reason to believe has been stolen, and who is not an officer of the law engaged at the time in the
performance of his duty as such officer. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-26: REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE:
No license or registration of any bicycle shall occur unless said bicycle meets the equipment requirement set forth in this
title. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-27: BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS:
A. Prohibited; Young Children, Small Bicycles Exception: No person shall ride a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk or
across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk in the city except that persons under twelve (12) years of age may ride
a bicycle with wheel size of less than twenty four inches (24") upon and along sidewalks or across roadways upon
and along a crosswalk in nonbusiness districts.
B. Exception; Bikeway Areas: Any place designated in accordance with the bikeway network map as stated herein under
this chapter is an exception. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-28: DRAINWAYS/GREENWAYS PATH DESIGNATION:
A. Area Established: There is hereby established within the city a drainways/greenways path as indicated by official
signs or markings designating the said drainways/greenways path, which shall be designated in accordance with the
drainways/greenways map, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office.
B. Path Not Considered Sidewalk: No portion of the drainways/greenways path shall be considered a sidewalk under this
code, but shall instead be considered a path for use exclusively by pedestrians, bicyclists, and persons in
wheelchairs. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-29: MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON DRAINWAYS/GREENWAYS PATH:
A. Generally: All "motor vehicles", "motorcycles", and "motorized pedalcycles", as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., shall be prohibited from traveling upon and along the paved pedestrian bikeway, known as
the drainways/greenways path, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Exception: All authorized vehicles shall be permitted to operate upon and along the drainways/greenways path in
order to perform routine maintenance, utility or emergency services. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-30: REGULATING TRAFFIC ON DRAINWAYS/GREENWAYS PATH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 807/923
A. Obedience To Traffic Control Devices: All persons traveling upon and along the drainways/greenways path shall obey
all traffic control devices.
B. Yield Right Of Way: All persons propelling a bicycle along and upon the drainways/greenways path shall yield right of
way to all pedestrians and persons in wheelchairs at all intersections and at all points along the bike path where said
persons are present.
C. Keep To Right: All persons propelling a bicycle along and upon the drainways/greenways path shall travel only upon
the right half of said path except when overtaking and passing slower traffic, and in such cases said person shall use
the left half or left lane of the described bike path exclusively, and shall give an audible signal of their intent to pass to
the slower moving party a reasonable length of time prior to overtaking and passing the slower moving party.
D. General Traffic Regulations Apply: All other traffic regulations and laws of the city shall apply to the use or operation
of bicycles and along the drainways/greenways path, except as set forth herein. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-31: EMERGING FROM DRAINWAYS/GREENWAYS PATH:
Any person operating a bicycle upon the drainways/greenways path shall come to a complete stop immediately prior to
riding into the sidewalk area extending across any intersecting streets, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall
come to a complete stop at a point where the operator has a view of approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right
of way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-14-32: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF BICYCLE REGULATIONS:
Any person may settle any claim the city may have against a person for a violation of this chapter by making payment in
accordance with the following schedule to the finance department:
PAYMENT SCHEDULE
If Paid Within 2 Days Of
Commission Of Violation
If Paid Between 2 And
14 Days Of Violation
If Paid On The 15th Day
After Violation But Prior
To Filing Of Complaint
$15.00 $20.00 $25.00
(Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 15
MISCELLANEOUS LAWS
18-15-1: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition and removing the key from the ignition, without effectively setting the brake thereon and, when
standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-2: LIMITATIONS ON BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering
with other traffic. (Ord. 2015-29)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 808/923
18-15-3: RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES:
A. Proper Number Of Riders: A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat
attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle
unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the
permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at
the rear side of the operator.
B. Proper Riding Position: A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with
one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
C. Handlebar Height Regulated: No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars higher than the height of the
shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or
saddle occupied by the operator. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-4: SPECIAL EQUIPMENT; EYE PROTECTION:
The operator of a motorcycle, or motorized pedalcycle and every passenger thereon shall be protected by glasses,
goggles or a transparent shield. The Illinois vehicle code shall determine the standards for this equipment, as
established and based upon the vehicle equipment safety commission regulation VESC-8, minimum requirements for
motorcyclists' eye protection. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-5: REQUIRED FOOTRESTS ON MOTORCYCLES:
Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for such
passenger. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-6: OPERATION ON ONE WHEEL:
No person shall operate a motorcycle, or motorized pedalcycle on one wheel. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-7: OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR OF DRIVING MECHANISM:
A. Overloading Of Passengers: No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat
such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle
or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B. Proper Seating Position: No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view
ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
C. Passenger Responsibility: No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position as to interfere with the
driver's view ahead or to the side or to the rear, or to interfere with his control of the driving mechanism of the bus.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-8: OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS:
No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to
do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on
the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(Ord. 2015-29)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 809/923
18-15-9: RIDING IN TRAILERS:
No person or persons shall occupy a house trailer or travel trailer while it is being towed upon a public street or highway.
(Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-10: COASTING PROHIBITED:
A. The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade shall not coast with the gears or transmission of
such vehicle in neutral.
B. The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a downgrade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. (Ord. 2015-
29)
18-15-11: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED:
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a
fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or stop such vehicle within five hundred feet (500') of any fire apparatus
stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-12: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, private road
or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. (Ord.
2015-29)
18-15-13: DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK:
No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized
temporary driveway. This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power nor to any motorized
wheelchair. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-14: HARMFUL MATERIALS ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED:
No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other
substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle upon such street or highway.
A. Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive, dangerous, hazardous
or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
B. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious
substance dropped upon the highway for such vehicle.
C. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other debris except
any "hazardous substance" as defined in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.215 of the environmental protection act,
"hazardous waste" as defined in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.220 of the environmental protection act, and
"potentially infectious medical waste" as defined in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.360 of the environmental
protection act, dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-15: APPROACHING, OVERTAKING, AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 810/923
A. When Stop Required: The driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle before meeting or overtaking, from either
direction, any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils on a highway, on a roadway on
school property, or upon a private road within an area that is covered by a contract executed pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-209.1. Such stop is required before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the
school bus the visual signals required by the Illinois vehicle code. The driver of the vehicle shall not proceed until the
school bus resumes motion or the driver of the vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual
signals are no longer actuated.
B. Use Of Stop Signal Arm: The stop signal arm required by the Illinois vehicle code shall be extended after the school
bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed before the
school bus is placed in motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any other time.
C. Red Flashing Lights: The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an eight (8) lamp flashing signal system required by
the Illinois vehicle code shall be actuated after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading
or discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus is placed in motion again. The red signal lamps
shall not be actuated at any other time except as provided in subsection D of this section.
D. Amber Flashing Lights: The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an eight (8) lamp flashing signal system
required by the Illinois vehicle code shall be actuated continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet
(100') traveled by the school bus before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within an urban
area and during not less than the last two hundred feet (200') traveled by the school bus outside an urban area. The
amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until the school bus is stopped. The amber signal lamps shall not be
actuated at any other time.
E. Multi-Laned Roadways: The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four (4) or more lanes which permits at least
two (2) lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not stop such vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is
stopped in the opposing roadway; and need not stop such vehicle when driving upon a controlled access highway
when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or
improved part of the controlled access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
F. Failure To Obey Signals: The suspension provisions set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1414 shall be
applicable to a violation of this section.
G. Owner's Statement Or Deposition: The owner of any vehicle alleged to have violated subsection A of this section
shall, upon appropriate demand by the authorized prosecutor acting in response to a signed complaint, provide a
written statement or deposition identifying the operator of the vehicle, if such operator was not the owner at the time
of the alleged violation. Failure to supply such information shall be construed to be the same as a violation of
subsection A of this section and shall be subject to the same penalties set forth in subsection F of this section. In the
event the owner has assigned control for the use of the vehicle to another, the person to whom control was assigned
shall comply with the provisions of this section and be subject to the same penalties as herein provided.
H. Penalty: A violation of any part of this section shall result in a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
or, upon a second or subsequent violation, five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any costs or charges
connected with the prosecution of such violation. Any violation of this section shall be a mandatory conviction. (Ord.
2015-29)
18-15-16: REGULATION OF PARADES:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to conduct, sponsor or take part in any
parade, march, assemblage or gathering, other than a funeral procession, on any public street, alley or other public
way without first obtaining a permit as provided in this section. The word "event" is used hereafter to refer to any
parade, march, assemblage or gathering regulated by this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 811/923
B. Applications For Permit: Applications for a permit under this section shall be made in writing to the city manager not
less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date upon which the event is to be held. Each application
shall state the name, address and phone number of the person, group, or organization holding the event; the purpose
of the event; the number of participants, vehicles and floats; the proposed route or location; the date and hours for
which the permit is desired and such other pertinent data as would assist the city in making plans to conduct the
event. Where good cause is shown therefor, the city manager shall have the authority to consider any application
hereunder which is filed less than ten (10) days before the date such event is proposed to be held.
C. Standards For Issuance: The city manager shall issue a permit when he finds:
1. That the proposed route or location has not been reserved for other use on the date and hours requested in the
application;
2. That the conduct of the event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic at or contiguous to the place where the same is conducted or held;
3. That the conduct of the event will not prevent or unduly interfere with normal fire and police protection in the city;
4. That the event is for a lawful purpose and is not intended to cause a public disturbance or breach of the peace;
5. That the event is not held purely for the private profit of the person, group, or organization conducting or holding
the event, or for the sole purpose of advertising any product or goods of such person, group or organization.
D. Issuance, Denial, Alternative Permits: The city manager shall act upon the application within five (5) days after its
receipt:
1. If approved, the city manager shall issue a permit which specifies the date of the event, its time of inception and
duration, its route or location, and such other information as he shall find necessary to the enforcement of this
section.
2. If the application is denied, the city manager shall immediately notify the applicant by mail, stating the reasons for
the denial of the permit.
3. The city manager, in denying an application for a permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the event
on a date, at a time, over a route, or at a location different from that named by the applicant. An alternate permit
shall conform to the requirements of this section.
E. Appeal Procedure: Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the city manager, shall have the right to appeal the denial
of the permit to the city council within ten (10) days after receiving written notice of this appeal.
F. Notice To City Officials: Immediately upon issuance of a parade permit, the city manager shall send a copy thereof to
the chief of police and fire chief.
G. Prohibited Acts:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to disturb, interfere with, or obstruct any event permitted
under this section.
2. The city manager shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along a public street or highway which constitutes a part of the route or location of an event. Signs shall be posted
to such effect, and it shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall
be liable under this subsection for parking on a street or public highway unless signs are posted thereon.
H. Revocation Of Permit: The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon
violation of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
I. Authority Of City Manager And Police Department: The city manager and the police department of the city are hereby
authorized and empowered to take such lawful action as may be necessary to carry out the regulations and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 812/923
requirements of this section, ensure an orderly event, to prevent obstruction to and ensure the full flow of traffic, and
to prevent riots and disorder. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-17: OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAY:
No person who shall wilfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, or delay, or wilfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay,
hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any street or highway in this city or offer
for barter or sale merchandise on said street so as to interfere with the effective movement of traffic. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-18: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
A. Right Of Way; Exceptions: Funeral processions have the right of way at intersections when vehicles comprising such
procession have their headlights lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
1. Operators of vehicle in a funeral procession shall yield the right of way upon the approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible signal;
2. Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right of way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;
3. The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply with the stop signs and traffic control
signals but when the leading vehicle has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with such signal or after
stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in such procession may proceed without stopping, regardless of
the sign or signal and the leading vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
B. Procession Remains Intact: The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not drive his vehicle in the
funeral procession except when authorized to do so by a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an authorized
emergency vehicle giving audible or visible signal.
C. Join Procession By Fraud: Operators of vehicles not a part of the funeral procession may not form a procession or
convoy and have their headlights lighted for the purpose of securing the right of way granted by this section to funeral
processions.
D. Passing And Overtaking Procession: The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and pass the
vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or
interfering with such procession.
E. Identification Of Vehicles In Procession: The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a flashing
amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead vehicle in such procession. Vehicles
comprising a funeral procession may utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers to identify the individual
vehicles in such a procession. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-19: OPERATION OF AMBULANCES AND RESCUE VEHICLES:
No person shall operate an ambulance or rescue vehicle in a manner not conforming to the motor vehicle laws and
regulations of this state and city as such laws apply to motor vehicles in general, unless in compliance with the following
conditions:
A. Orders From Physicians: The person operating the ambulance shall be either responding to a bona fide emergency
call or specifically directed by a licensed physician to disregard traffic laws in operating the ambulance during and for
the purpose of the specific trip or journey that is involved.
B. Sirens And Flashing Lights: The ambulance or rescue vehicle shall be equipped with a siren producing an audible
signal of an intensity of one hundred (100) decibels at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the siren, and with a lamp or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 813/923
lamps emitting an oscillating, rotating or flashing red beam directed in part toward the front of the vehicle, and these
lamps shall have sufficient intensity to be visible at five hundred feet (500') in normal sunlight.
C. Warning To Pedestrians And Other Drivers: The aforesaid siren and lamp or lamps shall be in operation at all times
when it is reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof during such trip or
journey.
D. Speed In Excess Of Limit: Whenever the ambulance or rescue vehicle is operated at a speed in excess of forty (40)
miles per hour, the ambulance shall be operated in complete conformance with every other motor vehicle law and
regulation of this state and city, relating to the operation of motor vehicles, as such provision applies to motor vehicles
in general, except laws and regulations pertaining to compliance with official traffic control devices or to vehicular
operation upon the right half of the roadway.
E. Special License Plates: The ambulance shall display registration plates identifying the vehicle as an ambulance.
F. Responsibility Of Emergency Response Drivers: The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an ambulance or
rescue vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor do such provisions protect the
driver from the consequences resulting from the reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-20: USE OF SAFETY BELTS; EXCEPTIONS AND PENALTY:
A. Generally; Exceptions: Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a street or highway in this
city shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety belt; except that a child less than eight (8) years of age
shall be protected as required pursuant to the child passenger protection act and section 18-15-21 of this chapter.
Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child eight (8) years of age or more, but less than sixteen (16) years of
age, in a motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety belt.
B. Exempted Conditions: Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any of the following:
1. A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving a vehicle or delivering property from the vehicle, if the speed
of the vehicle between stops does not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour.
2. A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a physician that such person is unable, for medical or
physical reasons, to wear a seat safety belt.
3. A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or license endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in
another state or country indicating that the driver is unable for medical, physical or other valid reasons to wear a
seat safety belt.
4. A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse.
5. A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965.
6. A motorcycle or motor driven cycle.
7. A motorized pedalcycle.
8. A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with seat safety belts under federal law.
9. A motor vehicle operated by a rural letter carrier of the United States postal service while performing duties as a
rural letter carrier.
C. Limitations On Law: Failure to wear a safety belt in violation of this section shall not be considered evidence of
negligence, shall not limit the liability of the insurer, and shall not diminish any recovery for damages arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 814/923
D. Stopped Or Searched: Any vehicle within the city of Carbondale may be stopped for suspected violation of this
section, but no motor vehicle, or driver or passenger of such vehicle, shall be searched by any law enforcement
officer solely on the basis of a violation of this section.
E. Penalty: A violation of this section shall be a petty offense and be subject to a fine not to exceed fifty five dollars
($55.00). (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-21: CHILD PASSENGER PROTECTION:
For the purposes of this section, "child restraint system" means any device which meets the standards of the United
States department of transportation designed to restrain, seat or position children.
A. Child Under Eight Years Of Age; Responsibility Assigned: When a person is transporting a child in the city under the
age of eight (8) years in a noncommercial motor vehicle of the first division, a motor vehicle of the second division
with a gross vehicle weight rating of nine thousand (9,000) pounds or less, or a recreational vehicle on the roadways,
streets or highways of the city or state, such person shall be responsible for providing for the protection of such child
by properly securing him in a child restraint system. The parent or legal guardian of a child under the age of eight (8)
years shall provide a child restraint system to any person who transports his child. Any person who transports the
child of another shall not be in violation of this section unless a child restraint system was provided by the parent or
legal guardian but not used to transport the child.
A child weighing more than forty (40) pounds may be transported in the back seat of a motor vehicle while wearing
only a lap belt if the back seat of the motor vehicle is not equipped with a combination lap and shoulder belt.
B. Children Aged Eight To Sixteen Years: Every person, when transporting a child eight (8) years of age or older but
under the age of sixteen (16), as provided in subsection 18-15-20A of this chapter shall be responsible for securing
that child in either a child restraint system or a seat belt.
C. Liability Limited: Failure to secure a child under eight (8) years of age in an approved child restraint system in violation
of this section shall not be considered evidence of negligence, shall not limit the liability of the insurer, and shall not
diminish recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle.
D. Physician Certified Exemption: The provisions of this section shall not apply to a child passenger with a physical
handicap of such a nature as to prevent appropriate restraint in such seat, provided that such handicap is duly
certified by a physician who shall state the nature of the handicap, as well as the reason the restraint is inappropriate.
No physician shall be liable, and no cause of action may be brought for personal injuries resulting from the exercise
of good faith judgment in making certifications under this provision.
E. Cause For Arrest: Police officers shall make arrests for violations of this section occurring upon a street or highway in
this city. Any law enforcement officer may stop a motor vehicle, or driver or passenger of such vehicle, solely on the
basis of a violation or suspected violation of this section.
F. Penalty: A violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) waived upon proof of
possession of an approved "child restraint system" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-22: TINTED REGISTRATION PLATE COVERS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle that is equipped with tinted plastic or tinted glass registration plate
covers. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-23: USE OF MOTORIZED OR ELECTRIC SCOOTERS, POCKET BIKES, AND SIMILAR
DEVICES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 815/923
Effective April 9, 2005, no person shall operate upon the public streets or other public property, including, but not limited
to, parks, rights of way, parking lots, or sidewalks, a motorized or electric scooter, a pocket bike, all-terrain vehicle, an off
highway motorcycle, golf cart or other similar device, unless that vehicle is properly registered, insured, and complies
with all other laws of the Illinois vehicle code or meets the provisions of chapter 16 of this title, including that the driver be
in possession of a valid driver's license and liability insurance. Nothing in this section applies to a person with disabilities
operating an electric personal assistive mobility device, or motorized wheelchairs, as permitted by the Illinois vehicle
code. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-24: OPERATION OF UNINSURED MOTOR VEHICLE; PENALTY:
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is covered by a liability insurance policy in
accordance with section 7-601 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended.
B. Any person who fails to comply with a request by a law enforcement officer for display of evidence of insurance, as
required under section 7-602 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended shall be deemed to be operating an uninsured
motor vehicle.
C. Any operator of a motor vehicle subject to registration under the Illinois vehicle code as amended who is convicted of
violating this section shall be required to pay a fine in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) but not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) except a person convicted of a third or subsequent violation of this section shall
be required to pay a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). However, no person charged with violating this
section shall be convicted if such person produces in court satisfactory evidence that at the time of the arrest the
motor vehicle was covered by a liability insurance policy in accordance with section 7-601 of the Illinois vehicle code
as amended.
D. A person convicted of violating this section or receiving shall be reported to the Illinois secretary of state in
accordance with the Illinois vehicle code as amended, and is subject to having his or her driver's license, permit, or
privileges suspended in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-707 as amended.
E. A person who: 1) has not previously been convicted of or received a disposition of court supervision for violating this
section and 2) produces at his or her court appearance satisfactory evidence that the motor vehicle is covered, as of
the date of the court appearance, by a liability insurance policy in accordance with section 7-601 of the Illinois vehicle
code as amended shall, for a violation of this section, pay a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court cost and
receive a disposition of court supervision. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-25: DRIVERS MUST HAVE LICENSES OR PERMITS:
A. No person, except those expressly exempted by section 6-102 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended, shall drive any
motor vehicle upon a highway in this state unless such person has a valid license or permit, or a restricted driving
permit, issued under the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code as amended.
B. No person shall drive a motor vehicle unless he holds a valid license or permit or a restricted driving permit issued
under the provisions of section 6-205, 6-206, or 6-113 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended.
C. No person shall operate a motor vehicle unless such person has a valid license with a proper classification to permit
the operation of such vehicle, except that any person may operate a moped if such person has a valid current Illinois
driver's license, regardless of classification.
D. License and permits to be carried and exhibited on demand. Every licensee or permittee shall have his driver's
license or permit in his immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and, for the purpose of
indicating compliance with this requirement, shall display such license or permit if it is in his possession upon demand
made, when in uniform or displaying a badge or other sign of authority, by a member of the state police, a sheriff or
other police officer or designated agent of the secretary of state. However, no person charged with violating this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 816/923
section shall be convicted if he produces in court satisfactory evidence that a driver's license was theretofore issued
to him and was valid at the time of his arrest.
For the purposes of this section, "display" means the manual surrender of his license certificate into the hands of the
demanding officer for his inspection thereof. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-26: MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION:
A. Evidence Of Registration: No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be operated, upon any
highway unless there shall be attached thereto and displayed thereon when and as required by law, proper evidence
of registration in Illinois, as follows:
1. A Vehicle Required To Be Registered In Illinois: A current and valid Illinois registration sticker or stickers and plate
or plates, or an Illinois temporary registration permit, or a drive away or in transit permit, issued therefor by the
secretary of state; or
2. A Vehicle Eligible For Reciprocity: A current and valid reciprocal foreign registration plate or plates properly issued
to such vehicle or a temporary registration issued therefor, by the reciprocal state, and, in addition, when required
by the secretary, a current and valid Illinois reciprocity permit or prorate decal issued therefor by the secretary of
state; or except as otherwise expressly provided for in this chapter.
3. A Vehicle Commuting For Repairs In Illinois: A dealer plate issued by a foreign state shall exempt a vehicle from
the requirements of this section if the vehicle is being operated for the purpose of transport to a repair facility in
Illinois to have repairs performed on the vehicle displaying foreign dealer plates. The driver of the motor vehicle
bearing dealer plates shall provide a work order or contract with the repair facility to a law enforcement officer upon
request.
4. Display Of Registration: Registration plates issued for a motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, autocycle, trailer,
semitrailer, truck-tractor, apportioned bus, or apportioned truck shall be attached thereto, one in the front and one
in the rear. The registration plate issued for a motorcycle, autocycle, trailer or semitrailer required to be registered
hereunder and any apportionment plate issued to a bus under the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code shall be
attached to the rear thereof. The registration plate issued for a truck-tractor or an apportioned truck required to be
registered hereunder shall be attached to the front thereof. Every registration plate shall at all times be securely
fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent the plate from swinging and at
a height of not less than five inches (5") from the ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and
position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained in a condition to be clearly legible, free from any materials that
would obstruct the visibility of the plate. A registration plate on a motorcycle may be mounted vertically as long as it
is otherwise clearly visible. Registration stickers issued as evidence of renewed annual registration shall be
attached to registration plates as required by the secretary of state, and be clearly visible at all times.
5. Registration Application: Except as provided herein for new residents, every owner of any vehicle which shall be
operated upon the public highways of this state shall, within twenty four (24) hours after becoming the owner or at
such time as such vehicle becomes subject to registration under the provisions of this act, file in an office of the
secretary of state, an application for registration properly completed and executed. New residents need not secure
registration until thirty (30) days after establishing residency in this state, provided the vehicle is properly registered
in another jurisdiction. By the expiration of such thirty (30) day statutory grace period, a new resident shall comply
with the provisions of this act and apply for Illinois vehicle registration.
B. Operation Of Motor Vehicle When Registration Suspended For Noninsurance: No person shall operate a vehicle the
registration of which is suspended pursuant to section 7-606 or 7-607 of the Illinois vehicle code as amended.
C. Fine: Any person convicted of violating this section is guilty of a business offense and shall be required to pay a fine
of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Any person
convicted of a second or subsequent violation of this section shall be required to pay a fine of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-27: GRADUATED LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 817/923
A. For the first twelve (12) months of licensing, or until the driver turns eighteen (18), whichever occurs first, the number
of passengers is limited to one person under age twenty (20), unless the passenger(s) is a sibling, stepsibling, child
or stepchild of the driver. After this period, the number of passengers is limited to one in the front seat and the
number of safety belts in the back seat. All occupants must wear safety belts.
B. Cellphone use while driving including a hands free device, is prohibited for drivers under age nineteen (19), except in
the case of an emergency. Texting while driving is prohibited.
C. Nighttime driving restrictions for drivers under the age of eighteen (18): Sunday through Thursday, ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M.; Friday through Saturday, eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord.
2015-29)
18-15-28: ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES:
A. As used in this section: "Electronic communication device" means an electronic device, including, but not limited to, a
handheld wireless telephone, handheld personal digital assistant, or a portable or mobile computer, but does not
include a global positioning system or navigation system or a device that is physically or electronically integrated into
the motor vehicle.
B. A person may not operate a motor vehicle on a roadway while using an electronic communication device.
C. A second or subsequent violation of this section is an offense against traffic regulations governing the movement of
vehicles. A person who violates this section shall be fined a maximum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a first
offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second offense, one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for a third
offense, and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a fourth or subsequent offense.
D. This section does not apply to:
1. A law enforcement officer or operator of an emergency vehicle while performing his or her official duties;
2. A driver using an electronic communication device for the sole purpose of reporting an emergency situation and
continued communication with emergency personnel during the emergency situation;
3. A driver using an electronic communication device in hands free or voice operated mode, which may include the
use of a headset;
4. A driver of a commercial motor vehicle reading a message displayed on a permanently installed communication
device designed for a commercial motor vehicle with a screen that does not exceed ten inches (10") tall by ten
inches (10") wide in size;
5. A driver using an electronic communication device while parked on the shoulder of a roadway;
6. A driver using an electronic communication device when the vehicle is stopped due to normal traffic being
obstructed and the driver has the motor vehicle transmission in neutral or park;
7. A driver using two-way or citizens band radio services;
8. A driver using two-way mobile radio transmitters or receivers for licensees of the federal communications
commission in the amateur radio service;
9. A driver using an electronic communication device by pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication; or
10. A driver using an electronic communication device capable of performing multiple functions, other than a
handheld wireless telephone or handheld personal digital assistant (for example, a fleet management system,
dispatching device, citizens band radio, or music player) for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by this
section. (Ord. 2015-29)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 818/923
18-15-29: SPILLING LOADS ON HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED:
A. Spilling Loads On Highways: No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom,
except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled
on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
B. Securely Fastened Covers: No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless said load and
any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent said covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or
in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. (Ord. 2015-29)
18-15-30: COVER OR TARPAULINS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN LOADS:
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on a highway, any vehicle loaded with dirt, aggregate, garbage,
refuse, or other similar material, when any portion of the load is falling, sifting, blowing, dropping or in any way
escaping from the vehicle.
B. This section shall not apply to the operation of highway maintenance vehicles engaged in removing snow and ice from
the roadway, nor to implements of husbandry or other farm vehicles while transporting agricultural products to or from
the original place of production.
C. For the purpose of this section "aggregate" shall include all ores, minerals, sand, gravel, shale, coal, clay, limestone
or any other ore or mineral which may be mined.
D. Notwithstanding any other penalty, whenever a police officer determines that the operator of a vehicle is in violation of
this section, as evidenced by the issuance of a citation for a violation of section of this code, or where a police officer
determines that a dangerous condition exists whereby any portion of the load may fall, sift, blow, drop, or in any way
escape or fall from the vehicle, the police officer shall require the operator to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and
keep such vehicle stationary until the load has either been reduced, secured, or covered with a cover or tarpaulin of
sufficient size to prevent any further violation of this section.
E. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a petty offense punishable by a fine not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2015-29)
Chapter 16
GOLF CARTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES
18-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY STREETS: Only those city streets designated on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated herein by reference, located within the boundaries of the city.
COUNTY ROADS: Include any roads outside the boundaries of the city limits.
GOLF CART: Defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-123.9 and means a vehicle specifically designed and
intended for the purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment while
engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or
private golf course.
NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE: A self-propelled, electronically powered four (4) wheeled vehicle; or a self-propelled,
gasoline powered, four (4) wheeled vehicle with an engine displacement under one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic
centimeters; which is capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per hour, but not more than
twenty five (25) miles per hour, and which conforms to federal regulations under title 49 CFR part 571.500.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 819/923
STATE ROADS: Include Illinois Route 13 and U.S. Highway 51. (Ord. 2016-13)
18-16-2: OPERATION ON STREETS:
A. It shall be lawful for a qualified person to operate a golf cart and neighborhood vehicle on designated streets within
the city, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle on any street in the city, unless:
1. The driver is at least eighteen (18) years of age and has a valid driver's license,
2. The vehicle is properly titled with the Illinois secretary of state, if required,
3. Has the minimum required liability insurance as set out in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-601 et seq., and
maintains proof of said insurance specifically for the golf cart or neighborhood vehicle to be operated on city streets
within the permitted vehicle,
4. Has been properly registered with the city of Carbondale and must display such registration as required in section
18-16-3 of this chapter, and
5. Has the following required, operable equipment:
a. Brakes,
b. Steering wheel apparatus,
c. Tires,
d. A driver's side outside mirror and either an interior rearview mirror or a passenger side outside mirror,
e. Red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear,
f. A slow moving emblem on the rear of the vehicle,
g. A headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, illuminated at all
times when operated on city streets,
h. A taillamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100') from the rear, illuminated at all times
when operated on city streets,
i. At least two (2) brake lights which emit a red light visible from a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the rear,
j. Turn signals mounted to the front and rear of the vehicle,
k. Seat belts for each seat,
l. Windshield, and
m. Horn which is audible from a distance of two hundred feet (200').
C. All persons eligible to operate a golf cart or a neighborhood vehicle on designated streets of the city must comply with
the following requirements:
1. Must not exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour.
2. Shall only be operated from sunrise until sunset.
3. Shall not be operated in inclement weather, nor when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other
conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a
distance of five hundred feet (500').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 820/923
4. Each driver and passenger of a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle shall wear a properly fastened and adjusted seat
safety belt. Children must be secured in a child restraint system as required pursuant to the child passenger
protection act.
5. A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle on a roadway while under
the influence of alcohol or drugs is subject to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 11-500 through 11-502.
6. Golf carts or neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on sidewalks or other public property not accessible to or
authorized to vehicular traffic.
7. Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on streets, highways and roads under the jurisdiction of
the Illinois department of transportation (Illinois Route 13 and U.S. Highway 51) or the county highway department.
8. Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on city streets with a posted speed limit in excess of
thirty (30) miles per hour.
9. Nothing in this chapter shall permit the use of recreational off highway vehicles as defined and provided in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-168.8 or all-terrain vehicles, off highway motorcycles and any other vehicle which is
not described within the foregoing definitions of "golf carts" or "neighborhood vehicles". (Ord. 2016-13)
18-16-3: REGISTRATION OF GOLF CARTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES:
A. Permit: A permit shall be issued within seven (7) days upon the approval of an application from an owner of a golf cart
or neighborhood vehicle to operate a neighborhood vehicle upon the streets and roadways within the jurisdiction of
the city of Carbondale, except where expressly prohibited.
B. Application: Any person requesting a permit shall submit to the Carbondale police department on a form supplied by
the city which shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. An application which contains the owner's name, address, phone number, driver's license number, vehicle
identification number (VIN), make and model of vehicle,
2. Proof of valid insurance information, which meets the requirements of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-601 et
seq., specifically for the golf cart or neighborhood vehicle to be operated on city streets,
3. Signed and notarized waiver of liability by applicant releasing the city from any and all future claims resulting from
the operation of their golf cart or neighborhood vehicle pursuant to this chapter or any other ordinance of the city of
Carbondale,
4. Present the vehicle for physical inspection to ensure that the vehicle is safe to operate on city streets and is in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. A golf cart or neighborhood vehicle will be allowed to be driven to
the police department to have the vehicle inspected and permitted, if the requester has called ahead and arranged
with the chief of police (or designee) a specific meeting time,
5. Any handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed by a physician that he is a handicapped applicant and
is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart, neighborhood vehicle or recreational off highway vehicle on the
roadways designated.
Upon issuance, said permit shall be displayed on the front and rear of the vehicle as may be administratively
required by the city.
C. Fee: An annual registration and permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for applicants age sixty five (65) or older and
fifty dollars ($50.00) per year for all other applicants shall be submitted at the time of the application for the permit,
and subject to renewal thereafter.
D. Permit Renewal: A permit shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed upon application of the owner,
in compliance with subsection B of this section.
E. Transferability: A permit is nontransferable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 821/923
F. Change Of Contact Information: It shall be the duty of the permit holder to inform the Carbondale police department of
any change of address, phone number, or insurance coverage, within ten (10) business days of such change.
G. Denial Of Permit: A permit shall be denied only for the following reasons:
1. The vehicle is not properly titled with the Illinois secretary of state, if required,
2. The insurance information for the vehicle cannot be verified,
3. The registered owner does not have a valid driver's license,
4. The owner has provided any false information in their application, or
5. The vehicle does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
H. False Information: It shall be unlawful for anyone to provide false information in the application for a permit to operate
a neighborhood vehicle or golf cart. (Ord. 2016-13)
18-16-4: OPERATION ON CERTAIN STREETS AND ROADS PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited Streets: Except as expressly authorized in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
neighborhood vehicle or golf cart as follows:
1. Any street which has a posted speed limit of greater than thirty (30) miles per hour.
2. On the following roadways except to make a direct crossing of the prohibited roadway at an intersection controlled
by either four-way stop signs or traffic control signal light:
Giant City Road
Illinois Avenue (U.S. Highway 51)
Main Street (Illinois Route 13 West)
New Era Road
Old Murphysboro Road
Reed Station Road
South Wall Street
That portion of Walnut Street which is designated as State Route 13
University Avenue
West Mill Street
B. Authorization Of Vehicles: Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on any street or road under the
jurisdiction of another local unit of government which has not authorized the use of neighborhood vehicles; such as,
those roads maintained by the Carbondale park district and Southern Illinois University. (Ord. 2016-13)
18-16-5: OBEDIENCE TO VEHICLE CODE:
A. Every operator of a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle shall obey all sections of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100
et seq., the Illinois vehicle code, and all provisions of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 822/923
B. The city may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the motorized golf
cart or neighborhood vehicle on the designated roadways.
C. Every person operating a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle pursuant to a permit hereunder on designated city streets
has all the rights and duties applicable to a driver of any other vehicle pursuant to the state highway traffic laws and
regulations except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts or neighborhood
vehicles. (Ord. 2016-13)
18-16-6: PENALTIES:
A. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a minimum fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), except a violation of subsection 18-16-2B3 of this chapter shall
be punishable by a minimum fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. A second conviction for a violation of this chapter within one year of the date of a prior conviction shall result in
suspension of permit, to be reinstated only by the city manager.
C. Upon conviction of operating a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle on a state highway, other than crossing at the
designated locations, shall result in a fine no less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and the suspension of
permit for one year. (Ord. 2016-13)
18-16-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect on and after February 23, 2016. (Ord. 2016-13)
Title 19
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 1
CABLE COMMUNICATION REGULATIONS
19-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is:
A. To regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair
and use of a cable communications system in, upon, along, across, above, over, under, or in any manner connected
with the streets, public ways, or public places within the corporate limits of the City, as now or in the future may exist;
and
B. To provide for payment of a fee and other valuable consideration to the City for construction and operation of a cable
communications system; and
C. To provide for a regulation of rates to be charged within the confines of the Cable Communications Act of 1984; and
D. To provide for the development of the cable communications system and for other public purposes; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 823/923
E. To establish procedures for acceptance and evaluation of applications for a cable franchise; and
F. To provide remedies and prescribe penalties for the violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. Words used in the past or present tense include the
future.
Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter and unless the context or the intent clearly indicates otherwise, terms,
phrases, words and their derivations not defined in this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the rules
and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
For purposes of this Chapter and any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless otherwise specifically provided in this
Chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise or unless such meaning would be inconsistent with the intent.
ACCESS CHANNEL(S): Those channels available at no cost to the City for educational and governmental use.
ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.
ADDITIONAL SERVICE: Any communication service other than basic service, provided directly over the cable
communications system by the operator directly or as a carrier to its parent, subsidiary, or affiliated corporations or any
other person engaged in communications service including, but not limited to, electronic intelligence transmission,
facsimile reproduction, meter reading, subscription programming, market surveying, and home shopping.
AFFILIATED CORPORATION: A. Any person directly or indirectly owning, controlling or holding with power to vote three
percent (3%) or more of the outstanding voting securities of the operator;
B. Any person three percent (3%) or more of whose outstanding voting securities are directly or indirectly owned,
controlled or held with power to vote, by the operator;
C. Any person directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control, with the operator.
D. Any officer, director, partner, copartner, or employee of the operator;
E. If the operator is an investment company, any investment advisor thereof or any member of an advisory board
thereof; and
F. If the operator is an unincorporated investment company not having a board of directors, the depositor thereof.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: The complement of programming and services distributed by the cable communications
system to all subscriber terminals to all locations within the City for a basic monthly charge, which includes local
television broadcast comparable to those specified in 47 CFR 76.51 ETSEQ.
BOOK VALUE: The original cost of the cable communications system less book depreciation and exclusive of the value
of the franchise as certified public accountant selected by the City at the expense of the operator.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: A nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths with associated
signal generation, reception and control equipment, under common ownership and control, which distributes or is
designed to distribute to subscribers the signals of one or more television broadcast stations. However, such term shall
not include any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under
common ownership, control or management, or any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
CABLECASTING: Transmissions of programming, exclusive of broadcast signals and community communications, via
the cable communications system to subscribers.
CHANNEL: A frequency band which is capable of carrying a standard broadcast audio-video television signal.
CHANNEL LESSEE: The City Clerk of the City of Carbondale.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 824/923
CITY: The City of Carbondale.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Carbondale.
COMMISSION: The Carbondale Information and Telecommunications Commission as established by Council to act as
an advisory body on matters pertaining to cable communications.
COMMUNITY COMMUNICATIONS: Programming, exclusive or broadcast signals, produced by person, organizations or
institutions other than the operator at designated centers or otherwise for cablecast over any designated community
communications channel.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Carbondale.
DEPARTMENT: Includes any branch or division of City administration, including any officer, employee or otherauthorized
representative thereof.
DIRECTOR: The chief administrative office of a department.
DISCRETE SERVICES: Services available on the cable communications system which may be provided to subscribers
on an individual and/or group basis and which may be particular to that subscriber and/or group and not available
system-wide. Discrete services are cable communications services which are delivered by means of a technically
segregated signal.
DOWNSTREAM CHANNEL: A channel through which an electronic or other signal, originated or converted at the
headend or subheadends, may be transmitted to and received at the location of the subscriber's receiver.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission or its legally appointed successor or representative.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: That price which a seller, dealing at arms length, ready and willing to sell and not compelled to
sell, would accept for the cable communications system when offered by a buyer, ready and willing but not compelled to
buy, exclusive of the value of the franchise.
FRANCHISE: The right granted through a contractual agreement between the City and a person by which the City
authorizes such person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain a cable
communications system in the City. Any franchise awarded by an agreement in accordance herewith shall be a
nonexclusive franchise.
FRANCHISE ORIGINATION: Programming, exclusive of broadcast signals and communications, carried on a cable
communications system over one or more channels and subject to the exclusive control of the operator, including, but
not limited to, leased channels.
HEADEND: Electronic equipment including, inter alia, antennas, pre-amplifiers, frequency converters, demodulators,
modulators and related equipment used to amplify, filter and/or convert television signals for distribution over the cable
communications system's channels, including antenna tower, satellite earth stations and any building housing any of the
above equipment.
INCEPTION OF SERVICE: Providing service to a subscriber in any separately programmable area.
LAW: Any Federal or Illinois Constitution or statute, local resolution or ordinance including, but not limited to those of the
City, and all rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to any of the same, now existing or hereafter adopted or
amended and interpretations of the same by a court of competent jurisdiction.
LEASED CHANNEL: A channel leased by the operator to permit the presentation and distribution of video-audio
programming or othervideo-audio communications to subscribers for a specified fee.
OPERATOR: The person to whom the right granted through a contractual agreement by the City, by which the City
authorizes such person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use and maintain a cable
communications system in the City. Any franchise awarded by an agreement in accordance herewith shall be a
nonexclusive franchise.
PARENT CORPORATION: Any corporation, other than the operator, in an unbroken chain of corporations ending with
the operator if, at the time of the execution of the franchise agreement, each of the corporations other than the operator
owns stock possessing fifty percent (50%) or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock in one of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 825/923
other corporations in such chain.
PERSON: Includes individual natural person, firms, partnerships, joint ventures, societies, organizations, clubs,
associations, trustees, trusts, corporations, companies or organizations of any kind; or any officers, agents, employees,
factors or any kind of person representative of the above, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other
person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. Whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the
term "person" as applied to partnerships or associations includes the partners or members thereof, and if applied to
corporations, the officers thereof. "Person" shall not include a Municipal corporation.
SINGLE DROP: The connection between the cable communications system and the subscriber's location and receiver
therein.
STREET: Any area established for vehicular use or the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open for public purposes. "Street" includes, but is not limited to, highway, avenue,
road, alley, right of way, lane, boulevard, concourse, bridge, tunnel, parks parkways, waterways, docks, overheads,
wharves and piers.
SUBSCRIBER: A person who lawfully receives any signal or service provided or distributed by the cable
communications system.
SUBSCRIPTION PROGRAMMING: Programming for which a per program, per channel, per day, per time period or
other per unit charge is made.
SUBSIDIARY CORPORATION: Any corporation, other than the operator, in an unbroken chain of corporations beginning
with the operator if, at the time of the execution of the franchise agreement, each of the corporations other than the last
corporation in the unbroken chain owns stock comprising fifty percent (50%) or more of the total combined voting power
of all classes of stock in one of the other corporations in such chain.
TOTAL LOCAL GROSS REVENUES: All cash, credits, or property of any kind or nature reported as revenue items on
operator's audited income statements, less refunds or credits for service outages,arising from or attributable to the sale
or exchange of cable communications services by the operator within the City or in any way derived from the operation
of its cable communications system, including, but not limited to, any interconnection between its system in the City and
any system whatsoever or the sale, exchange or cablecast of any programming developed on or for community
communications channels of the franchisee's system. This sum shall be the basis for computing the fee imposed
pursuant to this Section. Such sum shall not include any bad debts, deposits, promotional or vendor discounts or credits
nor sales, service occupation or other excise tax to the extent that such taxes are charged separately from normal
service charges and are remitted by the operator directly to the taxing authority.
UPSTREAM CHANNEL: A channel through which television signals emanating from a subscriber's location and/or the
location of any other entity except the main transmitting facility of the operator is transmitted via the cable
communications system to the system headend or other appropriate point.
USER: A person utilizing a cable communications channel and/or production facilities for purposes of production and/or
transmission of electronic or other signals as opposed to receipt thereof as a subscriber. (Ord. 90-85; Ord. 98-06; 1998
Code)
19-1-3: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE:
A. No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable system within the City, nor provide cable service or
acquire ownership or control of a cable system in the City, without first having applied for and been granted a
franchise.
B. Every application for a cable franchise shall be made in writing on a form provided by the City and the following
information shall be attached:
1. A representative sample of other franchise areas where the applicant, affiliant or subsidiary currently provides
cable service or has applications pending, if any.
2. Information demonstrating the financial capability of the applicant to design, construct and operate the proposed
cable system, including clearly identified sufficient net liquid assets on hand or committed sources of financing
available for the cable system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 826/923
3. Information demonstrating the technical quality of the proposed cable system and its interconnection capabilities
with any existing cable system.
4. Information demonstrating the impact of construction of the communication and electrical lines on the existing
utility poles and underground utility systems, including an assessment of adequate space and pole position; and
the impact on rights ofway.
5. Information demonstrating the rate and feasibility of the construction schedule for the proposed cable system,
including the appropriate surety and construction bonds.
6. Information demonstrating applicant's familiarity with the community, including, but not limited to, knowledge of the
ethnic, socioeconomic, and general demographic makeup of the neighborhoods to be served.
7. Information demonstrating the manner and extent to which the applicant proposes to meet community needs and
interests and the anticipated costs associated therewith.
8. Any other information the City may request in order to fully review, investigate and evaluate the financial, legal,
technical and other qualifications of applicant. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-4: NO LIABILITY OR WARRANTY:
This Chapter shall not be construed to create or hold the City responsible or liable for any damage to persons or property
by reason of any inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect, nor shall the issuance of
any permit or license nor the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein, nor any agreement executed
pursuant hereto constitute any representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by, nor create any liability upon the City
or any official, agent, or employee thereof. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-5: LENGTH OF FRANCHISE:
Any franchise awarded by the City by an agreement in accordance herewith shall be a nonexclusive franchise for the
use of the streets, public ways or public places within the City for a specified term of years for the erection, construction,
reconstruction, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing and use of a cable communications system. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-6: INFORMATION AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION:
A. There shall be a body known as the Carbondale Information and Telecommunications Commission, hereinafter "the
Commission", which shall act solely as an advisory body to the Council with regard to the best use of the cable
communications system in the City. In its advisory capacity, the Commission shall endeavor to promote and develop
the best use by the community of the cable communications system. (Ord. 90-85; Ord. 98-06)
B. The Commission shall be composed of seven (7) members, appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City
Council.
C. The members of the Commission shall be appointed on the following basis:
1. One Southern Illinois University student;
2. One representative from the office of the president of Southern Illinois University;
3. One representative from the School of Communications of Southern Illinois University;
4. Three (3) other citizens of the City, selected at large, who are subscribers to cablevision.
D. A member shall be deemed to have resigned from the Commission when the member no longer resides in the City or
no longer subscribes to cablevision, or when the member ceases to meet the requirements as set forth in subsection
C hereinabove.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 827/923
E. In addition to the membership of the Commission as set forth hereinabove, one Council person, designated by the
Mayor, shall serve as a nonvoting member.
F. Any action taken by the Commission shall require the concurrence of a simple majority of the Commission members
present and voting. (Ord. 90-85)
G. The Commission shall have such specific functions as provided in Title 1, Chapter 14, Article E of this Code. (Ord. 98-
06)
19-1-7: TERRITORY:
A. Any agreement awarding a franchise to operate a cable communications system in accordance herewith shall apply to
its operation throughout the City's corporate limits as now or in the future may exist.
B. The cable operator shall endeavor to offer cable communications service to all residents of the City. To the extent that
the cable operator intends not to provide service to any specific area, street, building or other location, the cable
operator shall designate them and clearly indicate in its proposal to enter into an agreement for a franchise the
reasons for its inability to provide service in the enumerated locations. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-8: CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
Within twelve (12) months of the date of execution of any agreement awarding a new franchise in accordance herewith
for an unbuilt cable communications system, the operator shall offer to install, make operational, and render cable
communications services to all residences within the City in accordance with this Chapter and any agreement awarding
a franchise in accordanceherewith, according to the following:
A. Operator shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with The Standards of Good
Engineering Practices for Measurements on Cable Television Systems, published by the National Cable Television
Association, 1983.
B. Operator shall, at all times, comply with the National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards) and the
National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters).
C. Operator shall maintain all parts of the system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period.
D. All performances and technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, erection, installation, operation,
testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of the cable communication system shall be in accordance with all
applicable FCC and other Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
E. All cables and wires shall be installed parallel with existing telephone and electric utility wires whenever possible.
F. Multiple configurations shall be in parallel arrangement and bundled, in accordance with engineering and safety
consideration.
G. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the City where both telephone and electric utilities' facilities are
underground at the time of the installation of the system.
H. Operator shall not open or otherwise disturb the surface or support of any street, sidewalk, driveway, public way, or
other public place for any purpose whatsoever without obtaining authorization to do so from City. Operator shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 828/923
repair any street it has disturbed at its own cost and expense, restore and replace any other property disturbed,
damaged or in any way injured by or on account of its activities in a manner approved by the owner, to its condition
immediately prior to the disturbance, damage or injury, or shall pay owner the fair market value thereof.
I. Where any damage is caused to any city property during construction or installation by operator, the cost of such
repairs including all service and materials, required from city will be billed to operator and these charges shall be paid
immediately. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-9: SERVICE TO CUSTOMERS:
A. All cable communications systems shall be designed for operation twenty four (24) hours per day and shall endure
service interruptions only for good cause and for a reasonable time. Permissible interruptions of service shall be for
the shortest possible time.
B. The cable operator shall maintain an office in the city which shall be open to the general public during normal
business hours, and staffed sufficiently to service the community.
C. The cable operator shall have a publicly listed telephone number and shall employ an operator or maintain a
telephone answering device twenty four (24) hours per day, each day of the year, to receive subscriber complaints.
D. The cable operator shall maintain a maintenance and repair service capable of responding to subscriber complaints
or requests for repairs within twenty four (24) hours after the receipt of the complaint or request.
E. If the operator or any of its shareholders owning at least three percent (3%) of its stock, or any subsidiary, parent or
affiliated corporation of the operator engages in the business or activity of selling, leasing, repairing, dismantling or
installing television or radio receivers, or accessories for such receivers, cameras, audio or video tape machines,
videotapes, microphones, converters, modulators or other equipment utilized by users or subscribers in the operation
of any cable communications system, the operator shall not condition cable communications service or the
continuation thereof of usage of community communications facilities on a person's purchase of or failure to purchase
any of such services or equipment.
F. In the event that its service to subscribers is interrupted for twenty four (24) or more consecutive hours, except for acts
of God, riots, or a state of emergency declared by the president of the United States, governor of the state of Illinois,
or the mayor, the operator shall grant affected subscribers a pro rata credit or rebate for the full duration of the
interruption.
G. The cable operator shall not delay service or use of community communications facilities or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers or users on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, disability, marital status, familial status,
sexual orientation, national origin or ancestry. The operator shallstrictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity
regulations of the FCC and to all federal, state, and local laws, and executive orders pertaining to discrimination,
equal employment opportunity and affirmative action.
H. The cable operator shall notify each subscriber at the time service is initially requested, of all fees and procedures
regarding payments, deposits, return of deposits, and disconnection.
I. Upon the granting of any franchise, the cable operator, in conjunction with the city, shall establish a complaint
procedure and notify all subscribers of the complaint process. (Ord. 2003-66)
19-1-10: PROGRAMMING AND SERVICES:
A. The operator shall carry all broadcast television channels to all subscribers as specified by the FCC or by the city in
the event that the city has the authority to do so.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 829/923
B. All cable communications systems constructed within the city shall have such community communications channels
and facilities as may be provided for in any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith.
C. In addition to the capabilities of the cable communications system mandated above, the cable operator shall construct
a cable communications system which, when used with an appropriate device at the subscriber's receiver, shall
enable only the reception of those local broadcast channels whose carriage is mandated by the FCC and such
community communications channels as may be specifically provided for in any agreement awarding a franchise in
accordance herewith.
D. The operator shall make available to all subscribers a full range of FM radio signals. Such signals shall include, but
not be limited to, all local commercial and educational FM radio signals available in the franchise area and receivable
at the headend. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-11: PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS:
During the operation of any cable communications system, the operator shall strictly observe the privacy and property
rights of subscribers, as set forth in the Act, or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-12: EMERGENCY OVERRIDE:
Any cable communications system shall include an emergency alert capability which shall permit the City Manager or the
City Manager's designated representative to override the audio on all television channels and FM signals simultaneously,
in accordance with FCC regulations, in the case of public emergencies as determined by the Mayor or City Manager.
The operator shall designate a channel which will be used for such emergency broadcasts and such designation shall be
included in any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-13: LOCAL REGULATORY FRAMEWORK:
A. Reservation Of Rights: The City expressly reserves the right to amend this Chapter.
B. Powers And Duties Of City: The City shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Mediating disputes of disagreements between a subscriber and the operator at either's request, following
investigation.
2. Reviewing and auditing all reports and filings submitted by the operator to the FCC and to the City pursuant to this
Chapter.
3. Submitting regulations regarding the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing or
use of the cable communications system established pursuant to an agreement awarding a franchise in
accordance herewith to the Director of the Department of Public Works for promulgation.
4. Reviewing all rules and regulations promulgated by the operator regarding community communications and basic
services in order to insure compliance by the operator.
5. Assuring that all rates and rules and regulations pertinent to the operation of a cable communications systems in
accordance herewith are available for inspection by the general public during normal business hours. Copies of
such rates and rules and regulation, which are hereby declared to be documents of public record, shall be made
available in the office of the City Clerk to those who request the same on a cost per copy basis.
6. Conferring and coordinating with the cable operator on the interconnection of the cable communications system
created in accordance herewith with any communications system, not limited to a cable communications system,
whatsoever, both within and without the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 830/923
7. Developing funding proposals and administering any funds obtained by the City for the ongoing development of the
cable communications system to be constructed and operated in accordance herewith.
8. Retaining consultants' service as authorized by Council in order to ascertain the best use of public facilities and
channels of the system and for other consulting services. (Ord. 90-85)
9. Coordinating the activities of Carbondale Information and Telecommunications Commission and assisting it in its
deliberation. (Ord. 90-85; Ord. 98-06)
19-1-14: BONDS:
A. All persons submitting a proposal for the grant of a franchise in accordance herewith for an unbuilt cable
communications system shall file with their proposals a corporate surety bond from a company authorized to conduct
business in the State and approved by A. M. Best and Company, in the amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00)
to assure the satisfactory completion of the construction of the cable system in accordance with this Chapter and the
franchise agreement.
B. Any cable operator granted a franchise by the City shall obtain and maintain at is sole cost, and file with the City, a
corporate surety bond from a company authorized to conduct business in the State and approved by A. M. Best and
Company, in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), or a security fund in the amount of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be deposited in local depository chosen by the City, to guarantee the faithful
performance by the operator of all obligations required in the franchise agreement, which shall be maintained
throughout the term of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-15: CONSIDERATION SUPPORTING AWARD OF FRANCHISE:
A. It shall be a term and condition of any agreement awarding a franchise that as a part of the consideration supporting
the award of such franchise and the City's permission thereby to use the streets of the City, that the operator shall
pay each year to the City a fee, which shall be set forth in the franchise agreement, and such further consideration as
the operator may offer in its proposal, including, but not limited to, community communications services and facilities
or extensions thereof as may be provided for in such agreement.
B. As additional consideration to that which is provided in subsection A hereof, the City shall have a first option to
purchase the cable communications system for its fair market value at the expiration of the term of any agreement
awarding a franchise in accordance herewith.
C. As additional consideration, the operator shall provide access channels(s), free of charge, for educational and
governmental use, and any and all equipment necessary to utilize such access channels(s).
D. As additional consideration, the cable operator shall provide access channel(s), free of charge, for educational and
governmental use, and any and all equipment necessary to utilize such access channel(s).
E. As additional consideration, the operator shall provide for the entire term of the agreement a single drop to all public
or nonprofit elementary and secondary schools, and institutions of higher learning located in the City. After such
installation, the operator shall not charge or collect from such schools or institutions any fee or other charge for any
cable communications service including basic service.
F. Any person submitting a proposal to enter into an agreement for the award of a franchise in accordance herewith may
offer consideration in addition to that listed in subsections A through E hereof, including, but not limited to, additional
fees and/or community communications services and/or facilities.
G. The annual fee provided for in subsection A hereof shall be assessed monthly for the preceding month.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 831/923
1. Each monthly payment shall be payable and reportable no less than forty five (45) days after the relevant
assessment date.
2. Each payment shall be accompanied by a report from the cable operator in a form approved by the City Treasurer
showing the basis for the computation and such other relevant data as may be required by the City Treasurer.
3. Each of such reports shall contain a notarized verification by the chief financial officer of the cable operator and
such reports shall be verified annually, within ninety (90) days of the close of business of the last day of the
calendar year, by a certified public accountant selected by the City at the expense of the cable operator.
H. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit the liability of the cable operator for all applicable Federal, State and
local taxes, including, inter alia, applicable local utility taxes. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-16: OBSCENITY:
The operator and all other persons using or making use of the cable communications system shall comply in all respects
with all Federal, State and local laws regarding obscenity. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-17: INDEMNITY AND INSURANCE:
A. The operator shall obtain, effective from the date of execution of any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance
herewith, and shall keep in force and effect during the entire term of such agreement or any extension thereof, a
policy of comprehensive general liability insurance, duly executed by the officers or authorized representatives of a
responsible and nonassessable insurance company evidencing the following minimum coverages for the benefit of
the City as an additional insured, which insurance shall be noncancellable except upon ninety (90) days' prior written
notice to the City.
Minimum limits; bodily injury, including death: five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) each occurrence; five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) aggregate.
Property damage: two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00) each occurrence; two million five
hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00) aggregate.
1. A copy of each such policy shall be delivered to the City upon the execution of such agreement.
2. At least ninety (90) days prior to expiration, written notice shall be given to the City of the insurer's intention not to
renew such policy, or not to replace the same, or materially to alter or change the same. All premiums on such
policy shall be at the expense of the operator. None of the provisions of this Chapter or of any insurance policy
required by the City hereunder, nor the receipt of any proceeds recovered by the City under any such policy, nor
any term or condition of any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith, shall be construed to excuse
the operator from the faithful performance of its obligation or limit its liability under any of the provisions of this
Chapter or of any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith.
B. The operator shall be solely responsible for the payment of premiums due for the insurance thereunder. The operator
shall furnish written proof of the payment of such premiums to the City on or before the due date.
C. No policy of insurance required under the provisions of this Section shall be replaced, renewed, cancelled or
materially changed or altered in any way except upon the express written authorization of the City. No change shall
be authorized which would violate the provisions of this Section or which would materially affect the protection such
policies afford the City. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-18: RATES:
A. The Council expressly reserves the right to be notified of rates any modification thereof which the operator charges its
subscribers for service any the rates for any other services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 832/923
B. The operator shall file with the City on or before December 31 of each year a full schedule of all subscriber and user
rates and all other charges including, but not limited to, pay TV, lease channel and discrete services, made in
connection with the cable communications system. All rates shall be published and on file in the City Clerk's office.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with
promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers or users.
D. The operator may require all subscribers to pay for basic service not more than one month in advance. The operator
shall require no other advancement of payment for basic service, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit an advancement of payment for installation of cable communications services. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-19: POLICE POWERS:
Nothing in this Chapter or in any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith shall be construed as an
abrogation by the City of any of its police powers. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-20: USE OF STREETS AND POLE ATTACHMENTS:
A. Before commencing construction of its cable communications system in, above, over, under, across, through or in any
way connected with the streets, public ways or public places of the City, the operator shall first obtain the written
approval from the Department of Public Works. Applications for such approval shall be made in the form prescribed
by the Department.
B. Upon obtaining such written approval, the operator shall give the Department written notice within a reasonable time
of proposed construction, but in no event shall such notice be given less than ten (10) days before such
commencement.
C. Any person who submits a proposal to enter into an agreement for the award of a franchise shall include proposed
agreements for the use of utility poles with all utility companies whose poles shall be used in or affected by the
construction of the proposed cable communications system, which agreements shall become effective on the date of
execution of the agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith in the event that such person is selected to
be the operator.
D. Any cable operator shall, at its own cost and expense,protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same
street or other public place, or remove from such street or other public place, any of its property when required to do
so by the City because the street or other public excavation, construction, repair, regrading, or grading; traffic
conditions; installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, City-owned power or signal lines, tracks; vacation or relocation
of streets or any other type of structure or improvements of a public agency, or any other type of improvement
necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.
E. Nothing in this Chapter or any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith, shall be construed as
authorizing an operator to erect and maintain new poles in areas serviced by existing poles. The operator shall obtain
written approval from the City, such approval not to be withheld unreasonably, before erecting any new poles or
underground conduits where none exist at the time that the operator seeks to install its cable communications
system.
F. An operator shall maintain all wires, conduits, cables, and other real and personal property and facilities in good
condition, order, and repair.
G. All cable operators shall keep accurate, complete and current maps and records of its system and facilities and shall
furnish as soon as they are available two (2) complete copies of such maps and records to the Department of Public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 833/923
Works. Such maps and records shall be available for inspection by the public during normal business hours of the
Department.
H. An operator shall not place, or cause to be placed, poles or other equipment in such a manner as to interfere with the
rights or reasonable convenience of adjoining property owners, or with any gas, electric or telephone utilities fixtures
or property, nor shall the operator place, or cause to be placed, such poles or equipment in the right of way between
the cartway and the right of way boundary except with the written approval of the City.
I. An operator shall, at the request of any person holding a permit to move a building, temporarily raise or lower its wires
to permit the moving of such building. Such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be at the cost and
expense of the person requesting the same, and the operator shall have the authority to request payment for the
same in advance before complying with such request. An operator shall restore any wires moved in accordance
herewith to their former position as soon as possible after the building is moved. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-21: TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS:
A. No operator shall transfer or assign its interest in any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith or in its
cable communications system before completion of the constructionof its cable communications system without the
prior written authorization of the City. For purposes of this Section, a merger or consolidation shall be deemed a
transfer or assignment.
B. During the term of any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith, an operator shall not sell, transfer,
exchange or release, or permit the sale, transfer, exchange or release of more than three percent (3%) of the
ownership of its cable communications system to a person, (hereinafter "proposed transferee") without the prior
written authorization of the City.
C. Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement in the form and containing the conditions approved by the City
Attorney that it will assume and be bound by all of the provisions, terms and conditions of this Chapter and any
agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith.
D. The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may, at the option of the City, terminate any franchise
agreement awarded hereunder, and accelerate all of the rights and obligations hereunder. For purpose of this
Section, an adjudication of bankruptcy or the placement of the operator into receivership shall constitute an
unauthorized assignment. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-22: REPORTS:
On or before March 31 of each year during the term of any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith, all
operator(s) shall submit a written report to the City, in a form approved by the City, including, but not limited to, the
following information:
A. A summary of the previous year's or, in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's activities in development
of the cable communications system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued, total number of
subscribers, subscribers added or discontinued during the reporting year, and user participation;
B. A financial statement including a statement of income, revenues, operating expenses, original cost of the system
retired from service during the previous year, the original cost of the system added to service during the previous
year, the total original cost of the system in service and used and useful at the end of the previous year, all other
annual capital expenditures, book depreciation with an attached depreciation schedule, interest paid, taxes actually
paid, historic and pro forma balance sheets and a statement of sources and application of funds, covering all years
since the beginning of the franchise.
C. A current statement of costs of construction by component categories.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 834/923
D. A projected income statement, balance sheet, statement ofsources and applications of funds and statement of
projected construction for the next two (2) years;
E. A reconciliation between previously projected construction and/or financial estimates as the case may be and actual
results;
F. A summary of complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition;
G. A list of officers and members of the board of directors of the operator, and its parent, subsidiary of affiliated
corporations, if any;
H. A list of its stockholders holding three percent (3%) or more of the voting stock of the operator, or its parent,
subsidiary and affiliated corporations, if any;
I. A copy of its annual report and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations;
J. Such other information or reports as the City may request. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-23: REVIEW, RENEWAL, TERMINATION AND CANCELLATION:
A. To provide for technological changes in the state of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures,
to promote the maximum degree of flexibility in cable communications system and to achieve a continuing, advanced,
modern system for the City, the City and any operator shall comply with the following provisions: (Ord. 90-85)
1. The Commission shall hold periodic review sessions to evaluate the performance of any operator. All such review
sessions shall be open to the public and notice shall be given by advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation at least four (4) days before each session. In addition, the operator shall announce the date and time of
each such session on each of at least four (4) days immediately preceding each session at a minimum of six (6)
regularly scheduled intervals daily. (Ord. 90-85; 1998 Code)
2. Topics for discussion and review at the review sessions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
service, rate structure, free services, application of new technologies, system performance, services provided,
programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to this Chapter,
undergrounding process and developments in the law.
3. Either the City or any operator may select additional topics for discussion at any regular or special review session.
4. Any topic proposed for discussion at any regular or special review session by a resident of the City shall be
included in the list of topics for discussion.
B. The procedure for considering the renewal or termination of any agreement awarding a franchise shall be pursuant to
the Cable Communications Act of 1984, as amended.
C. If any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith is cancelled by reason of the default of the operator,
the City may exercise its option to purchase any portion of the cable communications system then connected in any
manner with the streets, public ways, public places or other property of the City as well as all books and records,
private easements and assignable contracts, all of which are essential parts of the system, at a cost not to exceed its
then fair market value less any amount for any damages incurred by the City in connection with such cancellation.
Damages incurred by the City shall include, but shall not be limited to, any payment made by the City authorizing or
directing the continued operation of the system.
D. In the event that an operator dismantles or terminates the cable communications system or is required by any
provision of this Chapter to dismantle or terminate the cable communications system, the operator shall, at the City's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 835/923
direction, restore any property, public or private, to the condition in which it existed prior to the erection or
construction of the system, including any improvements made to such property subsequent to the construction of the
system. Restoration of City property, including, but not limited to, streets, shall be in accordance with the directions
and specifications of all affected directors and agencies of the City and all applicable laws. The operator shall restore
the same at its expense. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-24: FORECLOSURE; RECEIVERSHIP:
A. Foreclosure: Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system, or upon termination
of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the system, the operator shall notify the City of such fact. Such
notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the operator has taken place, and the
provision of Section 19-1-21 (Transfers and Assignments) of this Chapter, governing the consent of the City to such
change in control of the operator shall apply.
B. Receivership: The City shall have the right to cancel any franchise granted hereunder one hundred twenty (120) days
after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the operator, whether in
receivership, reorganization, trusteeship, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
1. Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully
complied with all provisions of this Chapter and remedied all defaults ofthe franchise agreement; and
2. Such receiver or trustee, within one hundred twenty (120) days shall have executed an agreement, duly approved
by a court of competent jurisdiction, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each
and every provision of this Chapter and the franchise agreement. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-25: MISCELLANEOUS:
A. This Chapter shall be made to conform in style to any codification of City ordinances hereinafter adopted by Council.
B. Neither the operator nor any other person shall connect or permit the connection of the operator's cable
communications system electronically or in any other manner whatsoever with any other type of system whatsoever
including, but not limited to, a cable communications system, without the authorization and the written approval of the
City, upon such conditions as the City, in the City's sole discretion, may direct.
C. The City shall have the authority to reject any and all proposals for any agreement awarding a franchise in
accordance herewith.
D. Any franchise granted shall comply with all Federal, State and local laws.
E. The provisions of this Chapter are severable, and if any provision or application is held illegal, unconstitutional or
invalid, such holding shall not affect the remaining provisions. It is the legislative intent of the Council that the Chapter
would have been adopted if such illegal provision had not been included or any illegal application had not been
made.
F. The City reserves the right to amend this Chapter and any franchise agreement granted hereunder to comply with any
amendments to the Cable Communications Act of 1984. (Ord. 90-85)
19-1-26: REPEAL:
Any ordinance or part of ordinance, conflicting with the provisions of this Chapter is hereby repealed so far as the same
affects this Chapter. (Ord. 90-85)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 836/923
19-1-27: PENALTY:
A. Where this Chapter provides alternative penalties or remedies, they shall be cumulative and the imposition of one
penalty or remedy shall not prevent the appropriate City officer from the invoking any other penalty or remedy
provided for.
B. Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violatingany provision of this Chapter or any rule or regulation
promulgated hereunder, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and
costs for each offense. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
C. In addition to any penalty provided or imposed, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision
of this Chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the City as provided in law or equity.
Each day such condition continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
D. Repeated violation of this Chapter or any franchise granted hereunder shall constitute cause for termination of the
franchise. (Ord. 90-85; Ord. 97-166)
Chapter 2
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
19-2-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
A. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the city's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the
effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the city of Carbondale. (Ord. 2014-3)
19-2-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection
standards of the cable and video protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the city. (Ord.
2014-3)
19-2-3: PENALTIES:
The city, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for
any material breach of the cable and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other
standards specified in any provision of the law.
B. The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow
such provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 837/923
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material
breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 2014-3)
19-2-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the
provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible
for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2014-3)
19-2-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be given effect
without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application
of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2014-3)
Chapter 3
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS
SUPPORT FEE
19-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and inkind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video
service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the city of Carbondale.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on
demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation,
installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to,
service order and service termination charges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 838/923
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the
costs of collecting delinquent payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's
network to provide cable service or video service within the city of Carbondale. The allocation shall be based on
the number of subscribers in the city of Carbondale divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the
relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable
service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar
channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services,
capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or
applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or
exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder
of the state issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable
service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video
service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without
limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory
or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or
any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the
holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules,
regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service
provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the
service within the city of Carbondale and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with
respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or
any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be
remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home
shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 839/923
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment
of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee
permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or
video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by
the holder to the city of Carbondale for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the
person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant
to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the
holder to the city of Carbondale for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such
video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of
way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any
video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2014-2)
19-3-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city of
Carbondale.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The City Of Carbondale: The holder shall notify the city of Carbondale at least ten (10) days prior to the
date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the city of Carbondale.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the city of Carbondale. The holder's
liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage
prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
401(b)(6) to the city of Carbondale.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the
close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an
existing franchise agreement with the city of Carbondale in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to
220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2014-2)
19-3-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 840/923
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video
service in the city of Carbondale in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to section 19-3-2 of this chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's
gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city of
Carbondale or its designee for PEG access support in the city of Carbondale.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city of Carbondale or to the entity designated by the
city of Carbondale to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on
the date set forth in subsection 19-3-2D of this chapter.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after
the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to
220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments
for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated
pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may
be credited against the fees that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2014-2)
19-3-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting
principles. (Ord. 2014-2)
19-3-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by
the city of Carbondale, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect
to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect
to payment of the city of Carbondale's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with
respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2014-2)
19-3-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The city of Carbondale will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service
or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city of Carbondale imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to
audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the city of Carbondale. If all local franchises between the city of Carbondale and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city of Carbondale pursuant to the local government
taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the city of
Carbondale's submission of an invoice for the sum. (Ord. 2014-2)
19-3-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 841/923
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the city of Carbondale
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2014-2)
Title 20
GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Chapter 1
CITY CODE GENERAL PROVISIONS
20-1-1: CITY CODE DESIGNATION AND CITING:
The ordinance embraced in this and all other titles, chapters and sections of this code shall constitute and be designated
the CARBONDALE CITY CODE and may be so cited. (1998 Code)
20-1-2: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the interpretation and construction of this code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed,
unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
CITY: The city of Carbondale in Jackson County, state of Illinois, except as otherwise provided.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If
the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
COUNCIL OR THE COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
COUNTY OR THE COUNTY: The words "county" or "the county" have reference to Jackson County, Illinois.
COURT: Includes all courts of record.
DIVISIONS OF CODE: Words designating paragraphs, sections, articles or similar parts of writing may be used
interchangeably as the context may require.
GENDER: Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
IN THE CITY OR WITHIN THE CITY: Means and includes all territory over which the city now has or shall hereafter
acquire jurisdiction for any lawful purpose.
JOINT AUTHORITY: Words purporting to give joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
MONTH: A calendar month.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Carbondale, Illinois.
NUMBER: Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things and words
importing the plural may include the singular.
OATH: Shall be deemed to include an affirmation and the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: The word "occupant" or "tenant", applied to a building or land, means any person who holds a
written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 842/923
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership
or joint tenant of the whole or part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or any city or state, or any subdivision thereof,
and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except "real property", as defined by this section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectfully.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE OR THE STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public, as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic.
TENSE: Words in the present tense include the future.
TIME: Central Standard Time shall be the official time of the city, except between four o'clock (4:00) A.M. standard time
on the last Sunday in April and four o'clock (4:00) A.M. daylight saving time on the last Sunday in September, during
which excepted period Central Daylight Saving Time shall be the official time of the city.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode or representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the
proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (1956 Code § 1-1-2)
20-1-3: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section,
nor unless expressly provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (1956 Code § 1-1-3)
20-1-4: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without
incorporation in this code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
(1956 Code § 1-1-4)
20-1-5: GENERAL PENALTY; FORECLOSURE OF LIENS:
A. General Penalty: Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision
of this code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each
day any violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 843/923
Any fines set forth herein, shall be assessed regardless of whether the violator is convicted or placed on supervision
by the court. If the offense is related to alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under twenty one (21) years of
age, the court may assign the offender to a chemical abuse counseling program which includes a certified evaluation
program and not less than four (4) hours of counseling.
B. Foreclosure Of Liens: In addition to any other legal remedy available under this code or applicable state or federal
law, any lien filed in accordance with this code shall be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as in the case of
mortgage or mechanic's liens under Illinois law, against the property subject to said lien for the collection of costs
incurred by the city for services rendered, including any and all administrative, filing and/or legal fees or costs for the
enforcement of the provisions of this code.
C. Order Of Supervision: The court may, upon a plea of guilty or a stipulation by the defendant of the facts supporting the
charge or finding of guilt, defer further proceedings and the imposition of a sentence and enter an order of
supervision for the defendant, if the defendant is not barred from receiving an order of supervision after considering
the circumstances of the offense and the history, character and condition of the offenses, if the court is of the opinion
that:
1. The defendant is not likely to commit further offenses;
2. The defendant and the public would be best served if the defendant were not to receive a conviction of an
ordinance violation; and
3. In the best interest of justice, an order of supervision is more important than a conviction of an ordinance violation.
(Ord. 2011-22)
20-1-6: ORDINANCES:
A. Ordinances Printed In Book Or Pamphlet Form: Whenever an ordinance imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or
forfeiture or making any appropriation shall be printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the council,
the director of the department charged with the administration of such ordinance may impose a reasonable price
commensurate with the cost of the printing thereof for the distribution of such book or pamphlet to the public, and
may furnish complimentary copies thereof to any law enforcing officers or other agencies deemed necessary in the
interests of the city. (1956 Code § 1-1-6)
B. Record And Memorandum Required:
1. The city clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the council.
Immediately following each ordinance, the city clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and the
publication, where required, of the ordinance. (1956 Code § 1-1-7)
2. The record and memorandum required by the preceding subsection, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima
facie evidence of the contents, passage and the publication or posting of ordinances. (1956 Code § 1-1-8)
C. Proof Of Ordinances:
1. The contents of all city ordinances, the date of passage and the date of publication or posting, where required, may
be proved by the certificate of the city clerk, under the seal of the city.
2. Whenever city ordinances are printed in book or pamphlet form, and purport to be published by authority of the city
council, such book or pamphlet shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and legal publication of
such ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in such book or pamphlet, in all courts and administrative tribunals.
D. Enacting Style Of Ordinances: The enacting style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the council of the city
of Carbondale". (1956 Code § 1-1-9)
E. Provisions Construed As Of Existing Ordinances: The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are
substantially the same as those of the revised ordinances of the city of Carbondale, 1929, or the code of the city of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 844/923
Carbondale, 1956, or the Carbondale revised code, 1971, and those of all other ordinances existing at the time of the
adoption of this code, shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. (1956 Code § 1-1-13)
20-1-7: STATUTES, CODES, RECORDS AND OTHER MATTER ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
At least three (3) copies of all statutes, codes, technical codes, public records and other matters adopted by reference, in
whole or in part or as modified in this code, have for more than thirty (30) days last past prior to the adoption of this code
been, now are and hereafter shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and there kept on file and available for public use,
inspection and examination. (1956 Code § 1-1-14)
20-1-8: CORPORATE SEAL AND FLAG:
A. Corporate Seal:
1. The city council shall, from time to time, select a corporate seal for the city. It shall be circular in form, one and onehalf
inches (11/2") in diameter and be surrounded with a scroll with the words "Carbondale, Illinois, Incorporated
1873", inscribed thereon.
2. The corporate seal shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk and an impression thereof attached to all
instruments, documents and other corporate acts which are required to be authenticated by the corporate seal. The
city clerk shall certify, under the corporate seal, copies of all records, documents or papers in his office when
required by any officer or other person. In no case shall the impression of the corporate seal be binding upon the
city unless it is authorized by ordinance and attested by the signature of the city clerk.
B. City Flag: The city flag shall consist of the corporate seal in gold, black and white on a white background. (Ord. 1663
§ 1)
20-1-9: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on May 1 of every year. For all city activities, the municipal year shall be the
same as the fiscal year. (1929 Code § 19-16)
20-1-10: DATUM PLANE:
The datum plane of the city is a horizontal plane passing four hundred five and five-tenths feet (405.5') below the top of
the city bench mark, located at the east curb line of Washington Avenue and the north line of Main Street. Such bench
mark is the top of a stone located at this point. (1956 Code § 1-1-18)
20-1-11: OFFICIAL CITY MAP:
The official map of the city shall be a certain map prepared by Paul O. Hall, engineer, compiled from the recorded plats
of such city, and bearing the legend "Official Map of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, and adopted by Ordinance 932 of the
City of Carbondale, Illinois, passed September 27, 1949". (Ord. 932 § 2)
20-1-12: SERVICE BY MAIL:
In all actions for violations of any city ordinance, service of summons may be by certified mail, return receipt requested,
whether service is to be within or outside of the state. (Ord. 80-104; 1998 Code)
20-1-13: SEARCH WARRANT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 845/923
A. Any police officer, fire inspector, or any officer designated by the city to inspect a premises may, upon affidavit, apply
to a court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances
that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of any ordinance of the city or any statute of
the state may exist, including, but not limited to, one or more of the following:
1. That the premises or records require inspection according to the cycle established by the inspecting officer or the
city council for periodic or systematic inspection of records, buildings or premises of the type involved;
2. That observation of external conditions of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief that violations
of any ordinance of the city or state statute exist;
3. That an unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle is present upon private property in violation of city ordinance;
B. If the court of competent jurisdiction is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the affidavit, the court shall authorize the
issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance
or violation may exist, the towing of a specific vehicle, or such other actions as the court deems appropriate. (Ord.
2013-42)
Chapter 2
HOME RULE AUTHORITY
20-2-1: AUTHORITY FOR ORDINANCE ADOPTION:
The violation embraced in this and all other provisions of this Code have been adopted by the City Council pursuant to
the Constitution and laws of the State, including but not limited to, the home rule authority vested in the City by virtue of
article VII, section 6 of the Illinois Constitution. (Ord. 81-23; 1998 Code)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATIVE PAY BY MAIL PROGRAM
20-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them by
this section, unless specified otherwise:
PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY SERVICE: Uncompensated, nonemployment status labor, work or activity for a designated
site which will enhance the physical, or mental stability, environmental quality or the social welfare of the community.
SITE: Any governmental agency, educational institution, charitable or not for profit organization or public body that
agrees to accept public or community service from a volunteer who is eligible for community service under the pay by
mail program. The site shall report directly to the city of Carbondale on the volunteer's progress, performance and
completion of public or community service.
VOLUNTEER: Any person who has violated a city ordinance violation which has been designated by resolution as
payable administratively through the city of Carbondale's administrative pay by mail program and which has been
designated by resolution as a violation that may be administratively settled by performing community service and paying
an administrative fee, and such person chooses the option of performing community service at a designated site and
paying a nonrefundable administrative fee to the city of Carbondale rather than paying the administrative fine as listed on
the pay by mail ordinance violation form or appearing in city court on the charge. (Ord. 98-72)
20-3-2: ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY:
The city hereby enacts an administrative pay by mail program whereby certain city ordinance violations may, at the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 846/923
discretion of the issuing officer, be settled administratively with the city instead being prosecuted through the judicial city
court system. Payments in settlement of eligible violations must be received bythe city within ten (10) business days from
the date of issuance of the citation to the person accused of such violation. The city ordinance violations which shall be
eligible to be settled administratively through the pay by mail program and the administrative fine, fee and/or community
service for such violation shall be established from time to time by resolution approved by the city council. The
administrative fine, fee and/or community service in such resolution shall only apply to the pay by mail program and shall
not change any penalty that may be entered by a court pursuant to any other section of this code. Payment of a fine, fee
and/or the performance of community service under this administrative process shall not relieve the violator from his
responsibility to correct a violation. (Ord. 2007-21)
20-3-3: COMMUNITY SERVICE OPTION:
Community service shall be available as an administrative remedy under the pay by mail program upon meeting all of
the following requirements:
A. The volunteer must have no prior criminal history or record of committing any offense under municipal, state or federal
law, except for minor traffic offenses (which shall be verified in writing under oath); and
B. The volunteer must submit a nonrefundable administrative fee (as established by resolution) to the city attorney's
office within ten (10) business days from the date of the arrest; and
C. The volunteer must sign and submit all forms and legal documentation with the city attorney's office within ten (10)
business days from the date of arrest; and
D. The volunteer must agree to hold the city, its officials and employees, including any city designated supervising
agency and site, harmless for any cause of action that may arise from any injury or damage caused from or incurred
by the volunteer during the performance of community service; and
E. The volunteer must complete the required number of community service hours within forty five (45) days from the date
the community service option is requested through the city attorney's office. (Ord. 2007-21)
20-3-4: AUTHORIZATION TO USE COMMUNITY SERVICE SITES:
The city is hereby authorized to retain the services, supervision and public or community service programs from sites to
assist the city in the volunteer's performance, supervision, and reporting of public or community service. Such sites shall
be released from any liability for personal injury or damage to property caused by a volunteer in the performance of
public or community service, except for any wilful and wanton behavior or gross negligence onbehalf of the site, its
employees or representatives. (Ord. 98-72)
20-3-5: NO IMPACT ON COURT:
Any administrative fine, fee or community service performed in accordance with the pay by mail program shall not effect,
change, alter or modify the fines that may be levied by a court pursuant to any other section of this code. (Ord. 98-72)
20-3-6: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
The public or community service provided by the sites in accordance with this chapter shall conform with any law which
may restrict or limit the use of public or community service. (Ord. 98-72)
20-3-7: LIABILITY; IMMUNITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 847/923
Neither the city, its representatives, officials, employees or any authorized site, nor any official or employee thereof
acting in the course of their official duties shall be liable for any injury, loss or damage a person or property may receive
during the performance of public or community service by the assigned volunteer, nor shall any of the aforementioned
entities be liable for any tortious acts of any person performing public or community service, except for wilful, wanton
misconduct or gross negligence of an employee of the city or the designated sites. (Ord. 98-72)
20-3-8: NO EMPLOYMENT STATUS; COMPENSATION:
No person or volunteer assigned to a public or community service program or site shall be considered an employee for
any purpose, nor shall the city or the site be obligated to provide any compensation to such person. (Ord. 98-72)
20-3-9: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall be applicable to ordinance violations which are eligible for administrative remedy as approved by city
council through resolution from time to time, under the city's pay by mail program, and shall not affect, modify or change
the penalties that may be imposed by a court pursuant to any other section of this code. (Ord. 98-72)
Title 21
CITY BOUNDARIES
Chapter 1
BOUNDARIES OF CITY
21-1-1: BOUNDARIES OF CITY:
PointA - The point of beginning is on the Carbondale/Murphysboro TWP line at the intersection of the centerline dividing
the N/S halves of Section 24 in Murphysboro WP and section 19 in Carbondale TWP.
Point B - A point in the W ROW line of McLafferty Road approximately 4,000 feet south of Pleasant Hill Road (Point B is
the southwest cornerpoint of the City Reservoir Property).
Point C - A point in the W ROW line of Campus Drive in line with Chautauqua Street extended.
Point D - A point in the center of the line dividing Sections 22 and 27 of Carbondale TWP.
Point E - A point in the center of Section 23 of Carbondale TWP.
Point F - The centerpoint of Section 24 of Carbondale TWP. Also the southeast corner of the City Farm Property, with
point contiguity to the Federal Wildlife Reserve.
Point G - A point in the intersection of the South ROW line of F.A. Route 14 and the E line of the Northwest Quarter of
Section 14 of Carbondale TWP.
Point H - A point in the center of the line dividing Sections 15 and 22 of Carbondale TWP.
Point I - A point in the W ROW line of F.A. 2 at its intersection with the N ROW line of Dillinger Road.
Point J - The centerpoint of Section 17 of Carbondale TWP.
Point K - The centerpoint of Section 18 of Carbondale TWP.
The following is a perimeter description of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, located in Carbondale Township of Jackson
County, Illinois. This description includes all property annexed to the City through December 31, 1982. This is not a legal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 848/923
description, but a metes and bounds narrative. It is taken from maps of the City of Carbondale at scales of 1" = 100',
1" = 600', and 1" = 1600', located in the Planning Division offices of City Hall, some of which are updated when any
annexation ordinance is adopted by the City Council of Carbondale.
A reduced copy of a map which follows this metes and bounds narrative isattached for clarification purposes. The point
of beginning and ending is identified on the map. Intermediate points are also identified on the map and in the narrative
for purposes of clarity.
A list of abbreviations used in this narrative:
N - North
TWP - Township
Rd - Road
E - East
Approx - Approximate
St - Street
S - South
Sect - Section
W - West
ROW - Right of way
All distances are approximations.
Point A - The point of beginning is on the Carbondale/Murphysboro TWP line at the intersection of the centerline dividing
the N/S halves of Section 24 in Murphysboro TWP and Section 19 in Carbondale TWP:
Thence east 1,640 feet;
Thence south 1,500 feet;
Thence east 1,500 feet to the east ROW line of Tower Road;
Thence north 620 feet along said east ROW line;
Thence east 250 feet;
Thence south 215 feet;
Thence east 1,076 feet;
Thence north approx. 1,050 feet to a point which is the centerline dividing the N/S halves of Section 19 of
Carbondale TWP;
Thence east 1,920 feet;
Thence south 1,400 feet;
Thence east 520 feet;
Thence south 1,260 feet to the S ROW of Chautauqua Road;
Thence East approximately 1,680 feet along said south ROW line to the east ROW line of McLafferty Road
extended;
Thence south along the east ROW line of McLafferty Road a distance of 6,760 feet;
Thence east 630 feet;
Thence south 330 feet;
Thence west 680 feet to the west ROW line of McLafferty Road;
Thence south 2,350 feet to a point hereinafter designated as Point B.
From Point B proceed east approximately 1,360 feet;
Thence north 680 feet;
Thence east 2,780 feet;
Thence north 165 feet;
Thence east 1,347 feet;
Thence north 99 feet;
Thence west 1,347 feet;
Thence north 1,695 feet;
Thence east 1,108 feet;
Thence north 150 feet;
Thence west 135 feet;
Thence north 150 feet;
Thence east 92 feet;
Thence north 238 feet;
Thence east 300 feet to a point in the east ROW line of S.B.I. Route 2;
Thence north 130 feet;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 849/923
Thence west 290 feet;
Thence south 90 feet;
Thence west 200 feet;
Thence north 91 feet;
Thence west 204 feet;
Thence north 702 feet to a point on the north ROW line of Pleasant Hill Road;
Thence west approx. 3,500 feet along said north ROW line to a point;
Thence north approx. 1,050 feet;
Thence east approx. 1,300 feet to a point on the section line dividing Section 29 and 28 in Carbondale TWP;
Thence north approx. 1,900 feet to a point which is the centerline dividing the N/S halves of Section 28;
Thence west 2,180 feet along said centerline of Section 28 to a point in the W ROW line of the SIU Campus Drive;
Thence in a Northerly and Westerly direction on an irregular line following the SIU Campus Drive to a point
hereafter designated as Point C.
From Point C proceed East 2,675 feet to the W ROW line of U.S. 51 S;
Thence Southerly along the W ROW of S.B. I. Rt. 2 5,964 feet to a point which is 239 feet south of the SW corner of
the intersection of U.S. 41 S. and Pleasant Hill Road;
Thence east 365 feet;
Thence north 235 feet to a point in the south ROW line of Pleasant Hill Road;
Thence east 2,431 feet along said S ROW line of Pleasant Hill Rd. to a point which is the SE corner of the
intersection of Pleasant Hill Rd. and S. Wall St.;
Thence north 3,750 feet along the E ROW line of S. Wall St.;
Thence east 600 feet;
Thence south 280 feet;
Thence east 60 feet;
Thence north 1,000 feet;
Thence east 660 feet;
Thence south 280 feet;
Thence east 1,700 feet to a point in the E ROW line of Park St. and Snider Hill Rd;
Thence north and west 1,000 feet along said ROW line of said Snider Hill Rd. to a point in the E-W centerline of
Section 27;
Thence north 500 feet;
Thence west 150 feet;
Thence north 150 feet along the east ROW line to a point in the E ROW line of Lewis Lane and Park St.;
Thence east 250 feet to a point in the center of the line dividing Sections 22 and 27 of Carbondale TWP hereafter
designated as Point D.
From Point D proceed north 600 feet to the S ROW line of Grand Avenue;
Thence east 1,770 feet;
Thence south 658 feet;
Thence east 864 feet;
Thence north 658 feet;
Thence east 2,128 feet along the S ROW line;
Thence south 700 feet;
Thence west 1,075 feet;
Thence south 350 feet;
Thence east 1,400 feet to a point in the E ROW line of State Aid Route 12 (Giant City Rd.);
Thence north 200 feet;
Thence east 700 feet;
Thence north 680 feet;
Thence east 1,000 feet;
Thence north 700 feet;
Thence west 1,500 feet;
Thence north 80 feet;
Thence west 180 feet to a point in the E ROW line of State Aid Route 12;
Thence north 520 feet along said ROW line;
Thence east 320 feet;
Thence north 400 feet;
Thence east 1,025 feet;
Thence south 521 feet;
Thence east 250 feet;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 850/923
Thence north 871 feet;
Thence west 250 feet to a point in the center of Section 23 of Carbondale TWP, hereafter designated as Point E.
From Point E proceed west 720 feet;
Thence north 250 feet;
Thence west 620 feet to the E ROW line of State Aid Route 12;
Thence north 200 feet along said E ROW line;
Thence east 240 feet;
Thence north 60 feet;
Thence west 240 feet to the E ROW line of State Aid Route 12;
Thence north 80 feet along said E ROW line;
Thence east 240 feet;
Thence north 60 feet;
Thence west 240 feet to the E ROW line of State Aid Route 12;
Thence north 160 feet;
Thence east 167 feet;
Thence south 130 feet;
Thence east 120 feet;
Thence north 130 feet;
Thence east 350 feet;
Thence south 480 feet;
Thence east 1,750 feet;
Thence north 220 feet;
Thence east 330 feet;
Thence south 40 feet;
Thence east 700 feet to the middle of Crab Orchard Creek bed;
Thence Southeasterly approx. 1,050 feet along said Crab Orchard Creek to a point in the centerline dividing the
N/S halves of Section 24 of the Carbondale TWP;
Thence east along said line 1,160 feet;
Thence north 320 feet;
Thence east 640 feet;
Thence south 320 feet;
Thence east 680 feet along said centerline dividing the N/S halves of Section 24 to a point at the center of said
Section 24 of Carbondale TWP, hereafter designated as Point F.
From Point F proceed north 1,340 feet;
Thence West 30 feet;
Thence north 1,005 feet;
Thence west 645 feet;
Thence north 1,725 feet to a point in the N ROW line of S.B.I. 13;
Thence west 210 feet;
Thence north 182 feet;
Thence west 209 feet;
Thence south 189 feet;
Thence southwesterly 3,500 feet along said ROW line to center of the Crab Orchard Creek bed;
Thence southerly 1,000 feet along said Crab Orchard Creek bed center;
Thence west 1,320 feet to a point in the S ROW line of S.B.I. 13;
Thence north 60 feet to a point in the N ROW line of S.B.I. 13;
Thence west 460 feet along said north ROW line to a point at the intersection of the east ROW line of Kaemper
Avenue and the north ROW line of S.B.I. Rt. 13;
Thence north 550 feet along the east ROW line of Kaemper Avenue to the north ROW line of Stafford Avenue;
Thence west 560 feet along said ROW line of Stafford Avenue;
Thence north 2,057 feet;
Thence northeasterly 230 feet;
Thence north 980 feet to the south ROW line of F.A. 14;
Thence northeasterly 390 feet along said south ROW line to a point in the east line of Northwest Quarter of Section
14; hereafter designated as Point G.
From Point G proceed north 2,570 feet along said east line of the northwest Quarter of Section 14 to a point in the
dividing line of Sections 11 and 14 of Carbondale TWP;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 851/923
Thence west 1,225 feet along said dividing line to the centerline of the Crab Orchard Creek bed;
Thence southwesterly approximately 530 feet along said creek bed centerline;
Thence northwesterly approximately 550 feet along said centerline to its intersection with the north line of Section
14 of Carbondale TWP;
Thence west 180 feet to the SW corner of Section 11;
Thence south 1,350 feet;
Thence west 1,370 feet;
Thence south 3,175 feet;
Thence southwesterly 1,482 feet;
Thence south 410 feet to a point in the center of the line dividing Sections 15 and 22 of Carbondale TWP, hereafter
designated as Point H.
From Point H proceed west a distance of 1,360 feet;
Thence north 1,600 feet;
Thence east 565 feet to the center of Piles Fork Creek;
Thence northerly 400 feet with the meander of the said stream;
Thence west 538 feet to a point on the west line of the Northeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 15 of
Carbondale TWP;
Thence north 720 feet to a point in the centerline dividing the N/S halves of Section 15;
Thence west 600 feet along said line;
Thence north 160 feet;
Thence east 320 feet;
Thence north 150 feet;
Thence northeasterly following the Jackson Boulevard ROW for a distance of 290 feet;
Thence west 250 feet;
Thence south 135 feet;
Thence westerly 150 feet;
Thence north 150 feet;
Thence west 100 feet;
Thence follow a semi-circle line in an easterly to westerly direction a distance approx. 400 feet around Renfro
Place;
Thence north 480 feet along the E ROW of McQueen Street;
Thence east 600 feet;
Thence north 400 feet;
Thence west 1,320 feet to a point in the E ROW line of North Wall Street;
Thence north along said E ROW line a distance of 60 feet to the S ROW line of the Illinois Central Gulf Tracks;
Thence southwesterly a distance of 690 feet along said S ROW line;
Thence east 100 feet;
Thence south 150 feet to the N ROW line of Knight Street;
Thence west 250 feet;
Thence south 50 feet;
Thence west 310 feet to a point on the S ROW line of aforementioned Illinois Central Gulf Railroad;
Thence Southwesterly along said ROW 549 feet;
Thence south 290 feet;
Thence west 260 feet to a point in the west ROW of N. Marion Street;
Thence south 480 feet;
Thence west 320 feet;
Thence northerly parallel to the east ROW of F.A. Rt. 2 a distance of 975 feet;
Thence west 500 feet;
Thence Northerly parallel to the east ROW of F.A. Rt. 2 a distance of 4,000 feet to the point;
Thence east 1,500 feet;
Thence north 2,680 feet to the south ROW line of Dillinger Road;
Thence east 830 feet;
Thence north 242 feet;
Thence west 180 feet;
Thence north 242 feet;
Thence west 552 feet;
Thence north 96 feet;
Thence west 150 feet;
Thence south 580 feet to a point in the north ROW line of Dillinger Road;
Thence west along said north ROW line a distance of 2,000 feet to a point in the west ROW line of F.A. Rt. 2 at its
intersection with the north ROW line of Dillinger Road extended; this point is hereafter designated as Point I.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 852/923
From Point I proceed southerly a distance of 275 feet along the west ROW line of F.A. Rt. 2 to a point;
Thence west 1,800 feet;
Thence south 850 feet;
Thence east 1,900 feet to a point in the west ROW line of F.A. Rt. 2 to a point;
Thence southerly 2,050 feet;
Thence west 245 feet;
Thence north 205 feet;
Thence west 833 feet;
Thence south 344 feet;
Thence east 1,080 feet;
Thence south 630 feet;
Thence west 400 feet;
Thence Northwesterly a distance of 100 feet;
Thence west 1,900 feet;
Thence south 1,190 feet;
Thence east 2,460 feet to a point in the west ROW line of F.A. Rt. 2;
Thence southerly along said west ROW line a distance of 1,910 feet;
Thence proceed westwardly along the north ROW line of the Northeast-Northwest spur of the Illinois Central Gulf
Railroad to the east line of North Oakland Avenue a total distance of some 2,900 feet;
Thence north 1,530 feet;
Thence west 1,325 feet;
Thence south 1,230 feet to the south ROW line of aforementioned Illinois Central Gulf Railroad;
Thence west 400 feet along same south ROW line;
Thence south 1,400 feet;
Thence east 150 feet;
Thence south 130 feet;
Thence southeast 240 feet;
Thence south 760 feet;
Thence west 720 feet;
Thence north 120 feet;
Thence west 240 feet;
Thence south 80 feet;
Thence west 400 feet;
Thence north 520 feet to a point hereafter designated as Point J.
Point J is the center of Section 17, Carbondale TWP.
From Point J proceed west 1,380 feet;
Thence south 700 feet;
Thence east 675 feet;
Thence south 675 feet;
Thence east 575 feet;
Thence south 1,320 feet to the north ROW line of W. Sycamore Street;
Thence west 100 feet along said north ROW line;
Thence north 180 feet;
Thence west 75 feet;
Thence south 180 feet to the north ROW line of W. Sycamore Street;
Thence west 275 feet;
Thence north 160 feet;
Thence west 130 feet;
Thence south 160 feet to a point in the north ROW line of W. Sycamore St.;
Thence west 880 feet along said north ROW line to a point of intersection with the north ROW line of F.A. 14;
Thence northwestwardly along said north ROW line a distance of some 200 feet;
Thence north 525 feet;
Thence northwestwardly 750 feet;
Thence northerly along the east ROW of New Era Road 550 feet;
Thence west 1,000 feet to a point in the north ROW line of F.A. 14;
Thence southwesterly a distance of 260 feet to a point in the south ROW line of F.A. 14;
Thence east 250 feet along said south ROW line;
Thence south 850 feet;
Thence west 220 feet;
Thence south 325 feet to the north ROW line of S.B.I. 13;
Thence west 290 feet along said north ROW line;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 853/923
Thence north 280 feet;
Thence east 200 feet;
Thence north 1,200 feet to the south ROW line of F.A. 14;
Thence northeastwardly 320 feet to a point in the north ROW line of aforementioned F.A. 14;
Thence northwesterly a distance of 180 feet along the north ROW line of F.A. 14;
Thence north a distance of 220 feet;
Thence east 150 feet;
Thence north 160 feet;
Thence east 200 feet;
Thence south 165 feet;
Thence east 35 feet;
Thence south 135 feet;
Thence east 15 feet;
Thence south 150 feet;
Thence east 825 feet;
Thence north 500 feet;
Thence west 500 feet;
Thence north 430 feet to the north ROW line of Streigel Road;
Thence west along said north ROW line 305 feet;
Thence north 640 feet;
Thence east 350 feet;
Thence north 200 feet;
Thence east 435 feet to a point in the east ROW line of New Era Rd.;
Thence north 485 feet to the NEW corner of SE 1/4-NE 1/4 of Section 18;
Thence west 1,320 feet along the north line of the SE 1/4 - NE 1/4;
Thence south 1,335 feet to the north ROW line of Streigel Road;
Thence west 1,430 feet along said north ROW line of Streigel Rd to the centerpoint of Section 18 of Carbondale
TWP, hereafter designated as Point K.
From Point K proceed south 1,400 feet on the E/W halves dividing line;
Thence east 500 feet;
Thence south 880 feet;
Thence west 280 feet;
Thence north 200 feet;
Thence northeastwardly 240 feet;
Thence northwestwardly 360 feet to a point on the aforementioned E/W halves dividing line;
Thence southwestwardly 200 feet;
Thence southeastwardly 250 feet;
Thence west 350 feet;
Thence south 360 feet;
Thence east 60 feet;
Thence south 260 feet to a point in the north ROW line of S.B.I. 13;
Thence further south 380 feet;
Thence west 190 feet;
Thence south 55 feet;
Thence west 155 feet;
Thence north 200 feet;
Thence west 90 feet;
Thence north 175 feet to the north ROW of S.B.I. 13;
Thence west along said ROW line 145 feet;
Thence southwestwardly along an "S" curve 950 feet;
Thence west 350 feet;
Thence north 30 feet;
Thence west 210 feet;
Thence south 540 feet;
Thence east 20 feet;
Thence south 150 feet;
Thence east 340 feet;
Thence south 400 feet;
Thence west 1,600 feet;
Thence south 700 feet to Point A the point of beginning.
(1998 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 854/923
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A: ANNEXATIONS
Ord.
No.
Subject
95-59
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (19.38 acres north of lots 6,
7, and 8 of the Rendlemen development).
97-
100
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Carolyn Barton (lot 19 in the
Crawshaw & Stephens subdivision).
97-
101
An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (lot 19 in the Crawshaw &
Stephens subdivision).
97-
102
An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (lots 18, 32, and 33 and the north
100 feet of lot 31, all in the Crawshaw & Stephens subdivision).
97-
103
An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 16, 18, 19 and
the north 500 feet of lot 15 in the Edgewood subdivision).
97-
104
An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (4.7 acres southwest of lot 26 of
the Crawshaw & Stephens subdivision).
97-
105
An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (9.72 acres between the
Crawshaw & Stephens and the Wayfair subdivisions).
97-
106
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with property owners in the Lakeland
Hills subdivision area.
97-
134
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Gary and Mona Hughes (6.5
acre parcel located on the north side of East Pleasant Hill Road, approximately 450 feet west of Warren
Road).
97-
136
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (5 acre parcel located at the
southeast corner of 1101 East Grand Avenue).
97-
150
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Carl Schmidt (14.34 acres on
the north side of Walden Road, east of Union Hills subdivision, commonly known as 77 Wilbur Lane).
97-
158
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (5 acre parcel commonly
known as 1080 Charles Road).
97-
159
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a 1 acre parcel commonly
known as 220 Dillinger Road).
98-07
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Andy Wallace and Christine
Boettcher (5.557 acres on the south side of Route 13 and east of County Club Road).
98-19
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Pineridge land trust no. 1 (parcel
commonly known as 2700 West Chautauqua Road).
98-20
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Bruce and Deborah Joseph (2
parcels commonly known as 3100 and 3110 West Chautauqua Road).
98-29
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Villa Land Trust (for land located
on the north side of West Chautauqua Road, east of Town Road).
98-46
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2 parcels of 11.73 acres,
more or less, located northwest of 501 Westridge Drive).
98-53 An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Chris A. Drone (parcel
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 855/923
commonly known as 131 Larsue Lane).
98-55
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.715 acre parcel located at
73 Yonder Hill Drive).
98-57
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.6 acres adjoining
Westridge Drive).
98-58
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (3.172 acres located east of
2950 Wedgewood Place).
98-61
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Crab Orchard water district (3.59
acres along the west end of Larsue Drive in Lakeland Hills subdivision).
99-11
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Brad and Suzanne Hinchcliff (10
acre parcel commonly known as 8928 Giant City Road).
99-23
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Ella Sweet (a 1 acre parcel
commonly known as 517 South Reed Station Road).
99-24
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Wayne and Kathy Qualls (4.64
acre parcel commonly known as 44 Sweets Drive).
99-27
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a 1 acre parcel commonly
known as 1955 New Era Road).
99-35
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.19 acres north of
Sycamore Street).
99-36
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (37.03 acres bordering East
Walnut Street and South Reed Station Road).
99-49
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with William G. and Frieda L. Hoover
and Greg H. McMillen (0.7 acre parcel on Harmony Lane south of Sweets Drive).
99-52
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.18 acre parcel commonly
known as 1800 West Sycamore Street).
99-53
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (lot 13 in the Brush Hill
development).
99-56
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (5 acre parcel commonly
known as 1100 Reed Station Road).
99-57
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (5 acre parcel commonly
known as 1150 Reed Station Road).
99-58
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (12.515 acre parcel
commonly known as 1150 Reed Station Road).
99-59
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (5 acre parcel commonly
known as 1300 Reed Station Road).
99-60
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (4.02 acre parcel commonly
known as 1300 Reed Station Road).
99-61
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a 1 acre parcel commonly
known as 1380 Reed Station Road).
99-62
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a 1 acre parcel commonly
known as 1400 and 1420 Reed Station Road).
99-63
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (4.64 acre parcel commonly
known as 2355 Sweets Drive).
99-67
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with William L. Broom, III and
Claudia B. Broom (23.269 acres on Boskeydell Road, east of Indian Creek).
99-68 An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (15.04 acres on the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 856/923
southeast corner South Reed Station Road and Illinois Route 13, commonly known as 1401 and 1425
South Reed Station Road).
99-69
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (9.0 acres located at the
northeast corner of South Reed Station Road and Illinois Route 13, commonly known as 1525 and 1575
South Reed Station Road).
99-70
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (58.30 acres of the Reed
Station Crossing subdivision).
99-71
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.044 acres on Sweets
Drive).
99-75
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (part of lot 3 in Brewner's
subdivision).
99-76
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (lots 1 and 2 in Brewner's
subdivision).
99-77
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.627 acres south of lots 2
and 3 in Brewner's subdivision).
99-78
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.482 acres in Brewner's
subdivision).
99-79
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (4.665 acres east and south
of lot 1 in Brewner's subdivision).
99-80
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.7 acre parcel on Harmony
Lane south of Sweets Drive).
99-81
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (part of lot 3 in Brewner's
subdivision).
99-82
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.133 acres north of lot 2 of
New Era Plaza).
99-84
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (parcel commonly known as
2524 Boskeydell Road).
2000-
30
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Scott Chapman (6.971 acre
parcel located south of Larsue Drive and 150 feet west of Glopen Road).
2000-
32
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (3.30 acre parcel commonly
known as 198 Sweets Drive).
2000-
41
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Scott Chapman (3.59 acres on
the west end of Larsue Drive in Lakeland Hills subdivision).
2000-
45
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.7 acres along Illinois
Route 13).
2000-
50
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with V.A. Beadle (3.48 acres located
along the centerline of FA Route 2 and SBI Route 2, Connector no. 1).
2000-
52
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (17 acre parcel on Sweets
Drive).
2000-
57
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6.28 acre parcel located
south of Sweets Drive and east of Sanpat Lane).
2000-
61
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (3 parcels totaling 60.93
acres at the northeast corner of South Reed Station Road and East Walnut Street).
2001-
01
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Ukeme and Christina Umana
(Eagles Wing Estate subdivision on Walden Road).
2001- An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.56 acre parcel on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 857/923
12 Harmony Lane south of Sweets Drive).
2001-
25
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Jeffrey and Jennifer Sykes (4
acre parcel commonly known as 252 Hillendale Drive).
2001-
28
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (5.98 acres along U.S.
Route 51).
2001-
32
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with John Joseph Hudgins (5.35 acre
parcel commonly known as Monks Trail subdivision on Hillendale Drive).
2001-
45
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Gardner T. Kenny (parcel
commonly known as 2431 New England).
2001-
46
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.50 acres north of
Sycamore Street).
2001-
51
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.027 acres of lot 1R in
Brewner's subdivision).
2001-
52
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (3 acre parcel commonly
known as 2001 Sweets Drive).
2001-
53
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.8 acre parcel commonly
known as 2145 Sweets Drive).
2001-
54
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6 acres north of Neal Lane,
approximately 1,500 feet east of Giant City Road).
2002-
01
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2.01 acres along U.S.
Route 51).
2002-
05
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (3.306 acres north of Neal
Lane, approximately 985 feet east of Giant City Road).
2002-
12
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Marylyn Sue Schmitto
(reconstruction of a portion of New Era Road).
2002-
13
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Phyllis R. Imhoff and James
Gary Imhoff (reconstruction of a portion of New Era Road).
2002-
15
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2 parcels totaling 6.838
acres along U.S. Route 51).
2002-
40
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Pearl Evelyn Freeman
(reconstruction of a portion of New Era Road).
2002-
45
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Cooper trust (reconstruction of a
portion of New Era Road).
2002-
47
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Diana Leech and David
Mendriski (22.08 acres, more or less, in Leech subdivision).
2002-
52
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with William David Fuson and June
L. Fuson (property located at 1050 North New Era Road).
2002-
55
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Ariel Development, LLC (63.37
acres located south of West Murphysboro Road and east of Country Club Road).
2002-
59
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Jamie Neil Andrew (property
located at 2385 New Era Road).
2002-
68
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6.0 acre parcel commonly
known as 1725 E. Dogwood Road).
2002-
72
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with the city of Carbondale and KCM
Land Trust for property located at 1600 N. New Era Road.
2002- An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (18.8 acre parcel at the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 858/923
86 southeast corner of the intersection of East Pleasant Hill Road and Springer Ridge Road).
2002-
91
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a 1.26 acre portion of the
new Route 13 East right of way located north of 2265 Sweets Drive).
2003-
03
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Clifford E. Tippy and Shelby J.
Tippy for property located at 169 Tippy Road.
2003-
07
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a parcel known as 1225
South Giant City Road).
2003-
09
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Virgil A. Beadle, Jr. for Beadle
Acres subdivision, 4.04 acres located on Old Route 51.
2003-
10
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Betty Fladeland for Fladeland
subdivision, 1.00 acre located on Reed Station Road.
2003-
24
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with ESOP Properties, LLC for
property located on South Illinois Avenue.
2003-
26
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Dennis and Patricia Kortkamp
for 9.26 acres located at 320 Sunset Drive.
2003-
27
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (10.376 acres located at
1305 East Grand Avenue).
2003-
31
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10,
11, & 12 in Bradford Pear Estates).
2003-
32
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (the common lot in Bradford
Pear Estates subdivision).
2003-
36
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2003-
44
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Lot 13 in Bradford Pear
Estates).
2003-
45
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Lots 6 and 15 in Bradford
Pear Estates).
2003-
46
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Lot 14 in Bradford Pear
Estates).
2003-
47
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Lot 8 in Bradford Pear
Estates).
2003-
57
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with the city of Carbondale and
Sherry J. Taylor for property located at 1030 N. New Era Road.
2003-
67
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with James Humphrey for 5.41 acres
located at the southeast corner of Reed Station Road and Haney Road.
2003-
69
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (10.25 acre parcel located
600 feet east of the intersection of New Route 13 East and North Reed Station Road).
2003-
74
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with James Legacy for Legacy
subdivision (4.483 acres located at 1819 West Lake Road).
2004-
01
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.5 acre parcel at 2475
West Striegel Road).
2004-
02
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with John Ham for 1.584 acres
located along Heather Lynn Lane.
2004-
12
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6.37 acre parcel located
east of 1245 East Grand Avenue).
2004- An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6.59 acre parcel at 2971 W.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 859/923
17 Alveria Drive).
2004-
22
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6.242 parcel south of
Sweets Drive and east of Harmony Lane and Harmony Lane right of way).
2004-
23
An ordinance accepting a dedication of road on Harmony Lane.
2004-
31
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1945 North New Era Road).
2004-
33
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1.37 acre parcel at 2375
New Era Road).
2004-
35
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Holly K. Immel and Wendell E.
Keepper for Whippoorwill Glen subdivision (11.3 acres located at 402 Whippoorwill Lane).
2004-
40
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Gerald R. and Hway Young
Dunn for Arbor Hill subdivision (5.74 acres located at 3686 and 3698 South Illinois Avenue).
2004-
43
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Joyce S. Hesketh for a 1.01 acre
parcel located at 4055 West Chautauqua Road.
2004-
44
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.28 acre parcel at 2401
New Era Road).
2004-
51
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1.12 acre parcel at 850
New Era Road).
2004-
52
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1.2 acre parcel at 1000
New Era Road).
2004-
53
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.65 acre parcel at 1030
New Era Road).
2004-
54
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.33 acre parcel at 1050
New Era Road).
2004-
55
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.79 acre parcel at 1080
New Era Road).
2004-
56
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (5.36 acre parcel at 1101
East Grand Avenue).
2004-
57
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (9.18 acre parcel at 1101
East Grand Avenue).
2004-
61
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2385 North New Era Road).
2004-
73
An ordinance changing the status of an annexed area owned by Charlie B. Brown & Associates, Ltd., to
allow thereon the sale of alcoholic liquor.
2004-
75
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2165 Sweets Drive).
2004-
76
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Dean Bush for a 5 acre parcel
located at 186 Verclif Drive.
2004-
84
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.011 acre parcel on New
Era Road).
2005-
36
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Dean Bush (8.11 acres located
along Warren Road).
2005-
37
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Kenneth Marquard (10.3 acres
located along Warren Road).
2005- An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Alan and Jenny Crowell for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 860/923
38 Tim's Place subdivision (1.15 acres located on the south side of No Name Road).
2005-
41
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1.8 acres on Striegel
Road).
2005-
42
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Roger Dale Karsten (2.07 acres
located at 2688 New Era Road).
2006-
03
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Quail Ridge subdivision).
2006-
04
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with William and Debra Gray for
Hidden Creek Estates subdivision (30.21 acres located north of Parkwood Road).
2006-
09
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2006-
12
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Pinecrest subdivision).
2006-
13
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2700 W. Chautauqua
Road).
2006-
14
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2760 W. Chautauqua
Road).
2006-
15
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2960 W. Chautauqua
Road).
2006-
24
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (45.42 acres on W.
Chautauqua and S. Tower Roads).
2006-
25
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (.48 acres on Union Hill
Road).
2006-
26
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (.81 acres on W. Pleasant
Hill Road).
2006-
27
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (property located on Illinois
Route 13, Leigeber).
2006-
28
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (property located on North
Reed Station Road, First Corner LLC).
2006-
29
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (property located on North
County Line Road, O'Fallon).
2006-
30
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (property located on North
County Line Road, O'Daniel).
2006-
33
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Mike and Georgette Twomey for
White Pine Estates subdivision (6 acres located at 3253 South Illinois Avenue).
2006-
35
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with T&T Farms for T&T Farms
subdivision (36 acres located on Ponce Trail).
2006-
36
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (3100 and 3110 W.
Chautauqua Road).
2006-
37
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (0.13 acre parcel on Reed
Station Road).
2006-
38
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (13.21 acres on W.
Chautauqua and S. Tower Roads).
2006-
41
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2006- An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 861/923
44
2006-
56
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1400 North Illinois Ave.,
The Crossings mobile home park).
2006-
63
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (25.07 acres on North Illinois
Ave., North Oakland Avenue and Ready Mix Road).
2007-
01
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1825 New Era Road).
2007-
11
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Egon Kamarasy for Bittersweet
subdivision (27.5 acres located south of Starvation Acres Road).
2007-
45
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2008-
21
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6429 West Murphysboro
Road).
2008-
22
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (3200 West Chautauqua
Road).
2008-
25
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Egon Kamarasy for Bittersweet
subdivision second plat.
2008-
27
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1201 South Giant City
Road).
2008-
40
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Brehm School property).
2009-
05
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (16.53 acres on South Giant
City Road).
2009-
07
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (20.6 acres on East Park
Street).
2009-
08
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Michael and Janet Althoff for the
Froesch Acres subdivision.
2009-
15
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (48.2 acres on West
Chautauqua Road).
2009-
16
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (7.6 acres on Glenn Road).
2009-
18
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (16.1 acres on New Era
Road).
2009-
24
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Allen Cissell for the Cissell
subdivision.
2009-
26
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (.22 acres located at 2431
New Era Road).
2009-
32
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2.86 acres located at 1600
New Era Road).
2009-
33
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (6.3 acres located at 1601
New Era Road).
2009-
34
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (16.097 acres located on
New Era Road).
2009-
38
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (.44 acres located at 2451
New Era Road).
2010- An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (414 San Diego Road).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 862/923
23
2010-
40
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (24.44 acres located on
Dogwood Road).
2010-
41
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (9.65 acres located at 1701
New Era Road).
2010-
43
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Dean Amley.
2010-
47
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with V.A. Beadle Trust.
2011-
01
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Neuro Restorative.
2011-
02
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Jacob and Suzette Povolish.
2011-
03
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (14.84 acres located at 2534
New Era Road).
2011-
12
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2915 West Striegel Road).
2011-
15
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Virginia Franklin.
2011-
16
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Dogwood Road).
2011-
36
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1275 North Reed Station
Road).
2011-
62
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (210 Dillinger Road).
2012-
15
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1301 South Giant City
Road).
2012-
40
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1345 East Park Street;
1355 East Park Street; 8641 South Giant City Road; 8609 South Giant City Road; 12 Vercliff Drive; 63
Vercliff Drive; 99 Vercliff Drive; 108 Vercliff Drive; 117 Vercliff Drive; 154 Glopen Road; 174 Glopen Road;
194 Glopen Road; 149 Bobette Lane; 167 Bobette Lane; 195 Bobette Lane).
2012-
56
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (1335 E. Park Street; 136
Glopen Road; 118 Glopen Road; 100 Glopen Road; 82 Glopen Road; 64 Glopen Road; 48 Glopen Road;
45 Glopen Road; 192 Bobette Lane; 120 Bobette Lane; 115 Bobette Lane; 98 Bobette Lane; 97 Bobette
Lane; 82 Bobette Lane; 79 Bobette Lane; 47 Bobette Lane; 42 Bobette Lane; 26 Bobette Lane; 25
Bobette Lane; 12 Bobette Lane; 9 Bobette Lane; 8489 Giant City Road; 8469 Giant City Road; 8449 Giant
City Road; 44 Vercliff Drive; 126 Larsue Lane, and other portions of Lakeland Hills Subdivision).
2013-
4
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (1625 New Era Road).
2013-
5
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (186 Vercliff Dr., 111 Glopen
Rd., 81 Glopen Rd., 65 Glopen Rd., 30 Glopen Rd.).
2013-
11
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (133 Bobette Lane; 8505
Giant City Road).
2013-
15
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (64 Bobette Lane; 131
Larsue Lane; 142 Larsue Lane; 8 H. Lee Street; 15 Glopen Drive; 31 Glopen Drive; 99 Glopen Drive; 129
Glopen Drive).
2013-
23
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (154 Bobette Lane).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 863/923
2013-
24
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (2622 New Era Road, 2646
New Era Road, 2688 New Era Road).
2013-
27
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (142 Bobette Lane).
2013-
30
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (84 Larsue Lane).
2013-
33
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (8865 South Giant City
Road).
2013-
40
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (368 Warren Road, 388
Warren Road, 412 Warren Road, 428 Warren Road).
2013-
58
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with David and Willetta Brunaugh for
the Brunaugh Subdivision.
2014-
06
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (Baggett Subdivision).
2015-
24
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with the owners of the Country
Village Subdivision.
2016-
71
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (4613 West Pleasant Hill
Road).
2017-
10
An ordinance annexing certain real property into the City of Carbondale, Illinois (813 West Lake Road,
847 West Lake Road, 175 Fishback Road).
2017-
11
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with the Southern Illinois Airport
Authority.
2017-
21
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (2355 New Era Road).
2017-
37
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (2511 South Park Lane).
2017-
38
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (169 Old Highway 13).
2017-
39
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Dennis Calufetti.
2017-
42
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Michelle Roberts.
2018-
06
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (229 South Hunt Road).
2018-
34
An ordinance annexing certain real property to the City of Carbondale, Illinois (Oakland Cemetery).
APPENDIX B: BONDS
Ord.
No.
Subject
94-76 An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 92-76, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 864/923
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1994 previously
established to pay such bonds.
94-77
An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 93-83, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois providing for the issuance of $5,115,000 general obligation bonds, series 1993, providing the
details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and
related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1994 previously established
to pay such bonds.
95-53
An Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for the issuance of $7,100,000
general obligation bonds, series 1995, providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay
certain revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related
matters.
95-67
An Ordinance authorizing the extension of the note and mortgage for the public works garage in the
amount of $180,000.00.
95-95
An Ordinance consenting to an assignment relating to the outstanding $300,000.00 economic
development project revenue bond (Pirmann and Vancil Project) of the City of Carbondale, Jackson
County, Illinois.
95-
107
An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 92-76, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of a $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1995 previously
established to pay such bonds.
95-
108
An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 93-83, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $5,115,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1995 previously
established to pay such bonds.
95-
109
An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 95-53, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $7,100,000 general obligation bonds, series 1995, providing the
details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and
related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1995 previously established
to pay such bonds.
96-86
An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 92-76, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $14,560,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1996 previously
established to pay such bonds.
96-87
An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 93-83, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $5,115,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1996 previously
established to pay such bonds.
96-88
An Ordinance concerning Ordinance 95-53, an Ordinance of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $7,100,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1996 previously
established to pay such bonds.
97-
160
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $14,560,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1997 previously
established to pay such bonds.
97- An ordinance concerning ordinance 93-83, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 865/923
161 Illinois, providing for the issuance of $5,115,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1997 previously
established to pay such bonds.
97-
162
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $7,100,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1997 previously
established to pay such bonds.
98-67
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $14,560,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1998 previously
established to pay such bonds.
98-68
An ordinance concerning ordinance 93-83, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $5,115,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1998 previously
established to pay such bonds.
98-69
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $7,100,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1998 previously
established to pay such bonds.
99-86
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $14,560,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1999 previously
established to pay such bonds.
99-87
An ordinance concerning ordinance 93-83, an ordinance of the city Of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $5,115,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1999 previously
established to pay such bonds.
99-88
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, an ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, providing for the issuance of $7,100,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995,
providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such
bonds, and related matters, abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 1999 previously
established to pay such bonds.
2000-
63
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $14,560,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992, the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2000 previously established to pay such bonds.
2000-
64
An ordinance concerning ordinance 93-83, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,115,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993, the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2000 previously established to pay such bonds.
2000-
65
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $7,100,000.00 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995, the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters,
abating a part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2000 previously established to pay such
bonds.
2001-
59
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $7,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995, the details of such bonds
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 866/923
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating a
part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2001 previously established to pay such bonds.
2001-
60
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992, the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2001 previously established to pay such bonds.
2001-
61
An ordinance concerning ordinance 93-83, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,115,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2001 previously established to pay such bonds.
2002-
10
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for the issuance of up to
$8,650,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2002, providing the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2002-
93
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for
the issuance of $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2002 previously established to pay such bonds.
2002-
94
An ordinance concerning ordinance 93-83, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,115,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1993, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2002 previously established to pay such bonds.
2002-
95
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $7,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating a
part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2002 previously established to pay such bonds.
2002-
96
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2002-10 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $8,650,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2002, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2002 previously established to pay such bonds.
2003-
48
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for the issuance of general
obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay
the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and secure the
principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2003-
78
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2002-10 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $8,650,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2002, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2003 previously established to pay such bonds.
2003-
79
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for
the issuance of $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2003 previously established to pay such bonds.
2003-
80
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $7,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating a
part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2003 previously established to pay such bonds.
2003-
81
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating
the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2003 previously established to pay such bonds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 867/923
2004-
16
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for the issuance of general
obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay
the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and secure the
principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2004-
46
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for the issuance of general
obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay
the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and secure the
principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2004-
88
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2004-46 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,185,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2004 previously established to pay such bonds.
2004-
89
An ordinance concerning ordinance 95-53, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $7,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1995, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating a
part of the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2004 previously established to pay such bonds.
2004-
90
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992, the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2004 previously established to pay such bonds.
2004-
91
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48, of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating
the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2004 previously established to pay such bonds.
2005-
01
An ordinance concerning ordinance 1990-73 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $3,000,000.00 unlimited ad valorem tax bonds of University Mall special service area
number one of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, series 1990, and abating the levy and
extension of taxes in its entirety for the years 2004_2008 previously established to pay such bonds.
2005-
65
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2004-46 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,185,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2005 previously established to pay such bonds.
2005-
66
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating
the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2005 previously established to pay such bonds.
2005-
67
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for
the issuance of $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2005 previously established to pay such bonds.
2006-
42
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for the issuance of general
obligation bonds, series 2006, providing the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the
principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2006-
67
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2006 previously established to pay such bonds.
2006-
68
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2004-46 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,185,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, the details of such bonds
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 868/923
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2006 previously established to pay such bonds.
2006-
69
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating
the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2006 previously established to pay such bonds.
2006-
70
An ordinance concerning ordinance 92-76 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for
the issuance of $14,560,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 1992, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2006 previously established to pay such bonds.
2007-
50
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay
the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and secure the
principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension of taxes for the
year 2007 previously established to pay such bonds.
2007-
51
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2004-46 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,185,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2007 previously established to pay such bonds.
2007-
52
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2007 previously established to pay such bonds.
2008-
05
An ordinance regarding a plan of financing by the city of Carbondale, Illinois, to issue revenue bonds for
Southern Illinois Regional Social Services, Incorporated in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
$6,000,000 for the purpose of financing a portion of the cost of certain health care and social services
facilities and infrastructure; affirming an official intent resolution; authorizing the holding of a public
hearing and the publication of notice for said public hearing; designating a hearing officer for said public
hearing; and related matters.
2008-
19
An ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of special facilities revenue bonds, series 2008 (Southern
Illinois Regional Social Services Incorporated project) by the city of Carbondale, Illinois in an aggregate
principal amount not to exceed $6,000,000 for the purpose of financing a portion of the cost of certain
health care and social services facilities and related infrastructure; authorizing the execution and delivery
of a loan agreement, a mortgage and security agreement, a security agreement, an indenture of trust, a
bond purchase agreement and related documents; authorizing the distribution of a preliminary official
statement and an official statement; and related matters.
2008-
53
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating
the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2008 previously established to pay such bonds.
2008-
54
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2004-46 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,185,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2008 previously established to pay such bonds.
2008-
55
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 869/923
and secure the principal of an interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2008 previously established to pay such bonds.
2009-
61
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2009 previously established to pay such bonds.
2009-
62
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2004-46 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,185,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2009 previously established to pay such bonds.
2009-
63
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2009 previously established to pay such bonds.
2010-
25
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing for the issuance of: (A) taxable
general obligation bonds, series 2010A (recovery zone economic development bonds (direct payment));
and (B) taxable general obligation bonds, series 2010B (build America bonds (direct payment)), providing
the details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and
related matters.
2010-
48
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2010 previously established to pay such bonds.
2010-
49
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2004-46 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,185,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2004, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2010 previously established to pay such bonds.
2010-
50
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2010 previously established to pay such bonds.
2010-
51
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010 A, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2010 previously established to pay such bonds.
2010-
52
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010 B, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2010 previously established to pay such bonds.
2011-
10
An ordinance providing for financing of improvements to the Northwest wastewater treatment plant by
issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation bonds, series 2011 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County,
Illinois, with bond payments to be made from sewer utility fees.
2011-
51
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson and Williamson Counties, Illinois, providing for the
issuance of general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, providing the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2011- An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 870/923
63 for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2011 previously established to pay such bonds.
2011-
64
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2011 previously established to pay such bonds.
2011-
65
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010 A, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2010 previously established to pay such bonds.
2011-
66
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010B, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2011 previously established to pay such bonds.
2011-
67
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-10 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2011 previously established to pay such bonds.
2011-
68
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-51 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,625,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2011 previously established to pay such bonds.
2012-
59
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2003-48 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,255,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2003, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2012 previously established to pay such bonds.
2012-
60
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2012 previously established to pay such bonds.
2012-
61
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010A, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2012 previously established to pay such bonds.
2012-
62
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010B, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2012 previously established to pay such bonds.
2012-
63
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-10 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2012 previously established to pay such bonds.
2012- An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-51 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 871/923
64 for the issuance of $6,625,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2012 previously established to pay such bonds.
2013-
19
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson and Williamson Counties, Illinois, providing for the
issuance of general obligation refunding bonds, series 2013, providing the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2013-
61
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2013 previously established to pay such bonds.
2013-
62
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010A, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2013 previously established to pay such bonds.
2013-
63
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010B, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2013 previously established to pay such bonds.
2013-
64
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-10 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2013 previously established to pay such bonds.
2013-
65
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-51 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,625,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2013 previously established to pay such bonds.
2013-
66
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2013-19 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $9,015,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2013, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2013 previously established to pay such bonds.
2014-
55
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2006-42 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $5,690,000 general obligation bonds, series 2006, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2014 previously established to pay such bonds.
2014-
56
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010A, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2014 previously established to pay such bonds.
2014-
57
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010B, providing the details of such
bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue
sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the
levy and extension of taxes for the year 2014 previously established to pay such bonds.
2014-
58
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-10 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 872/923
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2014 previously established to pay such bonds.
2014-
59
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-51 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $6,625,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds
and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources
to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and
extension of taxes for the year 2014 previously established to pay such bonds.
2014-
60
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2013-19 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $9,015,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2013, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2014 previously established to pay such bonds.
2015-
1
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Jackson and Williamson Counties, Illinois, providing for the
issuance of general obligation refunding bonds, series 2015, providing the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, and related matters.
2015-
05
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2015-1 of the city of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois, providing
for the issuance of $1,500,000 general obligation bonds, series 2015, the details of such bonds and for a
levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2014 previously established to pay such bonds.
2015-
48
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, providing for the issuance
of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010A, providing the details of such bonds and for a levy
of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and
secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension of
taxes for the year 2015 previously established to pay such bonds.
2015-
49
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2010-25 of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, providing for the issuance
of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010B, providing the details of such bonds and for a levy
of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and
secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension of
taxes for the year 2015 previously established to pay such bonds.
2015-
50
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-10 of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, providing for the issuance
of $1,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds and for a levy of
taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and
secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension of
taxes for the year 2015 previously established to pay such bonds.
2015-
51
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2011-51 of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, providing for the issuance
of $6,625,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of such bonds and for a levy of
taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay and
secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension of
taxes for the year 2015 previously established to pay such bonds.
2015-
52
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2013-19 of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, providing for the issuance
of $9,015,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2013, providing the details of such bonds and for
a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2015 previously established to pay such bonds.
2015-
53
An ordinance concerning ordinance 2015-05 of the City of Carbondale, Illinois, providing for the issuance
of $1,500,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2015, providing the details of such bonds and for
a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain revenue sources to pay
and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters, abating the levy and extension
of taxes for the year 2015 previously established to pay such bonds.
2016-
63
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2010-25 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010A, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2016 previously established to pay such bonds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 873/923
2016-
64
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2010-25 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010B, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2016 previously established to pay such bonds.
2016-
65
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2011-51 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $6,625,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2016 previously established to pay such bonds.
2016-
66
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2011-10 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2016 previously established to pay such bonds.
2016-
67
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2013-19 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $9,015,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2013, providing the
details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for
certain revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2016 previously established to pay such bonds.
2016-
68
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2015-05 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $1,500,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2015, providing the
details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for
certain revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2016 previously established to pay such bonds.
2017-
48
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2010-25 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $4,000,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010A, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2017 previously established to pay such bonds.
2017-
49
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2010-25 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $3,991,000 general obligation bonds, series 2010B, providing the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2017 previously established to pay such bonds.
2017-
50
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2011-51 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $6,625,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2017 previously established to pay such bonds.
2017-
51
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2011-10 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $1,100,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2011, the details of
such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for certain
revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2017 previously established to pay such bonds.
2017-
52
An ordinance concerning ordinance no. 2013-19 of the City of Carbondale, Jackson County, Illinois,
providing for the issuance of $9,015,000 general obligation refunding bonds, series 2013, providing the
details of such bonds and for a levy of taxes to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds and for
certain revenue sources to pay and secure the principal of and interest of such bonds and related matters,
abating the levy and extension of taxes for the year 2017 previously established to pay such bonds.
APPENDIX C: MISCELLANEOUS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 874/923
Ord.
No.
Subject
94-74
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and United Association
of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United States and Canada,
AFL-CIO for fiscal year 1995, fiscal year 1996 and fiscal year 1997 and authorizing the city manager to
execute the same.
95-05
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 1961 of
the International Association of Firefighters for fiscal years 1995_1996.
95-29
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining employees unit for fiscal year ending April 30, 1996.
95-48
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in
public works and ascertained by the Illinois department of labor.
96-07
An ordinance proposing the establishment of a special service area in the city of Carbondale and
providing for a public hearing and other procedures in connection therewith.
96-14
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a professional service agreement with a consultant for the
preparation of a new comprehensive plan.
96-17
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 1961 of
the International Association of Firefighters for fiscal year 1997.
96-25
An ordinance establishing downtown special service area number one in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
96-26
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a professional service agreement with the International
Association of Chiefs of Police.
96-30
An ordinance modifying fund balance for Carbondale Public Library.
96-31
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a professional service agreement with a consultant for a job
classification and pay plan study for certain positions.
96-34
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 1997.
96-52
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in
public works and ascertained by the Illinois department of labor.
97-24
An ordinance dedicating and pledging a source of revenue to repay the loan obtained for the construction
of the Charles Road sanitary sewer extension, CIP SAS 91-2.
97-70
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 1998.
97-71
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 1998.
97-80
An ordinance designating the F.A. Prickett Building at 127 North Washington Street as a landmark and
setting forth the design standards therefor.
97-81
An ordinance adopting a comprehensive plan for the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
97-83
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into an agreement with MetroSite Management, LLC,
for consulting and marketing services (identifying, marketing, and managing of antenna location to
wireless community companies).
97-84
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement to terminate the towing contract
between the city and Glen's Towing Company.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 875/923
97-85
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 160,
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United
States and Canada, AFL-CIO for fiscal year 1998.
97-99
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the fraternal order
of police lodge #192 and the Illinois state fraternal order of police labor council for fiscal years 1997 and
1998.
97-
109
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in
public works and ascertained by the Illinois department of labor.
97-
123
An ordinance amending the pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30,
1998.
97-
147
An ordinance approving and authorizing an amendment to the labor agreement between the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, and the fraternal order of police labor council for fiscal years 1997 and 1998.
97-
148
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city Of Carbondale, Illinois, and general
teamsters local no. 347 affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs,
Warehousemen and Helpers of America for fiscal years 1997 and 1998, and authorizing the city manager
to execute the same.
97-
149
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 1961, of
the International Association of Firefighters AFL-CIO, CLC for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 and authorizing
the city manager to execute the same.
97-
154
An ordinance amending the city of Carbondale, Illinois, nonbargaining unit employees rules and
regulations (amending section 13-8 funeral leave).
98-24
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a lease with Orval Twenhafel and Lyle Thompson
for farming rights (undeveloped acreage at the northwest and southwest water treatment plants and the
Bicentennial Industrial Park).
98-25
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 1999.
98-27
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 1999.
98-36
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
98-37
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a first amendment to lease agreement,
assignment and consent of lease, estoppel certificate and collateral access agreement with Spinnaker
Electrical Tape Company on behalf of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
98-49
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 160,
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United
States and Canada, AFL-CIO for fiscal year 1999.
98-59
An ordinance designating the William Dixon Home at 511 West Walnut as a landmark and setting forth the
design standards therefor.
98-60
An ordinance designating the Gilbert/Batson Home at 513 West Walnut as a landmark and setting forth
the design standards therefor.
98-62
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the fraternal order
of police lodge #192 and the Illinois state fraternal order of police labor council for fiscal years 1999 and
2000.
98-65
An ordinance amending the landmark designation of the Old Passenger Depot at 111 South Illinois
Avenue and setting forth additional design standards therefor.
98-74
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and general teamsters
local no. 347 affiliated with the International Brotherhood Of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and
Helpers of America for fiscal years 1999 and 2000.
99-02 An ordinance adopting the revised code of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, 1998.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 876/923
99-07
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a professional service agreement with the International
Association of Chiefs of Police (establishing an assessment center for the Carbondale police department).
99-08
An ordinance providing for the jurisdictional transfer of West Murphysboro Road (Old Illinois Route 13) to
the municipal street system of Carbondale, Illinois.
99-10
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 1961 of
the International Association of Firefighters AFL-CIO, CLC for fiscal year 2000, and authorizing the city
manager to execute the same.
99-13
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2000.
99-14
An ordinance adopting a classification plan and a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal
year ending April 30, 2000.
99-16
An ordinance amending lease agreement between city of Carbondale and Spinnaker Electrical Tape
Company (SETCO), consenting to Spinnaker's assignment of lease agreement to Intertape Polymer
Group, Inc.
99-17
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with the Carbondale Business
Development Corporation (adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2000).
99-18
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with the Carbondale convention and
tourism bureau (adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2000).
99-19
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale Main Street
(adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2000).
99-20
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with the Carbondale community arts
(adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2000).
99-21
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 160,
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United
States and Canada, AFL-CIO for fiscal year 2000.
99-31
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an amendment to a lease agreement between city
of Carbondale and Illinois department of central management services (remodeling property located at
606 East College).
99-32
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
99-41
An ordinance amending the city of Carbondale, Illinois, nonbargaining unit employees rules and
regulations (amending section 13.2 vacation).
99-92
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a lease agreement with First Cellular for erection
of communication tower on city property.
99-93
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with Carbondale
Community High School District #165 for the award of an exclusive beverage rights contract.
2000-
01
An ordinance amending the city of Carbondale, Illinois, nonbargaining unit employees rules and
regulations (amending section 13.3 sick leave).
2000-
12
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2001.
2000-
13
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2001.
2000-
14
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement with Carbondale Community
High School District #165 in relation to the costs and development of the superblock.
2000- An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale Business
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 877/923
15 Development Corporation (adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2001).
2000-
16
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale convention and
tourism bureau (adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2001).
2000-
17
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale Main Street
(adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2001).
2000-
18
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with the Carbondale community arts
(adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2001).
2000-
19
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into an agreement with the fraternal order of police
lodge #192 for the purchase of new uniforms.
2000-
22
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute agreements with community based organizations
(adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2001).
2000-
24
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an assignment of interest with Carbondale
Business Development Corporation in regard to real property located at 600 North Illinois Avenue,
Carbondale, Illinois (Tesa Tape, Inc.).
2000-
25
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2000-
28
An ordinance authorizing the mayor to execute an employment agreement with city manager Jeffrey W.
Doherty.
2000-
33
An ordinance amending the city of Carbondale, Illinois, nonbargaining unit employees rules and
regulations (amending section 9.2 duration of chapter 9 probation and section 12.2 holidays granted for
employees of chapter 12).
2000-
34
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with BA Properties for
redevelopment of the University Mall.
2000-
40
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 1961 of
the International Association of Firefighters AFL-CIO, CLC for fiscal years 2001 and 2002 and authorizing
the city manager to execute the same.
2000-
44
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and general teamsters
local no. 347 affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and
Helpers of America for fiscal years 2001 and 2002.
2000-
47
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 160,
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United
States and Canada, AFL-CIO for fiscal years 2001 and 2002.
2000-
62
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the fraternal order
of police lodge #192 and the Illinois state fraternal order of police labor council for fiscal years 2001 and
2002.
2001-
04
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an intergovernmental lease agreement with the
state of Illinois, department of management services for crime lab facilities in Carbondale, Illinois
(Brentwood Building located at 606 East College).
2001-
08
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale convention and
tourism bureau (adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2002).
2001-
15
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2002.
2001-
16
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2002.
2001-
19
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale Business
Development Corporation (adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2002).
2001-
20
An ordinance amending the labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the fraternal
order of police lodge #192 and the Illinois state fraternal order of police labor council for fiscal years 2001
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 878/923
and 2002.
2001-
22
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute agreements with community organizations
(adopting budget for fiscal year ending April 30, 2002).
2001-
23
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Good Samaritan Ministries
(procures the organization's services in the community).
2001-
24
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2001-
29
An ordinance authorizing the abandonment of a city water line easement for a 12 inch water line across
the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 22, township 9 south range 1 west of the third
principle meridian.
2001-
34
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a license agreement with the Women's Center, Inc.
(placing 1 multipair telephone and fiber optic cable on the property located at 610 South Thompson
Street).
2001-
42
An ordinance authorizing the extension and expansion of the downtown special service area number one.
2001-
64
An ordinance amending the city of Carbondale, Illinois, nonbargaining unit employees rules and
regulations (modified section 13.3 sick leave).
2002-
04
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to terminate the wireless communications consulting and
marketing agreement with Apex Site Management (formerly Metrosite Management, LLC).
2002-
16
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an intergovernmental agreement with Jackson
County for aerial photography (base map for a countywide geographic information system).
2002-
20
An ordinance adopting the general fund for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April
30, 2003.
2002-
21
An ordinance adopting special revenue fund, specifically, motor fuel tax fund for the city of Carbondale,
Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
22
An ordinance adopting special revenue fund, specifically, child care services fund for the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
23
An ordinance adopting the debt service fund for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2003.
2002-
24
An ordinance adopting the capital project funds, specifically, local improvement fund for the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
25
An ordinance adopting the capital project funds, specifically, railroad relocation project fund for the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
26
An ordinance adopting the proprietary fund types, specifically, waterworks and sewerage fund for the city
of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
27
An ordinance adopting the proprietary fund types, specifically, parking system operations fund for the city
of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
28
An ordinance adopting the proprietary fund types, specifically, solid waste management fund for the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
29
An ordinance adopting the proprietary fund types, specifically, rental properties fund for the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
30
An ordinance adopting the proprietary fund types, specifically, self-insurance fund for the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002-
31
An ordinance adopting the budget for the Carbondale Public Library as a component unit of the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
2002- An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2003.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 879/923
32
2002-
33
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale Business
Development Corporation (adopting budget for fiscal year 2003).
2002-
34
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Carbondale convention and
tourism bureau (adopting budget for fiscal year 2003).
2002-
37
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 1961 of
the International Association of Firefighters AFL-CIO, CLC, for fiscal years 2003 and 2004 and authorizing
the city manager to execute the same.
2002-
38
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Government E_Management
Solutions, Inc. (adopting budget for fiscal year 2003).
2002-
39
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute contracts with community based organizations and
Southern Illinois University Carbondale (in support of the Community Outreach Partnership Center).
2002-
42
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a lease agreement with Carbondale Main Street
for the purpose of leasing the Old Illinois Central Railroad Passenger Depot.
2002-
43
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a lease agreement with University Christian
Ministries for green space.
2002-
44
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 160,
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United
States and Canada, AFL-CIO for fiscal years 2003 and 2004 and authorizing the city manager to execute
the same.
2002-
46
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2002-
49
An ordinance adopting an historic preservation plan for the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2002-
58
An ordinance amending the city of Carbondale, Illinois, nonbargaining unit employees rules and
regulations (amend sections 12-7 eligibility for holiday pay and 13-8 funeral leave).
2002-
64
An ordinance authorizing the submission of a referendum question on increasing the number of city
council members serving on the city council of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, to be submitted to the
voters of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, at the general election on November 5, 2002.
2002-
90
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the fraternal order
of police lodge #192 and the Illinois state fraternal order of police labor council for fiscal years 2003 and
2004.
2002-
101
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and general teamsters
local no. 347 affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and
Helpers of America for fiscal years 2003 and 2004.
2002-
103
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Victory Christian Center of
Southern Illinois for use of city property.
2002-
105
An ordinance authorizing, dedicating, and pledging a source of revenue to repay the loan obtained for the
upgrade of the southeast wastewater treatment plant project (CIP WW9902).
2003-
08
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Bruce Harris and Associates,
Inc., for mapping services.
2003-
12
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an agreement with Jackson County for phase II and
phase III of the geographic information system (GIS).
2003-
15
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the FY 2003 budget expenditures.
2003-
18
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2004.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 880/923
2003-
19
An ordinance adopting the budget for the Carbondale public library as a component unit of the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2004.
2003-
20
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2004.
2003-
30
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2003-
33
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an agreement with the Illinois department of transportation
regarding traffic signals at the intersections of Grand Avenue and U.S. Route 51 (S. Illinois Avenue) and
street lighting along the west side of U.S. Route 51 (S. Illinois Avenue) from Grand Avenue to Mill Street.
2003-
35
An ordinance authorizing, dedicating, and pledging a source of revenue to repay the loan obtained for the
upgrade of the southeast wastewater treatment plant project (CIP WW9902).
2003-
41
An ordinance amending ordinance 89-81 (establishment of a Jackson County enterprise zone) and the
enterprise zone intergovernmental agreement dated February 15, 1990, in regard to the implementation
of a tax increment development project district within the enterprise zone.
2003-
50
An ordinance amending ordinance 2003-41 in regard to a technical correction in relation to ordinance 89-
125 (enterprise zone) and the enterprise zone intergovernmental agreement.
2003-
58
An ordinance establishing a home ownership program for the purpose of providing certain financial
incentives and assistance to developers in the construction of new subdivisions and the construction of
new residential structures in new or existing subdivisions in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2003-
59
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2004 budget for
employer's share of health insurance expenditures and operating supplies and materials.
2003-
65
An ordinance designating the R. Buckminster and Anne Hewlett Fuller Dome home at 407 South Forest
Avenue as a landmark district and setting forth the design standards therefor.
2004-
05
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2004 budget for
the installation of exhaust systems for stations no. 1 and no. 2.
2004-
24
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2005.
2004-
25
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2005.
2004-
30
An ordinance adopting the budget for the Carbondale public library as a component unit of the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending April 30, 2005.
2004-
39
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2004-
42
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget to
purchase the Lincoln Middle School.
2004-
45
An ordinance regulating recovery in medical malpractice suits.
2004-
48
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget.
2004-
60
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget for
the operation of the Eurma C. Hayes Child Care Center.
2004-
62
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget for
improvements to the Eurma C. Hayes Center.
2004-
65
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY 2005 police department contingency
account.
2004-
66
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget for
the preservation education display grant in the planning services division.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 881/923
2004-
72
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget to
provide funds for utilities for the Lincoln Middle School property.
2004-
78
An ordinance amending ordinance 2003-58, the home ownership program, to expand the infrastructure
improvement grant to include the R-1-5 zoning classification.
2004-
92
An ordinance authorizing the mayor to execute an employment agreement with city manager Jeffrey W.
Doherty.
2005-
03
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and general teamsters
local no. 347 affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and
Helpers of America for fiscal years 2005, 2006 and 2007.
2005-
05
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 160,
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the United
States and Canada, AFL-CIO for fiscal years 2005, 2006 and 2007 and authorizing the city manager to
execute the same.
2005-
07
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget for
the foreign fire insurance fund and regional training center fund.
2005-
10
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a mutual aid box alarm system agreement.
2005-
17
An ordinance approving a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 1961 of
the International Association of Fire Fighters AFL-CIO, CLC for fiscal years 2005, 2006 and 2007 and
authorizing the city manager to execute the same.
2005-
18
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2006.
2005-
21
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2005 budget by
$360,379.00.
2005-
22
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2006.
2005-
40
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2006-
01
An ordinance amending ordinance 2003-58, the home ownership program, to expand the new home
construction grant to include the RR zoning classification.
2006-
05
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a lease agreement with the African American
Museum Of Southern Illinois for the purpose of leasing the Attucks School property.
2006-
10
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for an increase in the overall fiscal year 2006 budget for
the purchase of a radio dispatch console for the Carbondale police department.
2006-
16
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2007.
2006-
17
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2007.
2006-
20
An ordinance providing for a refund of municipal infrastructure maintenance fees paid by wireless
telecommunications customers and collected by the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2006-
31
An ordinance accepting an interest arbitration award and adopting a labor agreement between the city of
Carbondale, Illinois, and the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge #192 and the Illinois State Fraternal Order of
Police Labor Council for fiscal years 2005, 2006 and 2007.
2006-
34
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2006-
45
An ordinance authorizing the extension and expansion of the downtown special service area number one.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 882/923
2006-
46
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2007 budget for
the water and sewer department for water and sewer improvements.
2006-
47
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for an increase in the overall fiscal year 2007 budget for
the purchase of emergency management supplies, services and repairs for the Carbondale emergency
management services.
2006-
57
An ordinance granting a cable television franchise agreement to MCC Illinois, LLC, d/b/a Mediacom.
2006-
58
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for an increase in the overall fiscal year 2007 budget for
the purchase of an alarm system for Oakland cemetery.
2007-
10
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for an increase in the overall fiscal year 2007 budget for
the final payment to Illinois department of transportation for the Mill Street underpass construction.
2007-
12
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2008.
2007-
13
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2008.
2007-
19
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2007-
20
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and general teamsters
local no. 347 affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and
Helpers of America for fiscal years 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011.
2007-
22
An ordinance amending the fiscal year 2008 five year community investment program to include Illinois
Route 13/Giant City Road intersection improvements and authorizing a budget adjustment for the
increase in the overall fiscal year 2008 budget for motor fuel tax and local improvement funds.
2007-
24
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local union no.
1961 of the International Association of Fire Fighters for fiscal years 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011.
2007-
25
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the Fraternal Order
of Police Lodge #192 and the Illinois State Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council for fiscal years 2008,
2009, 2010 and 2011.
2007-
30
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local no. 160,
United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitters Industry of the United
States of America for fiscal years 2008, 2009 and 2010.
2007-
33
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the fiscal year 2008 police department
contingency account and providing funds for a facade loan.
2007-
39
An ordinance establishing a single-family housing conversion program for the purpose of increasing
owner occupancy in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2007-
41
An ordinance waiving the payment of certain fees required for construction for Habitat For Humanity.
2007-
43
An ordinance authorizing the mayor to execute an employment agreement with city manager Jeffrey W.
Doherty.
2008-
06
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2008 budget for
housing rehabilitation projects in the building and neighborhood services division.
2008-
08
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2008 budget for
the purchase and installation of new breathing air compressor and turnout gear washer/extractor in fire
station no. 2.
2008-
09
An ordinance authorizing the mayor to solemnize marriages.
2008-
14
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall waterworks and sewerage fiscal
year 2008 budget for the northwest wastewater treatment plant and water distribution divisions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 883/923
2008-
15
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the fiscal year 2008 Eurma C. Hayes child care
budget and the fiscal year 2008 general fund budget.
2008-
16
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2008 budget for
the railroad relocation project fund and allocation of net remaining cash.
2008-
17
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2009.
2008-
18
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2009.
2008-
23
An ordinance appointing a new city manager for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and authorizing the mayor
to execute an employment agreement.
2008-
28
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2008-
31
An ordinance amending the FY 2009 five year community investment program to include Wall Street
improvements (Park Street to Pleasant Hill Road) CIP no. ST0401 and authorizing a budget adjustment
for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2009 budget for local improvement fund.
2008-
34
An ordinance extending the term of an electric franchise agreement with AMERENCIPS.
2008-
35
An ordinance extending the term of a gas franchise agreement with AMERENCIPS.
2008-
37
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY 2009 police department contingency
account.
2008-
38
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment adding IDOT grants to the police department.
2008-
43
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to accept a grant and approving a budget adjustment adding
ISBE preventive initiative grant funds to the child care services budget.
2008-
44
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to accept a grant and approving a budget adjustment to the
police department budget and authorizing the city manager to execute an intergovernmental agreement
with Carbondale Elementary School District 95.
2008-
48
An ordinance adopting the affirmative action plan for the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2009-
03
An ordinance amending the FY 2009 five year community investment program to include Reed Station
Parkway connector project CIP no. ST0305 and authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the
overall fiscal year 2009 budget for local improvement fund.
2009-
04
An ordinance amending the FY 2009 five year community investment program to include Marion Street
(from College Street to Mill Street) extension CIP no. ST0904 and authorizing a budget adjustment for the
increase in the overall fiscal year 2009 budget for local improvement fund.
2009-
12
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall waterworks and sewerage fiscal
year 2009 budget for the water treatment plant division.
2009-
13
An ordinance renewing an existing franchise and granting for a period of 20 years to AMERENCIPS, a
corporation, its successors and assigns, the franchise, right, permission and authority to construct,
reconstruct, excavate for, place, remove, extend, maintain, and operate a gas utility system in the city of
Carbondale, county of Jackson and state of Illinois.
2009-
14
An ordinance renewing an existing franchise and granting for a period of 20 years to AMERENCIPS, a
corporation, its successors and assigns, the franchise, right, permission and authority to construct,
reconstruct, excavate for, place, remove, extend, maintain, and operate an electric utility system in the city
of Carbondale, county of Jackson and state of Illinois.
2009-
20
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to add V.A.W.A. grant funds for the police department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 884/923
2009-
22
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2010.
2009-
23
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2010.
2009-
25
An ordinance amending the FY 2010 five-year community investment program to include resurface Wall
Street (from Mill Street to Park Street) (approximately 1,700 linear feet) (CIP no. ST1005), resurface
Washington Street (from Walnut Street to Mill Street) (approximately 1,500 linear feet) (CIP no. ST1006),
and resurface Oakland Avenue (from Willow Street to Rigdon Street) (approximately 1,500 linear feet)
(CIP no. ST1007) and authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2010
budget for local improvement fund.
2009-
27
An ordinance amending fiscal year 2010 budget for purchase of land development software from the
Davenport Group.
2009-
28
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2009-
29
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment to increase the FY 2010 fire department budget.
2009-
37
An ordinance amending the FY 2010 five-year community investment program to include northwest
wastewater treatment plant digester lid and gas collection (CIP WW0001) in FY 2010 and authorizing a
budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2010 budget for the water and sewer
department.
2009-
40
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment to increase the FY 2010 city hall/civic center budget.
2009-
47
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to accept the Illinois department of transportation mini alcohol
program (MAP) grant and child passenger safety grant on behalf of the police department.
2009-
48
An ordinance amending the FY 2010 five-year community investment program to include storm 2009 -
sidewalk repairs (CIP SW 1002) in FY 2010 and authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the
overall fiscal year 2010 budget for the local improvement fund.
2009-
49
An ordinance accepting a grant and approving a budget adjustment to increase the FY 2010 police
department budget.
2009-
54
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY 2010 police department contingency
account.
2009-
55
An ordinance authorizing the addition of an Illinois criminal justice information authority grant to the police
department budget.
2009-
57
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant from the Illinois department of transportation and
approving a budget adjustment to increase the FY 2010 budget.
2009-
58
An ordinance adopting the Jackson County multi-hazard mitigation plan.
2010-
01
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall waterworks and sewerage fiscal
year 2010 budget for the sewage lift stations division.
2010-
02
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall development services fiscal year
2010 budget for the planning services division.
2010-
09
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2010 budget due to storm
cleanup recovery costs.
2010-
11
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall waterworks and sewerage fiscal
year 2010 budget for the water treatment plant division.
2010-
12
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the police
telecommunicators of the Illinois state fraternal order of police labor council for fiscal years 2010, 2011
and 2012.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 885/923
2010-
13
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2011.
2010-
14
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2011.
2010-
15
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2011.
2010-
19
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to add V.A.W.A. grant funds for the police department.
2010-
20
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall waterworks and sewerage fiscal
year 2011 budget for the support services division.
2010-
22
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2010-
24
An ordinance adopting a new comprehensive plan for the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2010-
26
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor for Williamson County.
2010-
32
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to add justice assistance grant to the police department FY
2011 budget.
2010-
35
An ordinance authorizing the addition of grants to the police department FY 2011 budget.
2010-
36
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2011 budget for
the water and sewerage fund for WS0402 Illinois clean lakes program.
2010-
37
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY 2011 police department contingency
account.
2010-
44
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for an increase in the overall fiscal year 2011 budget for
the purchase of a sign for Oakland Cemetery.
2011-
04
An ordinance amending ordinance 2006-05 concerning a lease agreement with the African American
Museum Of Southern Illinois.
2011-
11
An ordinance increasing the overall budget to provide for the retirement payouts and additional general
obligation bond proceeds and uses.
2011-
13
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to add V.A.W.A. grant fund revenue for the police
department.
2011-
18
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2012.
2011-
19
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2012.
2011-
20
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2012.
2011-
26
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2011-
29
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and general Teamsters
Local No. 347 affiliated with the International Brotherhood Of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen And
Helpers Of America for fiscal years 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.
2011-
32
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant from the Illinois department of transportation and
approving a budget adjustment to increase the police department's FY2012 budget.
2011- An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant from the Illinois department of transportation and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 886/923
37 approving a budget adjustment to increase the police department's FY2012 budget.
2011-
40
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant through the Illinois emergency management agency and
approving a budget adjustment to the FY2012 budget.
2011-
41
An ordinance authorizing the award of a construction contract and approving a budget adjustment to the
lake management budget.
2011-
47
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and local union no.
1961 of the International Association Of Firefighters AFL-CIO, CLC for fiscal years 2012, 2013, 2014 and
2015.
2011-
55
An ordinance authorizing the addition of justice assistance grant to the police department FY2012.
2011-
56
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY2012 police department contingency
account.
2011-
57
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2012 budget for
unexpected items.
2011-
61
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the planning services division's fiscal year 2012
budget.
2012-
01
An ordinance appointing a new city manager for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and authorizing the mayor
to execute an employment agreement.
2012-
02
An ordinance amending the FY 2012 five-year community investment program to include WS0202 water
storage facility (phase II) and SA1201 Tan Tara sanitary sewer and authorizing a budget adjustment for
the increase in the overall fiscal year 2012 budget for the water and sewerage fund.
2012-
03
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2012 waterworks and
sewerage budget due to April - May storms and resulting flooding.
2012-
04
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2012 budget for city
property insurance claims.
2012-
05
An ordinance amending the FY 2012 five-year community investment program to include ST0102 Reed
Station Road, ST0305 Reed Station Parkway and fire station relocation PB0001 and authorizing a budget
adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2012 budget for the local improvement fund.
2012-
06
An ordinance increasing the overall budget to provide for the 2011 general obligation bond proceeds and
uses.
2012-
07
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the Fraternal Order
Of Police Lodge #192 and the Illinois state Fraternal Order Of Police labor council for fiscal years 2012,
2013, 2014, and 2015.
2012-
09
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment to the FY 2012 budget.
2012-
10
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2012 budget for city
property insurance claims and federal disaster relief.
2012-
11
An ordinance increasing the overall budget to provide for the use of an energy efficiency conservation
block grant.
2012-
12
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2013.
2012-
13
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2013.
2012-
14
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2013.
2012-
16
An ordinance increasing the overall budget to provide for the establishment of the health insurance
reimbursement fund.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 887/923
2012-
18
An ordinance authorizing the addition of an Illinois criminal justice information authority grant to the police
department budget and the award of purchase of a police vehicle.
2012-
21
An ordinance authorizing the city of Carbondale of Jackson County, Illinois, to borrow funds from the
public water supply loan program for the construction of the water storage facility project (CIP WS0202).
2012-
22
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustment to increase the necessary funding for addition of a tax
increment financing district.
2012-
23
An ordinance amending the FY 2013 five year community investment program to provide funds for the
construction of the water storage facility (WS0202) and authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the
overall fiscal year 2013 budget for the water and sewerage fund.
2012-
24
An ordinance amending the FY 2013 five year community investment program to provide funds for the
design of the fire station relocation (PB0001) and authorizing a budget adjustment to increase in the
overall fiscal year 2013 budget for the local improvement fund.
2012-
25
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of an Illinois department of transportation grant and approving a
budget adjustment to increase the police department's FY 2013 budget.
2012-
26
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer funds into the planning services division's fiscal
year 2013 budget.
2012-
27
An ordinance accepting a vehicle seized by the police department and approving a budget adjustment to
increase the police department's FY 2013 budget.
2012-
28
An ordinance authorizing a fiscal year 2013 budget adjustment for the completion of the investigation
phase of the Cedar Lake dam drainage system.
2012-
36
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant through the Illinois emergency management agency
(IEMA) and approving a budget adjustment to the FY 2013 budget.
2012-
37
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment to create the special tax allocation #2 fund and to transfer
funds from the special tax allocation fund (TIF district #1) to the new fund.
2012-
39
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer funds into the building and neighborhood
services and maintenance and environmental services fiscal year 2013 budget.
2012-
41
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY 2013 police department contingency
account.
2012-
42
An ordinance authorizing the addition of justice assistance grant to the police department FY 2013
budget.
2012-
45
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois and the police
telecommunicators of the Illinois state Fraternal Order Of Police Labor Council for fiscal years 2013, 2014
and 2015.
2012-
47
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Illinois setting the public hearing date for a proposed
redevelopment project area (Illinois-University corridor TIF #2), and related matters.
2012-
50
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2013 general fund
budget to purchase a fuel management system.
2012-
51
An ordinance accepting an ILEAS vehicle and approving a budget adjustment to increase the police
department's FY2013 budget.
2012-
52
An ordinance authorizing the extension of the downtown special service area number one.
2013-
07
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2013 budget for city
property insurance claims.
2013-
16
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2013.
2013-
17
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2014.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 888/923
2013-
18
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2014.
2013-
26
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2013-
28
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2014 budget for city
property insurance claims.
2013-
29
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer funds into the building and neighborhood
services division's fiscal year 2014 budget and declaring vehicles surplus property.
2013-
34
An ordinance adjusting the fiscal year 2014 budget for the 2013 G.O. refunding bonds to refinance the
2003 G.O. bonds, the IEPA loan for the SEWWTP and provide funding for CIP ST8705 - Schwartz Street
improvements.
2013-
35
An ordinance amending the FY 2014 five-year community investment program for the Schwartz Street
reconstruction (ST8705).
2013-
36
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment and award of personal protective equipment.
2013-
37
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale and Local No. 160 of the United
Association Of Journeymen And Apprentices Of The Plumbing And Pipe Fitting Industry Of The United
States And Canada, AFL-CIO.
2013-
43
An ordinance amending the FY 2014 five-year community investment program to provide additional funds
for the construction of the water storage facility (WS0202) and authorizing a budget adjustment to
increase the overall fiscal year 2014 budget for the water and sewerage fund.
2013-
44
An ordinance amending the FY 2014 five-year community investment program to provide additional funds
for the construction of the fire station relocation (PB0001) and authorizing a budget adjustment to
increase in the overall fiscal year 2014 budget for the local improvement fund.
2013-
46
An ordinance authorizing the addition of justice assistance grant to the police department's FY 2014
budget.
2013-
50
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment transferring funds into the building and neighborhood
services' fiscal year 2014 budget for the purchase of a new vehicle.
2013-
51
An ordinance authorizing the addition of a VAWA grant to the FY 2014 police department budget.
2013-
52
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY 2014 police department contingency
account.
2013-
55
An ordinance extending the cable television franchise agreement of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2013-
56
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the FY14 budget and award of purchase of a
pumper truck and rescue vehicle for the fire department.
2013-
59
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the FY14 budget, award the purchase of a
hybrid utility vehicle and declare city owned property as surplus.
2013-
68
An ordinance addressing the expired cable television franchise agreement of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois.
2014-
05
An ordinance accepting a vehicle seized by the police department and approving a budget adjustment to
increase the police department's FY2014 budget.
2014-
07
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall FY2014 budget to purchase a
mower for cemetery operations.
2014-
08
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer funds into the planning services division's fiscal
year 2014 budget.
2014- An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant from the Illinois department of transportation and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 889/923
12 approving a budget adjustment to increase the police department's FY2014 budget.
2014-
15
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2014 budget for
departmental overages.
2014-
16
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment to increase the police department's FY2014 budget for
IDOT grant funded initiatives.
2014-
17
An ordinance accepting an explosive ordnance disposal vehicle from the Illinois secretary of state and
approving a budget adjustment to increase the police department's FY2014 budget.
2014-
18
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2015.
2014-
19
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2015.
2014-
20
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for nonbargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2015.
2014-
23
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant from the Illinois public risk fund and approving a budget
adjustment to increase the fire department's FY2015 budget.
2014-
24
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2014-
25
An ordinance amending the FY 2015 five-year community investment program to provide additional funds
for reconstruction of Schwartz Street between Oakland Avenue and Eason Drive (ST8705) and
authorizing a budget adjustment to increase in the overall fiscal year 2015 budget for the local
improvement fund.
2014-
27
An ordinance accepting an ILEAS vehicle and approving a budget adjustment to increase the police
department's FY2015 budget.
2014-
30
An ordinance granting to the Egyptian Electric Cooperative Association, its lessees, successors and
assigns, certain rights in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2014-
33
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the Fraternal Order
Of Police Lodge #192 and the Illinois state Fraternal Order Of Police Labor Council for fiscal years 2015,
2016, and 2017.
2014-
35
An ordinance amending the FY 2015 five-year community investment program to provide funds for the
construction of Miller Court Phase II (ST1506) and authorizing a budget adjustment to increase in the
overall fiscal year 2015 budget for the local improvement fund.
2014-
36
An ordinance authorizing the addition of a justice assistance grant to the police department's FY2015
budget.
2014-
37
An ordinance amending the FY 2015 five-year community investment program to provide funds for the
water storage facility phase II project (WS0202) and the Miller Court watermain extension (WS1504) and
authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2015 budget for the water and
sewerage fund.
2014-
38
An ordinance amending the FY 2015 five-year community investment program to provide funds for the fire
station relocation project (PB0001) and authorizing a budget adjustment to increase in the overall fiscal
year 2015 budget for the local improvement fund.
2014-
44
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY2015 police department contingency
account.
2014-
51
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into the first addendum to the mutual aid box alarm
system intergovernmental agreement.
2015-
6
Ordinance adjusting the FY2015 budget for the 2015 general obligation refunding bonds and amending
the FY2015 budget for the 2010 general obligation public safety bonds interest rebate.
2015-
11
An ordinance establishing a foreign fire insurance fund and approving a budget adjustment providing
funds for purchases for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the city of Carbondale fire department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 890/923
2015-
16
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2015 budget for fund
overages.
2015-
19
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2016.
2015-
20
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2016.
2015-
21
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for non-bargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2016.
2015-
23
An ordinance adopting a prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed in
public works as certified by the Illinois department of labor.
2015-
26
An ordinance amending the FY2016 five-year community investment program to include the NWWWTP
clarifer project (WW1004), to provide additional funds for various construction projects that were not
completed during FY2015 and to authorize a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2016
budget for the water and sewerage fund.
2015-
28
Award of purchase of vehicles for the police department and ordinance approving a budget adjustment to
increase the police department's FY2016 budget.
2015-
31
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant from the U.S. department of homeland security and
approving a budget adjustment to increase the fire department's FY2016 budget.
2015-
36
An ordinance amending the FY2016 five-year community investment program to provide additional funds
for the construction of PK0701 and to authorize a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year
2016 budget for the parking system operations fund and solid waste management fund.
2015-
40
An ordinance amending the FY2016 budget to provide funds for the purchase of a backhoe tractor-loader
and authorizing a budget adjustment to increase in the overall fiscal year 2016 budget for the general
fund.
2015-
41
Award of purchase of a replacement vehicle for the police department and ordinance approving a budget
adjustment to increase the police department's FY2016 budget.
2015-
42
An ordinance authorizing the addition of a justice assistance grant to the police department's FY2016
budget.
2015-
44
An ordinance amending the FY2016 budget to provide funds for the purchase of cemetery property and
authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2016 budget.
2016-
01
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and Local Union No.
1961 of the International Association Of Fire Fighters AFL-CIO, CLC.
2016-
04
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and General
Teamsters, Automotive, Petroleum And Allied Trades Local Union No. 50 affiliated with the International
Brotherhood Of Teamsters.
2016-
05
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the FY16 budget.
2016-
06
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the FY16 budget.
2016-
07
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer the FY16 budget authorization for an IPRF
grant.
2016-
08
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY2016 police department contingency
account.
2016-
09
An ordinance amending the FY2016 five-year community investment program (CIP) to include additional
projects.
2016-
11
An ordinance accepting a vehicle seized by the police department and approving a budget adjustment to
increase the police department's FY2016 budget.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 891/923
2016-
14
An ordinance authorizing budget adjustments to increase the overall fiscal year 2016 budget for fund and
division overages.
2016-
17
An ordinance accepting the 1936 Diamond-T fire truck and budget adjustment increasing the foreign fire
insurance fund's FY2016 budget.
2016-
18
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the Illinois FOP
labor council for police patrolmen.
2016-
20
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the city of Carbondale, Illinois, and the Illinois FOP
labor council for police telecommunicators.
2016-
21
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the City of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2017.
2016-
22
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2017.
2016-
23
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for non-bargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2017.
2016-
24
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois Department of Labor.
2016-
27
An ordinance establishing a Curb Appeal Assistance Program in the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
2016-
28
An ordinance establishing a Down Payment Assistance Program in the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
2016-
29
An ordinance amending the Single Family Housing Conversion Program for the purpose of increasing
owner occupancy in the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
2016-
30
An ordinance establishing a Downtown Upper-Story Conversion Program in the City of Carbondale,
Illinois.
2016-
38
An ordinance authorizing the addition of a justice assistance grant to the Police Department's FY2017
budget.
2016-
39
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the Fire Department's FY2017 budget.
2016-
40
An ordinance amending the FY2017 Five-Year Community Investment Program (CIP) to include additional
projects.
2016-
46
An ordinance amending non-bargaining unit employee personnel rules and regulations.
2016-
50
An ordinance amending the FY2017 budget to provide funds for the relocation of overhead utilities and
authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2017 budget for the General Fund and
TIF #2.
2016-
52
Award of purchase of vehicles for the Police Department and ordinance approving a budget adjustment to
increase the Police Department's FY2017 budget.
2016-
53
An ordinance amending the Curb Appeal Assistance Program in the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
2016-
54
An ordinance amending the Down Payment Assistance Program in the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
2016-
57
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the FY2017 budget.
2016-
60
Award of purchase of vehicles for the Police Department and ordinance approving a budget adjustment to
increase the Police Department's FY2017 budget.
2016- An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer funds into the community investment division's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 892/923
61 fiscal year 2017 budget.
2017-
01
An ordinance increasing the FY2017 Five-Year Community Investment Program (CIP) budget to provide
funds for the relocation of overhead utilities for the South Illinois Avenue streetscape project (SP0904).
2017-
07
An ordinance authorizing a budget transfer from Information Services Division to Support Services
Division.
2017-
12
An ordinance authorizing acceptance of a grant from the Illinois Public Risk Fund and approving a budget
adjustment to increase the Fire Department's FY2017 budget.
2017-
14
An ordinance accepting a vehicle seized by the Police Department and approving a budget adjustment to
increase the Police Department's FY2017 budget.
2017-
18
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the City of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2018.
2017-
19
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2018.
2017-
20
An ordinance adopting a pay plan for non-bargaining unit employees for fiscal year ending April 30, 2018.
2017-
22
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages of laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois Department of Labor.
2017-
25
An ordinance accepting an ILEAS explosive ordnance disposal unit robot by the Police Department and
approving a budget adjustment to increase the Police Department's FY2018 budget.
2017-
26
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the City of Carbondale, Illinois and Local No. 160
United States Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipefitting Industry of the
United States and Canada, AFL-CIO.
2017-
34
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to fiscal year 2018 General Fund and Water & Sewer Fund
budgets to provide for repairs to equipment caused by the April 28 through 29 storms.
2017-
35
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the Fire Department's fiscal year 2018 budget
to accept a grant from FM Global.
2017-
43
An ordinance authorizing the addition of a justice assistance grant to the Police Department's FY2018
budget.
2017-
44
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment across various City divisions to mitigate reductions in State
revenues for FY 2018.
2017-
46
An ordinance authorizing the extension of the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
2018-
01
An ordinance amending non-bargaining unit employee personnel rules and regulations.
2018-
07
Award of purchase of vehicles for the Police Department and ordinance approving a budget adjustment to
increase the Police Department's FY2018 budget.
2018-
08
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the FY2018 budget.
2018-
09
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment establishing the FY2018 Police Department contingency
account.
2018-
10
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer ILEAS funds from the intergrovernmental
revenues-police grant account to the police protection-employee overtime account for FY18 budget.
2018-
12
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the City of Carbondale, Illinois, for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2019.
2018-
13
An ordinance adopting the operating budget for the Carbondale Public Library for the fiscal year ending
April 30, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 893/923
2018-
14
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the City of Carbondale, Illinois, and Local Union No.
1961 of the International Association of Fire Fighters AFL-CIO, CLC.
2018-
15
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the City of Carbondale, Illinois and the Fraternal Order
of Police Lodge #192 and the Illinois State Fraternal Order of Police Labor Council.
2018-
19
Award of purchase of vehicles for the Police Department and ordinance approving a budget adjustment to
increase the Police Department's FY2019 budget.
2018-
20
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the City Clerk's FY2019 budget for Memorial
Day expenses.
2018-
23
An ordinance adopting the prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics, and other workers employed
in public works as certified by the Illinois Department of Labor.
2018-
30
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the Civic Center City Hall Division's budget for
additional advertising costs.
2018-
31
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the Support Services Division budget for costs
related to the 2018 Carbondale Halloween celebration.
2018-
32
An ordinance authorizing the addition of a justice assistance grant to the Police Department's FY2019
budget.
2018-
33
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment to increase the Police Department's FY budget and
declaring City owned personal property surplus.
2018-
36
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for an increase in the overall fiscal year 2019 budget to
provide funds to establish a natural burial area in Oakland Cemetery.
2018-
38
An ordinance authorizing the addition of the assistance to firefighters grant to the Fire Department's
FY2019 budget.
2018-
39
An ordinance adopting a labor agreement between the City of Carbondale, Illinois and the Fraternal Order
of Police Lodge #192 (police telecommunicators) and the Illinois State Fraternal Order of Police Labor
Council.
2018-
40
An ordinance amending the FY2019 Five-Year Community Investment Program (CIP) to include additional
projects.
2018-
41
An ordinance approving a budget adjustment to increase the FY 2019 support services budget for the
Downtown Facade Improvement Loan Program.
2019-
01
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2019 budget for the Local
Improvement Fund to provide funding for the City Hall RTU replacement project (PB1901).
APPENDIX D: LAND, BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
Ord.
No.
Subject
94-41
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a contract for sale of land to Dexter Johnson (part of lots 34
and 35 in J.W. Crandell's subdivision of outlot 1 and the east half of outlot 2).
94-42
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (auto sampler
attachment).
94-45
An ordinance designating Town Square Pavilion as a landmark and setting forth the design standards
therefor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 894/923
94-47
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (1971 Massey
Ferguson tractor and front loader).
94-61
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (pickup and street
sweeper).
94-63
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (pavement roller).
94-80
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (2 pickup trucks).
94-84
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (2 exercise
treadmills).
95-01
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (4 cars).
95-23
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a contract for sale of land to Everette E. Thornton, Jr. and
Gwendolyn Thornton (part of lots 7 and 8 in Wierwille's subdivision of the south 338 feet of the east half of
10 acre lot 1).
95-40
An ordinance of the city council of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, authorizing the sale of land in the
Bicentennial Industrial Park to Beck Bus Transportation Corporation.
95-47
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (washers, dryers,
radios, and copy machines).
95-50
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a right of way grant to Central Illinois Public Company in
Bicentennial Industrial Park for Beck Bus Service.
95-51
An ordinance designating the George Washington Smith/Whitlock Home at 605 West Walnut as a
landmark and setting forth the design standards therefor.
95-61
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (1976 Kubota lawn
tractor).
95-68
An ordinance declaring certain public real estate to be surplus and authorizing the sale of said real
property (part of lot 27 in Frank Sumner's subdivision).
95-69
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (1977 Mack class A
pumper).
95-72
An ordinance authorizing the sale of parcel L-11 to Sharon Hampton.
95-75
An ordinance authorizing the purchase of real property by the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for public
purposes (47,400 square feet lying between Amtrack Station and East College Street, abutting the west
side of the Illinois Central Railroad tracks).
95-90
An ordinance declaring certain public real estate to be surplus and authorizing the sale of said real estate
(all of that part of lot 1 in Frank Sumner's subdivision of outlots 78 and 80).
95-96
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a contract for sale of land to the Carbondale Muslim Center,
Inc. (4 parcels situated in and a part of outlot 90).
95-97
An ordinance authorizing the sale of parcel F to Clifford and Flossie Bell.
95-99
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (1986 Ford
Tempo).
95-
102
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (4 automobiles).
95-
111
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (various office
equipment).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 895/923
95-
113
An ordinance to make a technical correction to the Jackson County enterprise zone (amends section VI(b)
of ordinance 89-125).
95-
114
An ordinance to limit incentives to the Jackson County enterprise zone (amends section VI of ordinance
89-25 by adding subsection g).
95-
115
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (lots 1, 2, and 3 in block 20 in the
original town, now the city of Murphysboro, Illinois).
95-
117
An ordinance declaring certain public real estate to be surplus and authorizing the sale of said real estate
(outlot A in second addition to Oakland Manor).
95-
119
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (2 automobiles).
96-01
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a contract for sale of land to W.B.Sr., Inc. (part of lots 10, 11, 12
and a part of a 16 foot wide platted alley [now vacated] lying south of said lots 10 and 12 and also a part
of a 16 foot wide platted alley [now vacated] lying between lots 10, 11, and 12, all in S.W. Dunaway's
subdivision of outlots 150 and 151).
96-04
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (power wagon and
Dodge with utility body).
96-09
An ordinance to declare surplus personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (1984 Chevy
Blazer).
96-15
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (miscellaneous
equipment).
96-33
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (numerous radio
items).
96-37
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an easement to south highway water district (for land adjacent
to Cedar Lake pump station being developed by Egon Kamarasy).
96-45
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (2 dump trucks).
96-48
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (strip linking Oakland Avenue/West
Main Street _ Walnut Street Area; Oakland Avenue/West Main Street _ West Walnut Street).
96-49
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (Giant City Road/Highway Route 13).
96-50
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (Dillinger Road/McRoy Drive).
96-51
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (0.589 acres in the city of
Murphysboro).
96-55
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (boat, motors and
trailer).
96-64
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a contract for sale of land to Pamela J. Anderson (situated in
and a part of outlot 90).
96-69
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (tractor with
mower).
96-73
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (2 portable radios).
96-78
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (Xerox 5320
copier).
97-30
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (4 vehicles).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 896/923
97-54
An ordinance authorizing execution of the sale of former council chambers to Carbondale Elementary
School District #95.
97-68
An ordinance of the city council of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, waiving the right of reentry onto certain
property located in the Bicentennial Industrial Park to Carbondale Business Development.
97-69
An ordinance declaring real and certain personal property surplus and authorizing the solicitation of
sealed bids for the sale of the property (old water plant, 1001 South Wall).
97-
108
An ordinance authorizing the purchase of real property by the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for public
purposes (between Old Illinois Central Railroad Depot and East Walnut Street and the Amtrack Station
and East Walnut Street).
97-
111
An ordinance authorizing a third amendment to contract for sale with J.C. Smith Construction (extension
of construction commencement and completion dates).
97-
113
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a contract for sale of land with James and Shirley Cooper
(situated in and a part of lots 6 and 7 in Wierwille's subdivision of the south 338 feet of the east 1/2 of 10
acre lot 1).
97-
114
An ordinance authorizing an amendment to contract for sale of land with the Carbondale Muslim Center
(extension of the construction commencement and completion dates).
97-
120
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (tractor/loaders).
97-
121
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (airpack breathing
apparatus).
97-
122
An ordinance authorizing execution of the conveyance of certain property to Carolyn F. Donow trust as
part of the Mill Street underpass project.
97-
130
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (pistols, shotguns,
and airpacks).
97-
131
An ordinance declaring real property surplus and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed to
convey said surplus property to the Carbondale Business Development Corporation (CBDC) (property
located in the Carbondale Industrial Park to be transferred to Com Pac International).
97-
137
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (1.327 acre parcel commonly known
as Vic Koeing Chevrolet at 1040 East Main Street).
97-
138
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (lot 12 and the east 27.5 feet of lot
11, all in block 2 of Julia M. Bridge's subdivision of outlots 36 and 43).
97-
139
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (lot 1 in Eastgate Park).
97-
143
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (mowing tractor,
snow blade for tractor and blueprint machine).
97-
153
An ordinance to declare certain personal property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (miscellaneous
office equipment).
97-
155
An ordinance to declare certain property of the city of Carbondale as surplus (miscellaneous office
equipment and computers from the Fairmont Building [609 E. College Street] and the Edgemont Building
[611 E. College Street]).
98-05
An ordinance authorizing the sale of certain real estate by bidding process (2 parcels located in J.W.
Crandell's subdivision consisting of parts of lots 14, 15, 32, 33, and 34).
98-09
An ordinance authorizing the sale of certain real estate by bidding process (lot 4 in J.L. Park's subdivision
of outlot 130 and the north part of outlot 129).
98-16
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (commercial area known as "the
island").
98-44 An ordinance authorizing a second amendment to the contract for sale of land with the Carbondale
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 897/923
Muslim Center (property located at 530 North Wall Street).
98-56
An ordinance authorizing execution of the conveyance of certain property to Z, Inc., as part of the Mill
Street underpass project (portion of the Illinois Central Railroad Company's original 200 foot wide Chicago
to Chairo, Illinois Main Line right of way).
99-04
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a ninety nine (99) year lease agreement with
Chang Ho Kim and Hai Ja Kim.
99-28
An ordinance authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of certain real
property to the Illinois department of transportation for improvement of FAP Route 322 (U.S. Route 51)
(7.402 acres located south of the Carbondale reservoir for the new Route 51 alignment).
99-37
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (situated in and a part of outlot 27).
99-38
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (northwest corner of Old Highway 13
and Reeds Station).
99-42
An ordinance rescinding bid award and authorizing the sale of certain real estate (30-24I, 240 East Oak
Street).
99-43
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a 50 year lease with Carbondale Community High
School for 20 acres located within superblock.
99-54
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract for sale with southern Illinois regional
social services for property located at 609 and 611 East College (old city hall site) and authorizing the
mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of such property.
99-72
An ordinance designating the Winters House at 512 West Oak Street as a landmark and setting forth the
design standards therefor.
99-73
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (5 acres west of Reeds Station).
99-74
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (lot 6 of block 2 of the W. F. Harris
and M. C. Naylor's addition to the city of Murphysboro).
2000-
03
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (43.60 acres linking Murphysboro
enterprise zone to Ameren _ CIPS).
2000-
20
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to acquire property and easements necessary for the
construction and maintenance of the New Era Road project (CIP ST9502) (Route 13 to Glenn Road).
2000-
21
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to acquire property and easements necessary for the
construction and maintenance of the East Green Street project (CIP ST9501) (from Washington Street to
Robert A. Stalls Avenue).
2000-
26
An ordinance authorizing the exchange of city owned real estate with Nettie B. Hayes-Morgan for East
Green Street project improvement.
2000-
36
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Beck Bus Transportation
Corporation for sale of real property in the Bicentennial industrial park and authorizing the mayor to
execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of such property.
2000-
48
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with James L. Rowe and Julia R. Rowe
for sale of real property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of such
property (parcel commonly known as 307 East Green Street).
2000-
49
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (Max Development subdivision on
Sweets Drive).
2001-
18
An ordinance authorizing a land transaction between the Illinois Central Railroad and the city of
Carbondale and authorizing the city manager to execute a contract for sale of land with adjoining owner
(tracts 53-3, 53-4, and 53-5).
2001-
36
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (3 parcels totaling 60.909 acres on
the northeast corner of Old Highway 13 and Reed Station).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 898/923
2001-
37
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (39.7 acres between Grand Avenue,
U.S. Route 51, Pleasant Hill Road, and the Canadian National/Illinois Central Mainline track right of way).
2001-
40
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with George Ernest Foree for the sale of
real property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property
(parcel commonly known as 210 East Green Street).
2001-
56
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (2.01 acres at the intersection of U.S.
Route 51 and Ready Mix).
2001-
57
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (between Sweets Drive and Sanpat).
2002-
06
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute an amendment to contract for sale of land with H&H
Investments.
2002-
07
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with O'Reilly Auto Parts for sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of such property.
2002-
11
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a lease agreement with Carbondale park district
for maintenance of the superblock.
2002-
18
An ordinance granting a permanent easement to the board of education of Carbondale Elementary
School District #95.
2002-
19
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a lease agreement with Carbondale park district
for maintenance of the superblock.
2002-
36
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Jackson-Union County Habitat for
Humanity for the sale of real property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the
conveyance of the property.
2002-
56
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Venegoni Horrell Distributing
Company, LLC for sale of real property for industrial development and authorizing the mayor to execute a
quitclaim for the conveyance of such property.
2002-
57
An ordinance authorizing the sale of certain real estate by bidding process (vacant lots in northeast
neighborhood).
2002-
62
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprize zone (12.4 acres for Reed Station
Business Park).
2002-
63
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (50 acres for proposed Grassroots
Baseball, Inc.).
2002-
71
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with TET IV, Limited Liability Corporation
for sale of real property in the BI-Centennial Industrial Park and authorizing the mayor to execute a
quitclaim deed for the conveyance of such property.
2002-
76
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a letter of understanding with the Illinois
department of transportation for the exchange of real property in regard to the improvements to U.S.
Route 51 in Jackson County and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed and accept a
quitclaim deed for the conveyance/exchange of real property.
2002-
77
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Carlton Smith for the sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property.
2002-
78
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Anitha Perez for the sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property.
2002-
79
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Carlton Smith for the sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property.
2002-
80
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Alpha South Construction for the
sale of real property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the
property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 899/923
2002-
81
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Carlton Smith for the sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property.
2002-
82
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Karen Anderson for the sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property.
2002-
83
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Jason Spearman for the sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property.
2002-
84
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Alpha South Construction for the
sale of real property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the
property.
2002-
99
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a lease agreement with Mediacom for property in
Carbondale, Illinois.
2002-
102
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with All Electric Services, Inc., for sale of
real property in the Bicentennial industrial park and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for
the conveyance of such property.
2002-
104
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Carbondale Muslim Center for the
sale of real property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the
property.
2003-
01
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Adams Printing Company for sale of
real property in the Bicentennial industrial park and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for
the conveyance of such property.
2003-
05
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Carlton Smith for the sale of real
property and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the conveyance of the property (611
N. Robert A. Stalls Avenue).
2003-
17
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a contract for the purchase of real property
(Lincoln Middle School) and authorizing the mayor to accept a deed which conveys said property to the
city of Carbondale.
2003-
22
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a lease with Eric Shields and Aaron Thompson
d/b/a TNT Farms for farming rights.
2003-
25
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Francis W. Adams for sale of real
property in the Bicentennial industrial park and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the
conveyance of such property.
2003-
53
An ordinance authorizing the conveyance of real property to the Carbondale Community Teen Center, Inc.
2003-
54
An ordinance designating the Dunaway block at 102-106 East Jackson Street as a landmark district and
setting forth the design standards therefor.
2003-
62
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2004 budget for
purchase of real property located at 805 South Illinois Avenue, Carbondale, Illinois.
2003-
70
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone (10.25 acres on East Main Street).
2004-
04
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2004 budget for
the purchase of the real estate located at 518 South Illinois Avenue.
2004-
29
An ordinance authorizing the city of Carbondale to acquire certain property located within the tax
increment financing district and the enterprise zone through the use of eminent domain.
2004-
34
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a contract for the sale of real property with Jacobs
Mechanical Services, Inc., and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed.
2004-
58
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Gary Martin and Bob Rolando for
sale of real property in the Bicentennial industrial park and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim
deed for the conveyance of such property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 900/923
2004-
67
An ordinance authorizing the purchase of real property by the city of Carbondale, Illinois, for public
purposes and authorizing the mayor to accept a deed conveying approximately 16,830 square feet lying
between East Walnut Street and the south right of way line of the platted East Monroe Street which abuts
the east side of the Illinois Central Railroad tracks to the city of Carbondale.
2004-
80
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with SCN Properties, LLC for sale of real
property located along Reed Station Road and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the
conveyance of such property.
2004-
82
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone.
2004-
83
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone.
2005-
06
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to acquire property for the Reed Station Road project (CIP
ST0107).
2005-
24
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Timothy and Karen Houseman for
sale of real property in the Bicentennial industrial park and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim
deed for the conveyance of such property.
2005-
45
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Gary Martin and Bob Rolando for
sale of real property in the Bicentennial industrial park and authorizing the mayor to execute a quitclaim
deed for the conveyance of such property.
2005-
49
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County enterprise zone.
2006-
21
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County-Carbondale-Murphysboro enterprise zone (Southern
Illinois Healthcare).
2006-
22
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County-Carbondale-Murphysboro enterprise zone (University
Place Improvements, LP).
2006-
23
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County-Carbondale-Murphysboro enterprise zone (First
Corner, LLC).
2006-
60
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County-Carbondale-Murphysboro enterprise zone (Richard
Parrish).
2006-
61
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County-Carbondale-Murphysboro enterprise zone (Franks',
LLC).
2007-
02
An ordinance designating the Tuscan Lodge at 201 North Washington Street as a landmark district and
setting forth the design standards therefor.
2007-
03
An ordinance designating the Shelton House at 601 West Oak Street as a landmark district and setting
forth the design standards therefor.
2007-
16
An ordinance to correct ordinance 2006-21; Jackson County-Carbondale-Murphysboro enterprise zone
(SIH-Prairie Heart Institute).
2007-
27
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County-Murphysboro-Carbondale enterprise zone (city of
Carbondale).
2007-
28
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County-Murphysboro-Carbondale enterprise zone (city of
Murphysboro).
2007-
29
An ordinance to extend the term of the Jackson County-Murphysboro-Carbondale enterprise zone (city of
Carbondale).
2007-
37
An ordinance changing the status of an annexed area owned by C. David Ponce-Campos and Beth A.
Ponce to allow thereon the sale of alcoholic liquor.
2008-
02
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to acquire property for the Reed Station Road reconstruction
project.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 901/923
2008-
11
An ordinance designating the Train Inn at 406 East Stoker Street as a landmark district and setting forth
the design standards therefor.
2008-
29
An ordinance authorizing the transfer of certain real estate to Intertape Polymer Corporation, a Delaware
Corporation, doing business in Carbondale, Illinois.
2008-
45
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a land use permit to American Campus Communities Operating
Partnership LP.
2008-
46
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County- Murphysboro-Carbondale enterprise zone (city of
Carbondale).
2008-
47
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County- Murphysboro-Carbondale enterprise zone (city of
Murphysboro).
2008-
50
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a lease with Eric Shields for farming rights.
2008-
52
An ordinance accepting frontage road located in the Sunny Acres North 2nd plat.
2009-
11
An ordinance authorizing the filing of condemnation actions to obtain real estate for Reed Station Road
corridor widening project.
2009-
36
An ordinance to declare certain property of the city of Carbondale as surplus and to allow for the sale of
said property.
2009-
41
An ordinance designating the Hickory Lodge at 1115 West Sycamore Street as a landmark district and
setting forth the design standards therefor.
2009-
51
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract for the sale of real property and
authorizing the mayor to execute a deed for the conveyance of such property.
2009-
52
An ordinance designating the Varsity Center for the Arts at 418 South Illinois Avenue as a landmark
district and setting forth the design standards therefor.
2010-
05
An ordinance changing the status of an annexed area owned by Wayne Qualls to allow thereon the sale
of alcoholic liquor.
2011-
38
An ordinance changing the status of three properties within the Carbondale city limits to allow thereon the
sale of alcoholic liquor.
2011-
44
An ordinance authorizing the mayor to execute a deed transferring real property.
2011-
45
An ordinance authorizing the mayor to execute a deed transferring real property.
2011-
58
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2012 northwest
wastewater treatment plant and lift station budgets due to the equipment shed fire.
2011-
59
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to increase the overall fiscal year 2012 northwest
wastewater treatment plant and lift station budgets due to the equipment shed fire.
2012-
33
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract for the sale of real property.
2012-
46
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into an economic development agreement with
Intertape Polymer Corp., and the mayor to execute a deed transferring real property.
2012-
48
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Illinois setting the public hearing date for a proposed
redevelopment project area (Oakland-Sycamore TIF #3), and related matters.
2012-
53
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into a lease with Common Greens, Inc. and
authorizing the mayor to execute a deed with Common Greens, Inc.
2013-
6
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer funds into the Building and Neighborhood
Services Division's fiscal year 2013 budget and declaring vehicles surplus property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 902/923
2013-
8
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment and award of purchase of outdoor warning siren.
2013-
39
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract with Jackson-Union County Habitat for
Humanity for the transfer of real property and authorizing the Mayor to execute a quitclaim deed for the
conveyance of the property.
2013-
41
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the sale of real property.
2013-
53
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a lease with Eric Shields for farming rights.
2014-
04
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the sale of real property.
2014-
13
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the sale of land and the Acting Mayor
to execute a deed to RD Mgmt., LLC, for Lot 4B in the Bicentennial Industrial Park in the amount of
$27,630.00.
2014-
26
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to transfer funds into the Municipal Rental Properties
Division's fiscal year 2015 budget and authorizing the City Manager to enter into a contract to purchase
real estate located at 207-211 West Willow Street.
2014-
40
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County - Murphysboro - Carbondale Enterprise Zone (City of
Carbondale).
2014-
41
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County - Murphysboro - Carbondale Enterprise Zone (City of
Carbondale).
2014-
42
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County - Murphysboro - Carbondale Enterprise Zone (City of
Carbondale).
2014-
47
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the sale of land and the Acting Mayor
to execute a deed to SSST, LLC, for 518 South Illinois Avenue in the amount of $30,000.00.
2015-
14
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a revised contract for the sale of land to SSST,
LLC, for 518 South Illinois Avenue.
2015-
27
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the sale of land and the Mayor to
execute a deed to Sai Krishna, LLC, for property on the 200 block of West Elm Street in the amount of
$75,000.00.
2015-
37
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the sale of land and the Mayor to
execute a deed to Common Greens, Inc., for property located at 410 East Chestnut Street and 411 East
Birch Street.
2016-
16
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County - Murphysboro - Carbondale Enterprise Zone (City of
Carbondale).
2016-
19
An ordinance declaring City owned personal property as surplus.
2016-
32
An ordinance authorizing the Mayor to execute an exchange of real estate with Southern Illinois
University.
2016-
43
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment to purchase real estate known as Bleyer Football Field.
2017-
28
An ordinance to add territory to the Jackson County - Murphysboro - Carbondale Enterprise Zone (City of
Carbondale).
2018-
05
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a contract for the sale of land and the Mayor to
execute a deed to HIDK Land Trust/et al., for property on the 400 block of University Avenue in the
amount of $15,000.00.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 903/923
APPENDIX E: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Ord.
No.
Subject
86-63
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a lease agreement between the City of Carbondale and
General Telephone Company.
88-13
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a right of way grant to Central Illinois Public Service Company.
89-12
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a lease agreement with GTE Leasing Corporation.
90-29
An ordinance authorizing the execution of agreement with CIPS for the tree removal-replacement
program.
96-76
An ordinance vacating a portion of a utility easement in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (part of Lot 1 in
LVO Minor Subdivision).
2000-
09
An ordinance authorizing the abandonment of City water line easement across Georgetown Apartments
(2 parcels totaling 3.0 acres along Lewis Lane and Grand Avenue).
2000-
11
An ordinance authorizing the City Manager to execute a permanent utility easement to Ameren CIPS for
superblock development.
2000-
38
An ordinance authorizing the grant of a permanent utility easement to GTE North Incorporated for
communication lines across southeast wastewater treatment plant property.
2000-
56
An ordinance authorizing the grant of a permanent utility easement to Ameren CIPS for the superblock
development.
2001-
47
An ordinance authorizing the grant of a permanent utility easement to Ameren CIPS for relocation of the
electrical service to Parking Lot #4 south of Grand Avenue.
2003-
43
An ordinance authorizing the granting of a quitclaim easement to Murdale Water District to install a 6"
water main and appurtenances at Cedar Creek Lake.
2004-
08
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a right of way grant to Central Illinois Public Service Company
at southeast wastewater treatment plant.
2004-
20
An ordinance authorizing the granting of two (2) quitclaim easements to South Highway Water District to
install a booster pump station and appurtenances at the Carbondale water treatment plant located on
McLafferty Road.
2005-
68
An ordinance authorizing the vacation of a utility easement across lots on Greg Lane.
2007-
08
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a sewer easement grant to Olympic Industries, Inc.
2007-
34
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a temporary construction easement grant to EDR Carbondale
LLC.
2010-
18
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an easement to S.I. Wireless, LLC.
2010-
21
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a water easement release to Blackstone Group.
2011-
09
An ordinance authorizing the execution of an easement to South Highway Water District.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 904/923
2011-
23
An ordinance approving a right of way license agreement with Delta Communications, L.L.C.
2013-
54
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a permanent easement to Ameren Illinois Company for
electrical transmission lines crossing Cedar Lake property.
2016-
51
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a utility easement to Egyptian Electric Cooperative Association
for service lines to the City's raw water pumping station.
2018-
04
An ordinance authorizing the execution of a permanent easement to Ameren Illinois Company for natural
gas transmission lines crossing City property.
APPENDIX F: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Ord.
No.
Subject
90-09
Regulating encroachments on public right of way along Illinois Route 13.
90-10
Providing for the deletion of a portion of West Walnut Street from the Municipal street system.
92-72
An Ordinance changing the name of Iris Avenue to Glenview Drive.
93-25
An Ordinance regulating encroachment on East Park Street owned by the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
93-26
An Ordinance regulating parking on East Park Street within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
93-43
An Ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Pinecrest Land Trust No. 1.
93-46
An Ordinance regulating parking on Giant City Road within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
93-47
An Ordinance regulating parking on Hester Street within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
93-63
An Ordinance regulating parking along a portion of the 1000 Block of West Walnut Street and the 200
Block of South Brook Lane within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
95-22
An Ordinance restricting parking along East and West Oak Street within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
95-39
An Ordinance to regulate traffic, parking, and establishing stop signs upon a certain portion of West
Freeman Street within the City of Carbondale.
95-57
An Ordinance prohibiting parking on the south side of West Walnut Street from the center line of Brook
Lane to a point 265 feet east.
95-64
An Ordinance regulating parking on portions of Illinois Avenue.
95-66
An Ordinance creating one-way traffic on a portion of South Washington Avenue.
95-70 An Ordinance establishing a mid-block pedestrian crosswalk in the 2500 Block of Sunset Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 905/923
95-74
An Ordinance regulating parking at various street locations to accommodate Southern Illinois University
transit buses.
95-81
An Ordinance restricting parking in the north-south alley, west of Ash Street, between College and Cherry
Streets within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
95-87
An Ordinance providing for the jurisdictional transfer of Chautauqua Street to the Municipal street system
of Carbondale, Illinois.
95-
103
An Ordinance authorizing the closure of a portion of the north-south alley located immediately west of
South Illinois Avenue and situated between West Elm Street and the east-west alley immediately south of
West Walnut Street.
95-
118
An Ordinance prohibiting parking anytime along the east side of Friedline Drive and the north and south
sides of both east-west connectors of Friedline Drive with Dixon Street.
96-08
An Ordinance prohibiting parking along the south side of Rawlings Street between Mill Street and College
Street from the hours of 10:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M.
96-10
An Ordinance prohibiting parking along the east side of Rawlings Street between Mill Street and College
Street from the hours of 10:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M.
96-39
An Ordinance prohibiting parking anytime along both sides of Sunny Acres Road.
96-43
An Ordinance regulating parking on Pecan Street.
96-46
An Ordinance regulating parking on Friedline Drive.
96-56
An Ordinance changing the name of Barnes Street to Robert A. Stall Avenue.
96-58
An Ordinance reducing the speed limit from 30 miles per hour to 25 miles per hour on West Elm Street
from Poplar Street to Forest Street.
96-63
An Ordinance prohibiting parking on the east side of Logan Street from East College Street to East
Freeman Street.
96-66
An Ordinance prohibiting parking on Lincoln Avenue.
96-68
An Ordinance regulating parking on a portion of South McLafferty Road.
96-74
An Ordinance amending the regulation of encroachments on public right of way along Illinois Route 13.
96-77
An Ordinance regulating parking and loading on the south side of Monroe Street between University
Avenue and Illinois Avenue.
96-82
An Ordinance regulating parking on Brehm Lane.
97-28
An Ordinance regulating encroachment on public right of way in the City of Carbondale.
97-29
An Ordinance regulating parking along Mill Street, East Freeman Street, South Washington Street and
South/North Bound U.S. Route 51, for the Mill Street underpass project.
97-41
An Ordinance reducing the speed limit from 55 miles per hour to 35 miles per hour on Striegel Road
between Main Street (Illinois Route 13) and the west City limits.
97-53
An Ordinance regulating parking on Burton Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 906/923
97-67
An Ordinance providing for the jurisdictional transfer of Giant City Road to the Municipal street system of
Carbondale, Illinois.
97-95
An Ordinance regulating parking on a portion of South Ash Street.
97-96
An Ordinance regulating parking on North Illinois Avenue - Oak Street to Hickory Street.
97-
107
An Ordinance regulating parking along the north-south alley situated west of Beveridge Street between
Freeman and Cherry Streets.
97-
116
An Ordinance which regulates parking in the first east-west alley north of 300 East Main Street.
97-
125
An Ordinance regulating parking and requiring placement of "Resident Parking Only" signs upon certain
portions of East Campus Drive and West Linden Street within the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
97-
126
An Ordinance regulating truck traffic on Bleyer, Linden and Smith Streets.
97-
127
An Ordinance regulating traffic at the intersection of Linden and Smith Streets - all-way stop.
97-
146
An Ordinance designating a tow-a-way zone along the east side of Rawlings Street between Mill Street
and College Street between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
97-
151
An Ordinance establishing a no parking zone at the corner of Sunset and Glenview Drives.
97-
152
An Ordinance regulating residential parking permit areas within the City of Carbondale.
97-
157
An Ordinance regulating traffic on the east-west alley located south of Monroe street between Illinois and
University Avenues (City Hall/Civic Center parking lot).
98-12
An Ordinance establishing parking regulations along the north and south sides of West Oak Street
between North University Avenue and North Poplar Street in the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
98-14
An Ordinance designating certain portions of the 700, 800 and 900 Blocks of West Pecan Street within
the City of Carbondale, Illinois as "Residential Parking Only".
98-18
An ordinance regulating parking on South Poplar Street.
98-23
An ordinance changing the street names within Woodland Hills subdivision.
98-33
An ordinance regulating traffic at the intersection of North Giant City Road and East Main Street frontage
road south.
98-50
An ordinance designating the 900 and 1000 blocks of East Cindy Street within the city of Carbondale,
Illinois, as "Residential Parking Only".
98-51
An ordinance establishing "No Parking" upon certain portions of North Brush Street, East Chestnut Street,
North Robert A. Stalls Avenue, and East Ashley Street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
98-66
An ordinance regulating traffic on New Era Road between Streigel Road north to Charles Road.
99-09
An ordinance establishing "No Parking" upon West Murphysboro Road in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
99-12
An ordinance reducing the speed limit from 30 miles per hour to 25 miles per hour on South Dixon Street,
between Old West Main Street and West Freeman Street.
99-22
An ordinance establishing "No Parking" upon Striegel Road in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 907/923
99-26
An ordinance changing the names of Twinbrook Boulevard and Ridgeview Drive to Pinewood Drive.
99-34
An ordinance regulating parking in an alley between 509 and 511 South Ash Street.
99-45
An ordinance regulating parking along both sides of East Grand Avenue from South Lewis Lane east to
South Giant City Road.
99-46
An ordinance regulating traffic on West Willow Street requiring northbound traffic to stop at its intersection
with West Laurel Street (1000 block).
99-47
An ordinance regulating traffic on Hunter Woods Drive requiring eastbound traffic to stop at its intersection
with Laurel Street.
99-55
An ordinance prohibiting parking in the 500 block of South Illinois Avenue between the hours of 12:00
A.M. and 7:00 A.M.
99-64
An ordinance establishing a three-way stop at the intersection of South Dixon Avenue and West Walnut
Street within the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2000-
10
An ordinance regulating parking in the 800 block of West Grand Avenue.
2000-
35
An ordinance repealing a portion of ordinance 80-103 which established a stop sign for southbound traffic
on South Oakland Avenue at its intersection with West Freeman Street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2000-
39
An ordinance naming the Mill Street underpass diagonal street between South Illinois Avenue and South
Marion Street and renaming East Freeman Street to East Mill Street between South Marion Street and
South Wall Street.
2001-
06
An ordinance establishing "No Parking" upon Reed Station Road in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2001-
09
An ordinance reopening a portion of West Chestnut Street to traffic, vacating easement, and revoking an
encroachment permit.
2001-
10
An ordinance establishing a portion of West Chestnut Street as a westbound one-way street.
2001-
13
An ordinance repealing "No Parking" along north side of East Freeman Street.
2001-
35
An ordinance prohibiting parking on the east side of South Oakland Avenue between West Walnut Street
and West Mill Street within the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2001-
48
An ordinance establishing stop signs on West Sycamore Street at North University Avenue and North
Illinois Avenue in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2001-
49
An ordinance establishing "no parking" on West Sycamore Street between North University and North
Illinois Avenue in the city of Carbondale.
2001-
58
An ordinance establishing "no parking" on West Ramada Lane in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2002-
03
An ordinance regulating parking on the west side of Brehm Avenue in the city of Carbondale.
2002-
67
An ordinance authorizing parking in the 500 block of South Illinois Avenue between the hours of 12:00
A.M. and 3:00 A.M.
2003-
16
An ordinance changing the name of East Green Street to James And Thelma Walker Avenue.
2003-
49
An ordinance establishing the maximum speed limit on West Lake Road within the city of Carbondale,
Illinois.
2003- An ordinance to provide for two-way traffic on West High Street and establishing a stop sign at the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 908/923
55 intersection of West High Street and North Springer Street within the city of Carbondale.
2003-
60
An ordinance repealing ordinance 75-93 and providing for right turn on red for northbound traffic on South
Washington Street at East Walnut Street.
2004-
06
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2004 budget for
the upgrade of certain traffic signals to LED lighted traffic signals.
2004-
18
An ordinance adopting a revised bikeway network map, as provided in subsection 18-14-14A of the
revised code of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2004-
71
An ordinance prohibiting parking at all times along the west side of the one hundred and two hundred
blocks of Parrish Lane and to amend ordinance 73-17.
2004-
77
An ordinance authorizing the placement of pedestrian crosswalks upon South Wall Street within the city of
Carbondale, Illinois.
2005-
08
An ordinance changing the name Imperium Place to Kira Court.
2005-
12
An ordinance establishing stop signs within the city of Carbondale, Illinois on North Springer Street at
West Sycamore Street.
2005-
13
An ordinance establishing stop signs at the intersection of West Sycamore and North Springer Streets
within the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2005-
28
An ordinance designating the east and west sides of the 500 and 600 blocks of South James Street within
the city of Carbondale, Illinois, as "residential parking permit area".
2005-
55
An ordinance establishing "No Parking" upon New Era Road in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2005-
56
An ordinance regulating encroachments on New Era Road right of way in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2005-
57
An ordinance regulating speed on New Era Road between Ramada Lane and Glenn Road within the city
of Carbondale, Illinois.
2006-
43
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to enter into an agreement to transfer maintenance and
jurisdiction of Pump Station Road to Makanda township.
2006-
54
An ordinance regulating parking on city of Carbondale property commonly known as Sports Blast Drive
within the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2006-
55
An ordinance providing for the jurisdictional transfer of West Pleasant Hill Road (between McClafferty
Road and Union Hill Road) to the municipal street system of Carbondale, Illinois).
2007-
36
An ordinance authorizing the placement of pedestrian crosswalks upon North Wall Street and South
Lewis Lane within the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2009-
31
An ordinance amending ordinance 90-82 regulating parking and no parking on the east side of North
Washington Street from Oak Street.
2009-
35
An ordinance establishing a stop sign at the intersection of West Westridge Place and North Westridge
Drive within the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2010-
39
An ordinance naming the new roadway that connects Reed Station Parkway to Illinois Route 13, Veterans
Parkway.
2011-
06
An ordinance providing for two-way traffic on East College Street, establishing stop signs on East College
Street, establishing "no parking" on East College Street, providing one-way traffic on South Graham and
South Logan, and establishing "parking" on South Graham and South Logan.
2011-
49
An ordinance establishing "no parking" along the south side of the 200 block of West Willow Street in the
City of Carbondale.
2011-
60
An ordinance establishing "no parking" on both sides of a portion of the 2500 block of Striegel Road in the
City of Carbondale.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 909/923
2012-
30
An ordinance providing for the jurisdictional transfer of South Giant City Road (from 4305 feet south of
Walnut Street to 6069 feet south of Walnut Street) to the Municipal street system of Carbondale, Illinois.
2016-
02
An ordinance establishing "no parking" along the west side of the 400 and 500 blocks (from East Walnut
Street to East College Street) of South Logan Avenue in the City of Carbondale.
2016-
41
An ordinance establishing stop signs at the intersection of West Tower Road and Sunset Drive within the
City of Carbondale, Illinois.
2017-
15
An ordinance establishing "no parking" on portions of various streets in the area bounded by: Oakland
Avenue, Rigdon Street, Michaels Street, and Sycamore Street in the City of Carbondale.
2018-
11
An ordinance adopting a revised bikeway network map, as provided in 18-14.14.A of the Revised Code of
the City of Carbondale, Illinois.
2019-
03
An ordinance establishing "no parking" on portions of various streets in Carbondale's northeast
neighborhood.
APPENDIX G: VACATING STREETS AND PROPERTY
Ord.
No.
Subject
91-24
An ordinance vacating part of West Jackson Street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
91-25
An ordinance vacating Swindell Street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
91-57
An ordinance vacating certain alleys in block of Oak, Jackson, University and Poplar Streets.
92-20
An ordinance vacating a portion of Blackhawk Drive right of way in Arrowhead subdivision.
92-52
An ordinance vacating a part of West Jackson Street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
92-60
An ordinance vacating the plat of first R.J. Hurst addition and segments of right of way contained therein
and renaming the south 220 feet of Hummon Drive to Baine Drive.
92-73
An ordinance vacating an alley between Jackson and Oak Streets.
93-07
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (between Hospital Drive and Cherry
Street).
93-59
An ordinance vacating portions of two alleys in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (south of Mill Street).
93-60
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (an east-west alley south of 805 North
Almond Street).
94-58
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (an east-west alley north of 109 North
Washington Street).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 910/923
94-81
An ordinance vacating portions of Twinbrook Boulevard right of way in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
95-03
An ordinance vacating alleys in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1: between Monroe Street and Walnut
Street; 2: between University Avenue and Illinois Avenue).
95-11
An ordinance vacating the plat of Candletree subdivision and right of way contained therein.
95-46
An ordinance vacating a portion of the Wild Roses Road right of way in Blackberry Hills subdivision.
95-78
An ordinance vacating a street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Karnes Court right of way).
95-82
An ordinance vacating Westridge Court right of way in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
95-89
An ordinance vacating a street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Gladys Drive lying north of a line lying
60 feet north of and parallel with the southerly right of way line of Rendleman Road).
95-
100
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (12 foot wide alley running
north and south between Oak Street and Jackson Street).
96-40
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (between West Pecan and
Sycamore Street).
97-42
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (an east-west alley between
201 and 211 North Washington Street).
97-60
An ordinance vacating a portion of a roadway in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (between Jackson and
Oak Streets).
97-61
An ordinance vacating a portion of a roadway in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (between Jackson and
Oak Streets).
98-10
An ordinance vacating portions of alleys in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (1: lying adjacent to lots 7
through 15, block 6, in McGuire's addition; 2: Ferrell's subdivision at East Elm Street).
98-21
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (along the east side of 622
East Main Street).
98-38
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (undeveloped alley in a portion of the
property commonly known as 601 North Washington Street).
98-43
An ordinance vacating a portion of the plat of Sunny Acres North subdivision.
98-54
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (between Wall Street and
McQueen Street lying north and adjacent to lots 10 through 20 in block 6 of Renfro Place).
99-01
An ordinance vacating a street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (portion of East Elm Street located east
of Marion Street).
99-66
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (north of 314 North Renfro
Street).
2001-
26
An ordinance vacating a portion of a street right of way in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a portion of a
previously dedicated street right of way in West Highlands).
2001-
50
An ordinance vacating portions of two alleys in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (south of College Street
and east of Popular Street).
2002- An ordinance vacating a portion of the plat of Max Development subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 911/923
17
2002-
50
An ordinance vacating a portion of the plat of Carbondale Manufacturers Center.
2003-
34
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2003-
73
An ordinance vacating a street and a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2004-
36
An ordinance vacating a street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Kenneth Road).
2004-
41
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (between North Washington/North
Marion Streets and East Birch/East Chestnut Streets).
2004-
69
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (east-west alley located south of East
Walnut Street and extending 215 feet east of South Marion Street).
2004-
79
An ordinance vacating a street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Ellis Street).
2005-
11
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (alley located north of East James and
Thelma Walker Avenue between North Marion and North Brush Streets).
2005-
14
An ordinance vacating a street and two alleys in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (East Stoker Street,
extending 180 feet east of South State Street; an east-west alley located north of East Stoker Street and
extending 180 feet east of South State Street; and the east-west alley located south of East Stoker
Street between South State Street and South Wall Street).
2005-
20
An ordinance vacating a street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Wright Court right-of-way located in the
Bicentennial industrial park).
2005-
27
An ordinance vacating a street in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a portion of Rendleman Road).
2005-
29
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a portion of the north-south alley
located west of South Logan Avenue, approximately 160 feet west of South Logan Avenue and 160 feet
north of East College Street).
2005-
47
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (part of alley located south
of East Fisher Street, between North Conner Street and North Robert A. Stalls Avenue).
2008-
07
An ordinance vacating a portion of an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (part of alley located south
of West Rigdon Street, between North Almond Street and North Bridge Street).
2008-
39
An ordinance vacating an alley in the city of Carbondale, Illinois (a certain alley running north/south
between East Burke Street and East Fisher Street and bounded by North Pierce Street and North Wall
Street).
2009-
06
An ordinance vacating a portion of the plat for Prairie Living subdivision.
2009-
10
An ordinance vacating an alley in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (a certain alley running north/south
between West Baird Street and West Rigdon Street and bounded by 500 and 504 West Baird Street).
2009-
30
An ordinance vacating a street in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (Wagner Street right-of-way bounded by
518 and 600 West Owens Street).
2011-
08
An ordinance vacating an alley in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (a portion of a certain alley running
north/south and east/west between West Chestnut Street and North Bridge Street and adjacent to 508
North Bridge Street).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 912/923
2011-
30
An ordinance vacating a portion of right-of-way in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (a portion of West
Jackson Street lying west of University Avenue).
2011-
31
An ordinance vacating an alley in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (the remainder of the north/south alley
located between East Fisher Street and East Larch Street, lying just west of Robert A. Stalls Avenue).
2014-
22
An ordinance vacating a sanitary sewer easement in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (the unused portion
of a sanitary sewer easement located within the reserve at Saluki Pointe Apartment Complex).
2015-
25
An ordinance vacating a north/south alley in the City of Carbondale, Illinois (the closed portion of a
north/south alley located south of 308 South Illinois Avenue).
2016-
31
An ordinance vacating a portion of South Washington Street located south of Grand Avenue in the City
of Carbondale, Illinois.
2018-
03
An ordinance vacating a north/south alley and a portion of an east/west alley in the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (the north/south alley located west of the 300 block of North University Avenue and a portion of
the east/west alley located south of 305-307 West Pecan Street).
APPENDIX H: ZONING
Ord.
No.
Subject
94-28
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (4.6 acres, located on the north side of Lake Road between new Route 13 and Wood Road).
94-29
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the city of Carbondale, Illinois (2 parcels of land
totaling 17.57 acres, located on the south side of new Route 13 at the Wood Road intersection).
94-35
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (90 acres east of the Bicentennial Industrial Park).
94-40
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (lots adjacent to Main Street between First and Second Streets in Crab Orchard Estates
subdivision).
94-43
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (13.58 acres adjoining and east of Deer Lake subdivision).
94-59
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (36 acre tract located at the northwest corner of Route 13, east of Striegel Road).
94-62
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 lots located on the west side of North Illinois Avenue, approximately 400 feet north of Charles
Road).
94-82
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (37.2 acres on Country Club Road).
95-06
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (5.65 acre parcel commonly known as Parrish Acres West 7th plat).
95-07
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels commonly known as lots 605 and 701 in Parrish Acres West 7th plat).
95-08
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (part of lot 604 in Parrish Acres West).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 913/923
95-12
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.88 acres located on the south side of Charles Road approximately 250 feet west of North
Oakland Avenue).
95-14
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (10.7 acres located southwest of Pine Lake subdivision).
95-16
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property commonly known as 210 East Jackson Street).
95-20
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3.34 acres, more or less, located on the north side of Charles Road, 400 feet west of Route 51
North).
95-25
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (10.43 acres, more or less, located 235 feet east of Tower Road and 450 north of Chautauqua
Road).
95-27
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (a 1 acre parcel located in 1621 East Walnut Street).
95-28
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (7.534 acres in the Sunny Acres West subdivision).
95-35
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (9.02 acres south of Deer Lake subdivision).
95-37
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (tract south of Pleasant Hill Road and west of Warren Road).
95-58
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (27.8 acres in the Rendleman development).
95-60
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (Parrish-Reeves subdivision on East Walnut Street).
95-65
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1.06 acres, more or less, located on the south side of Charles Road approximately 650 feet west
of Route 51 North).
95-79
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (10 acre parcel immediately west of Meadowood subdivision and commonly known as 7168 Old
Highway 13 West).
95-94
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.93 acre parcel of land located approximately 220 feet north of West Sycamore Street).
95-98
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (a parcel of land, approximately 9.0 acres, located at the northeast corner of Route 13 and Reed
Station Road commonly known as 700 North Reed Station Road).
95-
101
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3 parcels commonly known as 407, 409 and 411 West Oak Street).
96-05
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (8.24 acres located on the north side of Old Route 13 between new Route 13 and Robinson Road).
96-13
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (parcels adjacent to the former National Food Store at 915 West Main).
96-19
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (parcels adjacent to the former National Food Store at 915 West Main located to the northwest,
south and southeast including 202, 204 and 2041/2 South Oakland Street).
96-20
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property commonly known as 2411 South Illinois Avenue).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 914/923
96-22
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (20 acre parcel commonly known as 8862 Giant City Road).
96-23
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3 parcels commonly known as 905 East Park).
96-27
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (Hughes property).
96-71
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property commonly known as 2341, 2351 and 2361 South Illinois Avenue).
96-75
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels located at the southeast corner of North Marion and East Jackson Streets).
96-79
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (14.34 acres on the north side of Walden Road, east of Union Hills subdivision, commonly known
as 7 Wilbur Lane).
97-27
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1.5 acres parcel commonly known as 810 North Wall Street).
97-37
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1.5 acre parcel located on the southeast corner of the Wall Street and East Walnut Street
intersection).
97-38
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels consisting of 1.35 acres commonly known as 1335 and 1345 East Park Street).
97-40
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (lot at the northwest corner of North Illinois Avenue and Charles Road, commonly known as 2000
North Illinois Avenue).
97-55
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.5 acre parcel located on the north side of East Pleasant Hill Road, approximately 450 feet west
of Warren Road).
97-57
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (parcel commonly known as 405 Charles Road).
97-66
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property commonly referred to as 1001 East Park Street, Wedgewood Hills Mobile Home Park).
97-
110
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (parcel commonly known as 102 North Oakland Avenue).
97-
128
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (4.7 acre parcel located on the northwest corner of Giant City Road and East Walnut Street
intersection).
97-
135
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (5 acre tract located in the southeast corner of 1101 East Grand Avenue).
98-01
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (northeast corner of North Giant City Road and East Sunny Acres Road).
98-03
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (approximately 52 acre tract located at 2220, 2240 and 2260 North Illinois Avenue).
98-08
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3 parcels commonly known as 210 East Jackson Street).
98-11
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (parcel commonly known as 219 East Lewis Lane).
98-15
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels commonly known as 1904 and 1906 North Illinois Avenue).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 915/923
98-28
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels of 14.55 acres, more or less, located at Villa Court and Chautauqua Road).
98-31
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (parcel of 2.84 acres, more or less, located west of 501 Westridge Drive).
98-32
An ordinance to establish a land use intensity ratio number of certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction
of the city of Carbondale, Illinois (parcel of 2.84 acres, more or less, located west of 501 Westridge Drive).
98-52
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3.34 acre parcel commonly known as 1051 South Wall Street and 602 East Park).
98-63
An ordinance to expand, classify and zone certain territory within the 11/2 mile zoning jurisdiction of the
city of Carbondale, Illinois (expansion of zoning boundaries).
99-03
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels commonly known as 245 and 337 South Lewis Lane).
99-05
An ordinance to expand, classify and zone certain territory within the 11/2 mile zoning jurisdiction of the
city of Carbondale, Illinois (expansion of zoning boundaries to include Southern Illinois airport).
99-25
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (10 acre parcel more commonly known as 2524 Boskydell Road).
99-33
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (32.37 acre parcel commonly known as 2170 South Illinois Avenue).
99-39
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property commonly known as Southern Illinois airport).
99-40
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (37.03 acre parcel located at the northwest corner of Reed Station Road and East Walnut).
99-48
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.7 acre parcel on Harmony Lane south of Sweets Drive).
99-50
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.482 acre parcel located south of Sweets Drive and west of Sanpat Lane).
99-51
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (portion of a parcel commonly known as 2300 South Illinois Avenue).
99-83
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (7.2 acre parcel located west of 1020 North Oakland Avenue).
99-85
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (4.5 acre parcel located in the 1300 block of East Walnut Street).
2000-
02
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3 acres located at the northwest corner of East Grand Avenue and South Lewis Lane and
commonly known as Georgetown Apartments).
2000-
23
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (5 parcels commonly known as 819 West Main Street, as well as 103, 105, and 107 South
Oakland).
2000-
29
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.971 acre parcel located south of Larsue Drive and 150 feet west of Glopen Road).
2000-
31
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (triangular piece of property located south of Max Development subdivision on Sweets Drive).
2000-
42
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (11.48 acres located on the south side of Walden Road).
2000- An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 916/923
51 Illinois (3.48 acres along Spur Connector no. 1).
2000-
53
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.28 acre parcel located south of Sweets Drive, east of Sanpat Lane).
2000-
54
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (5 acre parcel commonly known as 6271 U.S. Highway 51).
2001-
02
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3 parcels totaling 60.929 acres located at the northeast corner of the intersection of Old Route 13
and Reed Station Road).
2001-
11
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.56 acre parcel on Harmony Lane south of Sweets Drive).
2001-
14
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels commonly known as 250 South Lewis Lane and 1007 East Cindy Street).
2001-
21
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels commonly known as 1636 West Lake Road and 252 Hillendale Drive of Murphysboro,
Illinois).
2001-
33
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (a parcel commonly known as 603 West Elm Street).
2002-
02
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (southwest corner of North Beadle Drive and West Stiegel Road).
2002-
14
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 parcels totaling 6.838 acres along U.S. Route 51).
2002-
48
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 tracts commonly known as 614, 616 and 704 East Park Street).
2002-
53
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (63.37 acres located southeast of the intersection of Country Club Road and West Murphysboro
Road).
2002-
61
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2330, 2340 and 2350 South Illinois Avenue).
2002-
88
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (19.54 acres located on the south side of East Grand Avenue between South Lewis Lane and
Brehm Lane).
2002-
89
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.94 acres located at 1209 East Walnut Street).
2002-
92
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (the property commonly known as 200 N. Emerald Lane).
2003-
02
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.70 acre located at 169 Tippy Road).
2003-
64
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (4.483 acres located at 1819 West Lake Road).
2003-
68
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (10.25 acre parcel located 600 feet east of the intersection of New Route 13 East and North Reed
Station Road).
2004-
03
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2220 North Illinois Avenue).
2004-
13
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.242 acres south of Sweets Drive and east of Harmony Lane).
2004- An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 917/923
14 Illinois (1100 and 1101 South Morningside Drive).
2004-
27
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (608 North Oakland Avenue).
2004-
28
An ordinance to increase the land use intensity (LUI) number for certain territory zoned planned unit
development within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale, Illinois (Country Village subdivision
located on Old Route 13).
2004-
32
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (4.25 acres west of 3686 and 3698 South Illinois Avenue).
2004-
59
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1101 East Grand Avenue).
2004-
63
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1890 North Illinois Avenue).
2004-
70
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (303, 305 and 307 South Marion Street).
2004-
85
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (201 and 203 South Marion Street and 200 South Logan Avenue).
2004-
93
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (5.36 acres on the northwest corner of North Almond and West Kenicott Streets).
2005-
04
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1055 South Tower Road).
2005-
25
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (10 acres from AG to RR for property located at the southwest corner of the intersection of Crowell
Road and No Name Road).
2005-
30
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2010 North Illinois Avenue).
2005-
31
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1.04 acres from RR to R-1-8D for property located on the west side of South Illinois Avenue
approximately 1 mile south of the Carbondale city limits).
2005-
32
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.95 acres from LI to R-1-8 for property located in the 500 and 600 block of North Washington
Street on the west side of Washington).
2005-
43
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3.85 acres from AG to BPL for property located at 1580 North Reed Station Road).
2005-
44
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1001 East Park Street).
2005-
48
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (113 acres from AG to RR located at the southeast corner of the intersection of Kennedy Road and
Union Hill Road).
2005-
59
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (approximately 98 acres from AG to RR located north of Parkwood subdivision).
2005-
70
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois.
2005-
71
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1000 East Park Street).
2006-
06
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (11.4 acres from AG to R-1-12 located east of Deer Lake III subdivision).
2006- An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 918/923
07 Illinois (8.4 acres located on IL Route 13).
2006-
11
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2 acres located at 2501 West Murphysboro Road).
2006-
32
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (302 W. Sycamore Street).
2006-
39
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (approximately 27.5 acres from AG to RR located on Starvation Acres Road).
2006-
40
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (5.97 acres located at 2611 and 2621 S. Illinois Avenue).
2006-
48
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.06 acres located at 1525 North Reed Station Road).
2006-
49
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (South Washington Street properties).
2006-
50
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (241 S. Lewis Lane).
2006-
51
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (401, 405, 407, and 409 South Washington Street).
2006-
52
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (3.34 acres located at 230, 240, and 250 Charles Road).
2007-
17
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (approximately 8.98 acres from AG to RR located at 2883 South Illinois Avenue).
2007-
23
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (approximately 10.024 acres from AG to RR located at 186 and 296 Sheila Ray Lane).
2007-
31
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (12 acres located at 130 Starvation Acres Road from AG to RR).
2007-
35
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (14.33 acres located at the northwest corner of Lewis Lane and Rendleman Road from BPL to
AG).
2007-
44
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (25.63 acres located west of Westridge Place).
2007-
46
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (22.5 acres located on the east side of New Era Road).
2007-
47
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.881 acre located at 1513 East Dogwood Road from AG to R-1-15).
2007-
49
An ordinance to adopt a new official zoning map for territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of
Carbondale, Illinois.
2008-
01
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (9.35 acres located at 900, 910, and 1000 East Park Street).
2008-
20
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.75 acres located at 6429 West Murphysboro Road).
2008-
26
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (South Washington Street and East College Street properties).
2008-
32
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (400 South Lewis Lane).
2008-
33
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (northwest corner of the intersection of Glenn Road and New Era Road).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 919/923
2008-
41
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (110 East Oak Street).
2008-
51
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (430 South Giant City Road).
2010-
07
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1601 East Walnut Street).
2010-
08
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.77 acres located east of E. Campus Drive).
2010-
27
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (5.39 acres located at 1209 East Walnut Street).
2010-
29
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (6.18 acres located at 150 North Oakland Avenue).
2010-
38
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (0.78 acres located at 617 & 621 East Campus Drive).
2010-
42
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (214 Health Department Road).
2010-
46
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (4 Crown Lane).
2011-
05
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1211 West Sycamore Street).
2011-
17
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (2760 West Chautauqua Street).
2011-
24
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (975 West Charles Road).
2011-
25
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (276 & 300 Walden Road).
2011-
39
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1121 West Lake Road).
2012-
19
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (112 and 200 North Poplar Street).
2012-
31
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (410 North Glenview Drive).
2012-
43
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1580 North Reed Station Road).
2013-
10
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (400-600 block of N. Washington St.).
2013-
13
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (1000 N. Springer St., 1005 N. Springer St., 1010 N. Springer St., 1015 N. Springer St., 1020 N.
Springer St., 1025 N. Springer St., 1030 N. Springer St., 1035 N. Springer St., 1040 N. Springer St., 600
W. Baird St., 605 W. Baird St., 610 W. Baird St., 615 W. Baird St., 620 W. Baird St., 630 W. Baird St., 640
W. Baird St., 650 W. Baird St., 601 W. Rigdon St., 603 W. Rigdon St., 605 W. Rigdon St., 607 W. Rigdon
St., 609 W. Rigdon St., 611 W. Rigdon St., 615 W. Rigdon St., 2430 S. Illinois Ave., 2440 S. Illinois Ave.,
3009 W. Sunset Dr., 3011 W. Sunset Dr., 3012 W. Sunset Dr., 3016 W. Sunset Dr., 3101 W. Sunset Dr.,
3102 W. Sunset Dr., 3110 W. Sunset Dr., 3112 W. Sunset Dr., 3114 W. Sunset Dr., 3116 W. Sunset Dr.,
301 S. Wall St., 400 E. Walnut St., 412 E. Walnut St., 203 S. Logan Ave.).
2013-
22
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (150 North Oakland Avenue).
2013- An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 920/923
45 Illinois (3 Speede Drive).
2013-
57
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (8865 South Giant City Road).
2014-
32
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located in the northwest corner of Illinois Route 13 and County Line Road).
2014-
39
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at 900, 910, and 920 East Walnut Street).
2015-
2
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at 500 North Oakland Avenue).
2015-
08
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the city of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at 202 South Logan Avenue, 205 South Marion Street, 301, 304, 315, 318, and
322 East Walnut Street).
2015-
43
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at 701 South Tower Road).
2015-
56
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at the intersection of Iowa Road and West Charles Road).
2016-
47
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located along former and existing railroad right-of-way in Carbondale's downtown).
2016-
48
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at 169 Old Highway 13).
2017-
09
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (certain property located between East Main and East Walnut bounded by South Washington and
South Marion).
2017-
31
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (certain property located at 800 East Main Street).
2017-
32
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (certain property consisting of one acre located at 4620 Country Club Road).
2017-
40
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (certain property consisting of 2.14 acres located at 1655 North Reed Station Road).
2017-
54
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (certain property consisting of 1.8 acres located in the 300 block of University Avenue).
2017-
56
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at 300 South Oakland Avenue).
2018-
17
An ordinance to classify and zone certain territory within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois (property located at 814, 816, and 818 West Main Street).
APPENDIX I: TAXES
Ord.
No.
Subject
97-
163
An ordinance establishing the 1997 tax levy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 921/923
97-
164
An ordinance establishing the 1997 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
98-70
An ordinance establishing the 1998 tax levy.
98-71
An ordinance establishing the 1998 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
99-89
An ordinance establishing the 1999 tax levy.
99-90
An ordinance establishing the 1999 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2000-
66
An ordinance establishing the 2000 tax levy adopted by the city council of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2000-
67
An ordinance establishing the 2000 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2001-
43
An ordinance abating the 2001 tax levy for certain commercial or industrial property.
2001-
62
An ordinance establishing the 2001 tax levy adopted by the city council of the city of Carbondale, Illinois.
2001-
63
An ordinance establishing the 2001 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2002-
97
An ordinance establishing the 2002 tax levy.
2002-
98
An ordinance establishing the 2002 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2003-
42
An ordinance authorizing a budget adjustment for the increase in the overall fiscal year 2004 budget for
consultant service fees in regard to the establishment of a tax increment financing (TIF) district.
2003-
56
An ordinance of the city of Carbondale, Illinois, authorizing the establishment of tax increment financing
"interested parties" registries and adopting registration rules for such registries.
2003-
77
An ordinance establishing the 2003 tax levy.
2003-
82
An ordinance establishing the 2003 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2004-
09
An ordinance approving the tax increment redevelopment plan and project for redevelopment project area
no. 1.
2004-
10
An ordinance designating redevelopment project area no. 1.
2004-
11
An ordinance adopting tax increment financing for redevelopment project area no. 1.
2004-
47
An ordinance establishing the special tax allocation fund for tax increment financing in redevelopment
project area number 1.
2004-
86
An ordinance establishing the 2004 tax levy.
2004-
87
An ordinance establishing the 2004 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2005-
63
An ordinance establishing the 2005 tax levy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 922/923
2005-
64
An ordinance establishing the 2005 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2006-
65
An ordinance establishing the 2006 tax levy.
2006-
66
An ordinance establishing the 2006 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2007-
53
An ordinance establishing the 2007 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2007-
54
An ordinance establishing the 2007 tax levy.
2008-
24
An ordinance authorizing the city manager to execute a contract with Carbondale Main Street for
remittance of the special service area tax.
2008-
56
An ordinance establishing the 2008 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2008-
57
An ordinance establishing the 2008 tax levy.
2009-
64
An ordinance establishing the 2009 tax levy with abatements.
2009-
65
An ordinance establishing the 2009 tax levy for the downtown special service area number one.
2011-
69
An ordinance establishing the 2011 tax levy.
2011-
70
An ordinance establishing the 2011 tax levy for the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
2012-
65
An ordinance establishing the 2012 tax levy.
2012-
66
An ordinance establishing the 2012 tax levy for the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
2012-
67
An ordinance adopting and approving the tax increment finance, City of Carbondale, redevelopment
project area (Illinois-University corridor - TIF #2), redevelopment plan and project, of the City of
Carbondale, Illinois, for the proposed redevelopment project area (Illinois-University corridor - TIF #2).
2012-
68
An ordinance designating the City of Carbondale, Illinois tax increment finance redevelopment project
area (Illinois-University corridor - TIF #2).
2012-
69
An ordinance adopting tax increment financing for the City of Carbondale, Illinois redevelopment project
area (Illinois-University corridor - TIF #2).
2012-
70
An ordinance adopting and approving the tax increment finance, City of Carbondale, redevelopment
project area (Oakland-Sycamore - TIF #3), redevelopment plan and project, of the City of Carbondale,
Illinois, for the proposed redevelopment project area (Oakland-Sycamore - TIF #3).
2012-
71
An ordinance designating the City of Carbondale, Illinois tax increment finance redevelopment project
area (Oakland-Sycamore - TIF #3).
2012-
72
An ordinance adopting tax increment financing for the City of Carbondale, Illinois redevelopment project
area (Oakland-Sycamore - TIF #3).
2013-
60
An ordinance adopting the 2013 Property Tax levy.
2013-
67
An ordinance establishing the 2013 tax levy for the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=470 923/923
2014-
53
An ordinance adopting the 2014 Property Tax levy for the Carbondale Public Library.
2014-
54
An ordinance adopting the 2014 Property Tax levy.
2014-
61
An ordinance establishing the 2014 tax levy for the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
2015-
47
An ordinance adopting the 2015 Property Tax levy.
2015-
54
An ordinance establishing the 2015 tax levy for the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
2016-
62
An ordinance establishing the 2016 tax levy for the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
2016-
69
An ordinance adopting the 2016 Property Tax levy.
2017-
30
An ordinance affirming and maintaining the one-fourth of one percent (1/4%) Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation and Service Occupational Tax.
2017-
47
An ordinance establishing the 2017 tax levy for the Downtown Special Service Area Number One.
2017-
53
An ordinance adopting the 2017 Property Tax levy.