
Channahon, Illinois Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF CHANNAHON, ILLINOIS
Code of Ordinances



2018 S-22 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 1932, passed 5-21-18
State legislation current through ALS 2017 #8



 







 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



VILLAGE OFFICIALS OF CHANNAHON, ILLINOIS



 




Missey Moorman Schumacher

 

Village President




Sam Greco

 

Finance/Human Resources Trustee




Scott McMillin

 

Public Works  and Facility Trustee




Patricia Perniar

 

Community and Legislative Affairs Trustee




Mark Scaggs

 

Community Development Trustee




Chantal Host

 

Public Safety/Emergency Support Trustee




Scott Slocum

 

Technology/Community Image/Code Enforcement  Trustee




Kristin Hall

 

Village Clerk




Thomas J. Durkin

 

Village Administrator





 



   Adopting Ordinance




   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF CHANNAHON
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE




   WHEREAS, the Village of Channahon is a Home Rule Municipality under and
by virtue of the Constitution of the State of Illinois; and



   WHEREAS, the Acts of the State Legislature of the State of Illinois
empower and authorize the Corporate Authority of the Village to revise,
amend, restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances
and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate
such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, the Corporate Authority of the Village of Channahon has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the village of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinances in book form.



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE VILLAGE OF CHANNAHON, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS, IN THE EXERCISE OF THEIR
HOME RULE AND OTHER POWERS:



Section 1:   That the general ordinances of the Village of Channahon as
herein revised; amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form are
adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances" of the Village of
Channahon.



Section 2:   That the Code as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles, to-wit:



         Title 1      General Provisions



         Title 111   Administration



         Title V      Public Works



         Title VII   Traffic Code



         Title IX   General Regulations



         Title XI   Business Regulations



         Title XIlI   General Offenses



         Title XV   Land Usage



         Tables of Special Ordinances



         Parallel References



         Index



         and such other titles as from time to time be adopted.



Section 3:   That all ordinances prior to ordinance number 840 pertaining
to the subjects treated in the Code which are inconsistent with the Code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of the Code except
as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in the Code; provided
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of the Code, or shall such
repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating
money, annexing or detaching territory establishing franchises or granting
special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting
easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, naming or vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public places, nor to any
other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects
not contained therein.



Section 4:   That the Clerk of the Village of Channahon is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of the Code in the Office of the
Village Clerk.



Section 5:   That the Code shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form and filing
thereof in the Office of the Clerk, and the Code shall be presumptive
evidence in all courts and places of the ordinances and all provisions,
sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the date of
passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.



   PASSED, ATTESTED and APPROVED this 6th day of November, 1995.



Wayne W. Chesson  /s/



Village President



Christine Pucel  /s/



Village Clerk



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



         10.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




   10.01   Title of code




   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   [Reserved.]



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



   10.19   Corporate seal



 



   10.98   Compliance tickets



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the Village of Channahon,
shall be designated as the Code of Channahon, Illinois, and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY, or TOWN.  The Village of
Channahon, Illinois.



   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The President and Board of Trustees of the
village.



   COUNTY.  Will County, Illinois.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of Illinois.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)    AND or.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance  requires 
an  act  to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to  express such  intent, such spelling shall be corrected
and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with
the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as
though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  [RESERVED].



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All  ordinances  passed  by  the  legislative  body requiring
publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof,
unless otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication
shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in anyway be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall by itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.  In addition to
such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance,
a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)     As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)     If a statutory cite is included in the history,
this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as
the statute.  Example:  (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 § 3-2-7)  (Ord. 10, passed
1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85)



      (2)     If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 31.10  MAYOR.



      The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the legislative body.



   (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)



   Statutory reference: For term of the Mayor, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 §
3-4-4



§ 10.19  CORPORATE SEAL.



   The corporate seal shall be the seal heretofore provided and used by
and for the village, the impression of which is circular in form with words
"Corporate Seal" in the center thereof and with the inscription "Village of
Channahon, Illinois" in the outer circle thereof.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 10.98  COMPLIANCE TICKETS.



   The ordinances of the village are hereby amended to provide for the use
of compliance tickets for all ordinance violations except those that, in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-204, as it may from time to time be
amended, must be reported to the Secretary of State.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any
person accused of violating any provision of this Code or any other ordinance
or regulation of the village may be issued a compliance ticket which shall
require the violator to:



      (1)   Pay an administrative fee as stated in division (F) of
this section to the Village Treasurer within 14 days of the issuance of a
compliance ticket as a settlement and compromise of the claim against the
violator. In the event payment of the administrative fee and compliance has
not been obtained within the 14-day period, the administrative fee will be
doubled for the period beginning the 15th day and including the 30th day
after issuance of the ticket. The offender shall have until the close of
business on the 30th day to satisfy the claim; and



      (2)   Correct, repair, or rectify any condition which
constitutes a continuing violation of a village ordinance or regulation
within the period specified in the compliance ticket.



   (B)   A compliance ticket may be issued as a courtesy to the
violator in lieu of instituting a prosecution for the alleged violation. If
the person accused of the violation fails to settle and pay the claim within
the period specified in the compliance ticket, the compliance ticket shall be
converted to a complaint or uniform traffic citation, and that person shall
be subject to prosecution in the Circuit Court and shall be subject to the
fines and penalties authorized by law or ordinance.



   (C)   If any person to whom a compliance ticket has been issued
desires to contest the validity of the compliance ticket, then that person
shall file a written notice within five days of the issuance of the
compliance ticket. The Village Administrator shall appoint a person to serve
as a hearing officer who shall, after receiving evidence from the person
issuing the compliance ticket and the person to whom the compliance ticket is
issued, render a decision.  If the person to whom the compliance ticket is
issued does not comply with any order issued by the hearing officer within
seven days, then the village shall have the right to pursue any available
remedy to seek collection and compliance, including prosecution in Circuit
Court.



   (D)   The Village Administrator is authorized to promulgate
administrative regulations to implement the compliance ticket programs.



   (E)   If a compliance ticket requires the correction or repair of a
condition within a period of time and the violator fails to correct, repair,
or rectify the violation within that period, then the village may issue
additional compliance tickets or may pursue prosecution in Circuit.



   (F)   (1)   Any person violating any provisions of the Village
Code is subject to the following administrative fees:



 



Improper disposal of garbage (Ch. 50)
 

$100



Violation of code regulating sewers (Ch. 51)
 

$100



Violation of code regulating water system (Ch. 52)
 

$100



Improper disposal of recycling materials (Ch. 94)
 

$100



Abandoned vehicles (Ch. 90)
 

$250



Public nuisance (§ 93.10)
 

$100



Animals nuisance complaints (Ch. 91)
 

$25



Vicious dog complaints (Ch. 91)
 

$250



Tall grass and weeds on unimproved lots (§ 93.21)
 

$100



Tall grass and weeds on improved lots (§ 93.21)
 

$100



Obstruction of drainage ditches (§ 95.01)
 

$100



Improper display/damage to house numbering (§ 95.21), (§ 95.23)
 

$25



Violating general licensing regulations (Ch. 110)
 

$100



Violation of code regulating solicitors, peddlers, canvassers (Ch. 116)
 

$100



Violation of the swimming pool regulations (Ch. 155)
 

$100



Structures other than mailboxes in right-of-way (§ 95.49)
 

$100



Violating the village Building Code (Ch. 151)
 

$250



Violation of code regulating flood hazard prevention (Ch. 153)
 

$100



Violating the subdivision regulations (Ch. 154)
 

$250



Violating the zoning regulations (Ch. 156)
 

$250



Violating the soil erosion regulations (Ch. 157)
 

$250



Violation of Litter Control Act (5 13.5/105-1 et seq.)
 

$250



Possession of alcohol by a minor (§ 111.47(A))
 

$100



Possession and purchase of tobacco by a minor (§ 13.5/675 / 705 (5)(6))
 

$100



Possession of cannabis, less than 2.5 grams (13-131.55074(A))
 

$100



Possession of cannabis, 2.5 grams, but less than 10 grams (13-131.55074(B))
 

$250



Possession of cannabis, 10 grams, but less than 30 grams (13-131.550/4(C))
 

$500



Parking violations, other than (70-11-1301.3), first offense within one year
 

Warning



Parking violations, other than (70-11 -1301.3), after warning was issued
 

$25



Parking in space reserved for a person with disabilities (70-11-1301.3)
 

$250



Unless otherwise listed, violations under Title 13, (Ch. 131) Drug and
Related Offenses
 

$500



Unless otherwise listed, violations under Title 13, (Ch. 132) Gambling
Offenses
 

$250



Unless otherwise listed, vehicle code violations - non-moving violations
 

$50



Unless otherwise listed, other misdemeanor violations
 

$250





 



      (2)   A separate administrative fee shall accrue for each day
on which an offense continues.



(Ord. 827, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 1496, passed 8-6-07; Am. Ord. 1611,
passed 3-15-10; Am. Ord. 1870, passed 10-3-16)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



         30.  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



         31.  OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



         32.  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



         33.  ELECTIONS



         34.  FINANCE



         35.  POLICE DEPARTMENT



         36.  PERSONNEL POLICIES



         37.  TAXATION



         38.  VILLAGE POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Composition of Board of Trustees; duties



   30.02   Compensation



Meetings



   30.10   Regular meetings



   30.11   Special meetings; notice



   30.12   Quorum



   30.13   Addressing corporate authorities



   30.14   Order of business



   30.15   Presiding officer



   30.16   Robert's Rules of Order to govern



   30.17   Alteration of rules



   30.18   Disturbing meeting unlawful



 



   30.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES; DUTIES.



   The Board of Trustees shall consist of the President and six trustees
elected for a four-year term.  Three members shall be elected every two
years.  The Board of Trustees is the legislative body of the village and is
the repository of all municipal powers which have not been specifically
delegated to some other office, commission, committee or board.  The
appointment of all officers, commissions, committees and boards shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees and the hiring and dismissal
of all employees of the village shall also be subject to approval of the
Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.02  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Each of the Village Trustees shall receive compensation of
$250 for each regular, special and committee meeting attended.



   (B)   In addition to the compensation herein provided, Trustees
shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred
or advanced on behalf of the village.



(Ord. 892, passed 2-5-96; Am. Ord. 997, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 1145, passed
9-18-00; Am. Ord. 1887, passed 3-6-17)



MEETINGS



§ 30.10  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The regular meetings of the Corporate Authorities, to include dates,
times and places shall be announced, posted and advertised at the beginning
of each calendar year.  Any change to the regular schedule must be
announced, posted and advertised as required by law.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.11  SPECIAL MEETINGS; NOTICE.



   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the President or any three
Trustees upon a 24-hour notice to every member of the Board of Trustees;
provided that the requirement of a notice shall not be binding in any special
meeting at which all of the members of the Board of Trustees are present as
is provided by statute.



   (B)   Such notice may be served by any member of the Police
Department or by any other person in the village; and it shall be the duty of
the Village Clerk when given copies of such notices to serve the same or to
cause the same to be served immediately.



(Ord. 1, passed 5-14-62)



§ 30.12  QUORUM.



   A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of
the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.13  ADDRESSING CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.



   All persons desiring to address the Corporate Authorities or to present
petitions or communications requiring action at a regular meeting shall file
notice thereof with the Village Clerk not less than seven days prior to the
meeting.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.14  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The order of business shall be as follows:



   (A)   Call to order by presiding officer;



   (B)   Pledge of allegiance to the Flag;



   (C)   Roll call;



   (D)   Establishment of quorum;



   (E)   The reading and approval (with corrections and additions, if
any) of the journal of the proceedings of the previous meeting or meetings;



   (F)   Reports and communications from the Village President and
other officers:



      (1)   Treasurer (if required by a majority of the Corporate
Authorities);



      (2)   Attorney;



      (3)   Engineer;



      (4)   Board of Appeals;



      (5)   Planning and Zoning Commission;



      (6)   Building Commissioner;



      (7)   Village Clerk;



   (G)   Petitions, communications, orders, resolutions, and ordinances;



   (H)   Public discussion and comments from the floor;



   (I)   Unfinished business;



   (J)   Reports of special committees;



   (K)   Reports of standing committees:



      (1)   Accounts and Finances;



      (2)   Public Safety;



      (3)   Public Property;



      (4)   Public Affairs;



      (5)   Roads and Drainage;



      (6)   Public Health;



   (L)   Adjournment.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.15  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The presiding officer (Village President or President Pro Tem) shall
preserve order and decorum and may speak to points of order in preference to
other members, and shall decide all questions of order subject to appeal. 
If he refuses to allow the Trustees to exercise their right of appeal a
decision of the Chair, the Board of Trustees may consider, and by majority
vote of its presence, may pass upon the matter in spite of the Chair's
failure to grant them an appeal.  In case of any disturbances or disorderly
conduct, the presiding officer shall have the power to require the chamber to
be cleared.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.16  ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER TO GOVERN.



   The current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, except when otherwise
provided by law or other provisions of this chapter, shall govern on all
questions or parliamentary procedure at said meetings.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.17  ALTERATION OF RULES.



   The rules may be altered, amended or temporarily suspended at any time
by resolution or ordinance passed by the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 30.18  DISTURBING MEETING UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt any regular or special
meeting of the Village Board.  Any person violating any provision of this
section shall be fined as provided in § 30.99, and may be summarily ejected
from the meeting room.



(Ord. 1, passed 5-14-62)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 30.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of § 30.18 shall be fined not less
than $1 and not more than $10 for each offense.



(Ord. 1, passed 5-14-62)



CHAPTER 31:  OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Application of provisions



   31.02   Records



   31.03   Receipt of money



   31.04   Conservators of peace; powers of arrest



   31.05   Duty upon termination of office



   31.06   Oath



   31.07   Bonds; approval



   31.08   Bonds for officers and personnel other than those
specifically listed



   31.09   Salaries



   31.10   Job description



   31.11   Appointment of other officers



   31.12   Removal from office



   31.13   [Reserved]



   31.14   Deferred compensation plan



   31.15   Electronic attendance at meetings



Village President



   31.20   Duties and responsibilities



   31.21   Compensation



   31.22   Bond



Clerk; Deputy Clerk



   31.30   Duties and responsibilities



   31.31   Bond of Clerk and Deputy Clerk



   31.32   Compensation



Treasurer



   31.40   Duties and responsibilities



   31.41   Bond



Village Administrator



   31.50   Office created



   31.51   Appointment



   31.52   [Reserved]



   31.53   Powers and duties



   31.54   Compensation and expenses



   31.55   Oath and bond



   31.56   Conflict of interest



   31.57   Outside activities



   31.58   Effect of Village Administrator on powers of President and
Board of Trustees



   31.59   Absence of Village Administrator



   31.60   Performance evaluations



   31.61   Removal



   31.62   Personnel policy



Village Attorney



   31.70   Appointment; duties and responsibilities



Village Auditor



   31.80   Appointment; duties



Village Engineer



   31.90   Appointment; duties



Human Resource Manager



   31.95   Position created



   31.96   Qualification and appointment



   31.97   Authority



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions in this chapter shall apply to all officers and
employees of the village, regardless of the time of creation of office,
appointment or employment thereof.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.02  RECORDS.



   All records kept by any officer or employee in connection with his work
are the property of the village and shall be subject to inspection by any
member of the Corporate Authorities at any time.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.03  RECEIPT OF MONEY.



   All monies received by any officer or employee on behalf of the village
shall be turned over to the Village Clerk with statement showing source of
same.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.04  CONSERVATORS OF PEACE; POWERS OF ARREST.



   The members of the Corporate Authorities, Village Clerk and all members
of the Police Department are hereby declared conservators of the peace with
such powers of arrest as are given conservators of the peace by statute.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.05  DUTY UPON TERMINATION OF OFFICE.



   Every officer or employee, upon termination of his office or position
for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver all books, records and other papers
and things relative to his office or position to the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.06  OATH.



   Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon the duties of
his office, take the oath of office as prescribed by the statute at a public
meeting of the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.07  BONDS; APPROVAL.



   (A)   Every officer, and every employee when directed by the
Corporate Authorities or by law, shall, before entering upon his duties of
office or position, execute a bond in such amount as may be determined by the
Corporate Authorities or by law, with sureties as it may approve, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office or position.  The
village will pay the premiums of said bonds. 



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



   (B)   All bonds required by law or ordinance to be submitted to and
approved by the Corporate Authorities shall first be submitted to the Village
Attorney and it shall be his duty to examine said bonds.  If in his judgment
the bonds are properly drawn and are legal and binding obligations, he shall
endorse the same with his approval.  If they are not, he shall endorse his
disapproval thereon together with his reasons therefor. 



(Ord. 217, passed 5-21-79)



§ 31.08  BONDS FOR OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OTHER THAN THOSE SPECIFICALLY
LISTED.



   Prior to the entering upon the duties of Village Trustee, Chief of
Police, police officer, positions on the Planning and Zoning Commission and
employment in the Street Department and Maintenance Department, all such
persons shall execute a bond with security to be approved by the Corporate
Authorities made payable to the village in amounts of not less than $3,000
per person.  The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of each office or position and the payment of all money received
by each officer or person according to the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the village.  The obligation of the sureties shall not extend
to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or closing of any bank
organized and existing either under the laws of the state or the United
States wherein the person has placed funds in his custody, providing the bank
has been approved by the Corporate Authorities as a depositary for said
funds.  This bond shall be a part of the blanket bond of the village.  The
village shall pay all premiums of said bond.  The bond shall be filed with
the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 217, passed 5-21-79)



§ 31.09  SALARIES.



   All officers and employees of the village shall receive such salary as
is provided for from time to time by law or ordinance.  No officer of
employee receiving a salary from the village shall be entitled to retain any
fees, or portion thereof, collected by him in the performance of his duties.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.10  JOB DESCRIPTION.



   A job description of all employee positions shall be on file with the
Village Clerk.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.11  APPOINTMENT OF OTHER OFFICERS.



   The Village President may, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, appoint such other officers as may be required or necessary under
the laws of the state or as the Corporate Authorities may deem to be
appropriate from time to time.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.12  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.



   The Village President may remove any officer appointed by him pursuant
to this chapter in the manner provided by law.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.13  [RESERVED].



§ 31.14  DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.



   (A)   The village hereby establishes the deferred compensation plan
(the "plan") in the form of the ICMA Retirement Corporation Deferred
Compensation Plan and Trust, referred to as Appendix A, attached to Ordinance
No. 1426, passed May 1, 2006.



   (B)   The assets of the plan shall be held in trust with the village
serving as trustee, for the exclusive benefit of the plan participants and
their beneficiaries, and the assets shall not be diverted to any other
purpose.



   (C)   The plan will permit loans.



   (D)   The village hereby executes the Declaration of Trust of the
ICMA Retirement Trust, attached to Ordinance No. 1426, passed May 1, 2006 as
Appendix B, intending this execution to be operative with respect to any
retirement or deferred compensation plan subsequently established by the
village if the assets of the plan are to be invested in the ICMA Retirement
Trust.



   (E)   The village hereby agrees to serve as trustee under the plan
and to invest funds held under the plan in the ICMA Retirement Trust.



   (F)   The Village Treasurer shall be the coordinator for this plan;
shall receive necessary reports, notices, etc., from the ICMA Retirement
Corporation or the ICMA Retirement Trust; shall cast on behalf of the village
any required votes under the ICMA Retirement Trust, administrative duties to
carry out the plan may be assigned to the appropriate departments, and is
authorized to execute all necessary agreements with the ICMA Retirement
Corporation incidental to the administration of the plan.



(Ord. 1426, passed 5-1-06)



§ 31.15  ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



   The Village President and Board of Trustees hereby adopt the Rules
Governing Electronic Attendance at Meetings, attached to Ordinance 1475,
passed March 19, 2007 as Exhibit "A", to permit any member of a public body
of the village to attend any meeting of said public body via electronic means.



(Ord. 1475, passed 3-19-07)



VILLAGE PRESIDENT



§ 31.20  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Village President shall be elected for a four-year term and is the
Chief Executive Officer of the village.  He shall perform all of the duties
which are prescribed by law and municipal ordinances, and he is required to
see that said laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.  He shall keep
the Board of Trustees informed on matters pertaining to the public affairs of
the village.  No action by the Village President shall be effective to bind
the village unless approved by the Corporate Authorities where required by
law.  The Village President shall appoint, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees, such other officers, standing committees, commissions
and boards as prescribed by law and municipal ordinances that may be
necessary to the health, welfare and safety of the village.  The President
and Board of Trustees, voting together shall elect one member of the Board of
Trustees to the position of President Pro Tem.  The Trustee so elected
President Pro Tem shall serve as President when circumstances arise which, in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes, would so
necessitate.  The President and Board of Trustees may at any time, for any
reason whatever, remove said President Pro Tem and elect another member of
the Board of Trustees to said position.  The election to the position of
President Pro Tem shall take place following each public election.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.21  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The President of the Village shall receive as compensation
$250 for each regular, special and committee meeting attended.



   (B)   The President shall receive additional compensation of $600 a
month for maintaining office hours in the Municipal Building on average of
two hours per week on a monthly basis.



   (C)   The President shall also receive a salary for the duties as
Liquor Control Commissioner in the sum of $720 annually and $120 per liquor
related meeting attended.



   (D)   In addition to the compensation herein provided, the President
shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred
or advanced on behalf of the village.



(Ord. 157, passed 6-7-76; Am. Ord. 310, passed 2-7-83; Am. Ord. 593, passed
6-4-90; Am. Ord. 997, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 1145, passed 9-18-00; Am. Ord.
1887, passed 3-6-17)



§ 31.22  BOND.



   Prior to entering upon the duties of the office of President of the
village, the President shall execute a bond with security to be approved by
the Corporate Authorities made payable to the village in an amount of not
less than $3,000.  The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office of President and the payment of all
money received by the President according to the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the village.  The obligation of the sureties shall not extend
to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or closing of any bank
organized or existing either under the laws of the state or the United States
wherein the President has placed funds in his custody, provided the bank has
been approved by the Corporate Authorities as a depositary for said funds. 
This bond may be part of the blanket bond of the village.  The village shall
pay all premiums of said bond.  The bond shall be filed with the Village
Clerk.



(Ord. 217, passed 5-21-79)



CLERK; DEPUTY CLERK



§ 31.30  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Village Clerk shall be elected to a four-year term to run
concurrently with that of the Village President.  The  Village  Clerk
shall attend all meetings of the Corporate Authorities and shall be the clerk
thereof, and shall keep a full and complete record of its proceedings, in the
journal.  The Village Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts and
ordinances of the village and all licenses, permits and other documents
requiring such formality.  The Village Clerk shall be the Village Collector
and shall keep accounts showing all monies received, the source and
disposition of same, and all other accounts and reports required by ordinance
or statute; shall forthwith turn over all money received for or on behalf of
the village, to  the  Village  Treasurer  with  a  statement  of  the
source thereof.  The Village Clerk shall publish, when required by law, and
keep a record of all ordinances and other documents which are required to be
kept and preserved by statute, and shall also keep a register or record of
all licenses or permits issued and payments therefor, a record of all
officers and employees of the village, and all other such records as may be
required by order of the Corporate Authorities or by ordinance or by
statute.  The Village Clerk shall be custodian of the official village seal
and shall also be custodian of all documents not otherwise assigned to
another office.  The Village Clerk shall properly index all documents and
records in custody for easy access and use thereof and shall perform such
other duties and services from time to time as may be required by the
statute, ordinance or order of the Corporate Authorities.  The Village Clerk
may delegate such of the foregoing duties above as may be delegated by law.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 31.31  BOND OF CLERK AND DEPUTY CLERK.



   (A)   Prior to entering upon the duties of the office of Clerk of
the village, the Clerk shall execute a bond with security to be approved by
the Corporate Authorities made payable to the village in the amount of
$20,000.  The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of the office of Clerk and the payment of all money received by the
Clerk according to the laws of the state and the ordinances of the village. 
The obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the
insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and existing either
under the laws of the state or the United States wherein the Clerk has placed
funds in his custody, provided the bank has been approved by the Corporate
Authorities as a depositary for said funds.  The village shall pay all
premiums of said bond.  The bond shall be filed with the Village Treasurer.



   (B)   Prior to the entering upon the duties of the office of Deputy
Clerk, the Deputy Clerk shall execute a bond with security to be approved by
the Corporate Authorities made payable to the village in the amount of
$20,000.  The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of the office and the payment of all money received by the Deputy
Clerk according to the laws of the state and the ordinances of the village. 
The obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the
insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and existing either
under the laws of the state or the United States wherein the Deputy Clerk has
placed funds in his custody, provided the bank has been approved by the
Corporate Authorities as a depositary for said funds.  The village shall pay
all premiums of each bond.  Each bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 217, passed 5-21-79)



§ 31.32  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Village Clerk shall receive compensation for each regular,
special and committee meeting attended in the sum of $125.



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall receive additional compensation of
$250 per month for maintaining office hours in the Municipal Building on
average of two hours per week on a monthly basis.



   (C)   In addition to the compensation herein provided, the Village
Clerk shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for reasonable expenses
incurred or advanced on behalf of the village.



(Ord. 997, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 1145, passed 9-18-00; Am. Ord. 1887,
passed 3-6-17)



TREASURER



§ 31.40  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Village Treasurer shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Board.  The Treasurer shall hold office
concurrently with the term of the Village President or until his successor is
duly appointed and qualified unless sooner removed.  The Treasurer shall be
compensated in such an amount as is from time to time established by the
Corporate Authorities.  The Village Treasurer shall be the custodian of all
village funds and shall keep a true and correct account of all monies
belonging to the village.  At the end of each month and at the end of each
fiscal year the Treasurer shall render an account under oath to the Corporate
Authorities showing the state of the village treasury on the date of the
account, the balance of money in the treasury, a statement of all money
received into the treasury, and on what account, together with a statement of
all disbursements made.  Provided, further, the Treasurer shall perform all
such duties as are from time to time set forth by the President and Board of
Trustees and the Illinois Municipal Code.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77; Am. Ord. 770, passed 8-30-93)



§ 31.41  BOND.



   Prior to entering upon the duties of Treasurer of the village, the
Treasurer shall execute a bond with security to be approved by the Corporate
Authorities made payable to the village in an amount of money that is not
less than three times the latest federal census population or any subsequent
census figure used for motor fuel tax purposes.  The bond shall be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office of
Treasurer and the payment of all money received by the Treasurer according to
the laws of the state and the ordinances of the village.  The obligation of
the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency,
failure or closing of any bank organized and existing either under the laws
of the state or the United States wherein the Treasurer has placed funds in
his custody, provided the bank has been approved by the Corporate Authorities
as a depositary for said funds.  The village shall pay all premiums of said
bond.  The bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 217, passed 5-21-79)



VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.50  OFFICE CREATED.



   The position of Village Administrator is hereby created subject to the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.51  APPOINTMENT.



   The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the Village President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for an indefinite term
on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications without
consideration of race, age, color, handicap, national origin, sex, politics
or religious beliefs with special reference to education and actual
experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the
administration of local government and to the powers and duties of the office
as specified below.  At the time of his appointment, he need not be an
actual resident of the village provided that he becomes a resident of the
village within one year following the date of his appointment.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91; Am. Ord. 790, passed 2-2-94)



§ 31.52  [RESERVED].



§ 31.53  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Village Administrator shall be the chief administrative
officer of the village and shall be responsible to the President and the
Board of Trustees for the proper administration of the day-to-day business
affairs of the village.



   (B)   The Village Administrator shall have the following powers and
exercise these specific duties as follows:



      (1)   Personnel.  It shall be the duty of the Village
Administrator to direct, control, supervise and coordinate all village
departments and divisions thereof as may be created by the Board of Trustees
with the exception that the technical supervision of the Police Department
shall be provided by the Chief of Police.  He may recommend to the board of
Trustees the appointment of all officers, department heads and employees of
the village, except police personnel.  He may further recommend the
discipline, suspension of up to 15 days or removal of any nonpolice officer
or nonpolice employee when such discipline, suspension or removal shall be
consistent with the best interests of the village.  All recommendations for
appointment, discipline, suspension or removal shall be based on merit and
qualifications or disqualifications of such officer or employee without
regard to political belief or affiliation.  He shall recommend to the Board
of Trustees the salaries, wages, hours and conditions of employment of all
officers and employees under his jurisdiction.  Nothing herein shall limit
or take away from the Board of Trustees the final decision as to whom shall
be employed, suspended or removed or as to the amount of any salaries or
wages.



      (2)   Annual financial and administrative report.  The
Village Administrator shall prepare  or  be responsible for and submit to
the President and Board of Trustees within 60 days of conclusion of each
fiscal year a complete report of the financial and administrative activities
of the village for the preceding fiscal year.



      (3)   The annual budget, appropriation and levy ordinances. 
The Village Administrator shall prepare or cause to be prepared on or before
February 1 of each year an annual budget and shall submit the budget to the
President and Board of Trustees together with a message outlining its
important features.  He shall be responsible for its administration after
adoption provided that nothing herein shall limit the duties and
responsibilities of the Village Treasurer as provided for in state statutes
and the ordinances of the village.  The Village Administrator shall also
prepare and file each year the annual appropriation ordinance and the levy
ordinance.



      (4)   Signatory on Bank Accounts.  The Village Administrator
shall be designated as one of the signatories on all bank accounts of the
village.



      (5)   Purchases.  The Village Administrator shall purchase
all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the
budget provided that no purchase shall be made, contract let or obligation
incurred for any item or service which exceeds the current budgeted amount
without a supplemental appropriation by the Board of Trustees.  The
authority of the Village Administrator to authorize purchase orders or
contracts or expend the funds of the village shall be limited to $10,000. 
The Village Administrator shall make recommendations to the President and
Board of Trustees as to whether a bid or contract officer is desirable or
undesirable or which of several contracts or bids submitted to the village is
the most desirable.



      (6)   The absence or vacancy of the Treasurer.  The Village
Administrator during any period of absence or vacancy of the Village
Treasurer shall immediately assume the duties and exercise the full powers of
the office as provided for in the village ordinances and state statutes.  In
no event shall the Village Administrator be required to obtain a bond in his
capacity as acting Treasurer if at the time of the exercise of such duties he
has a bond in effect in an amount not less than the amount provided for in §
31.55.



      (7)   Village property.  The Village Administrator  shall
keep a current inventory of all  real and personal property of the village
and the location of such property.  He shall be responsible for the care and
custody of all village property which is not by statute or ordinance assigned
to some other officer or body for care and control.



      (8)   Recommendations and advice.  The Village Administrator
shall recommend to the Board of Trustees the adoption of such measures as he
may deem necessary or expedient.  He shall advise the Board of Trustees of
the monthly financial condition of the village and the future financial needs
of the village and make such recommendations as he deems appropriate.



      (9)   Attendance at meetings.  The Village Administrator
shall be required to attend all the regular and special meetings of the Board
of Trustees unless expressly excused by the President or the Board of
Trustees.  He shall direct the preparation of the agenda for each such
meeting.  He shall present a report at each regular monthly meeting and be
prepared to answer any questions regarding the administration of the village.



      (10)   Pending legislation.  The Village Administrator shall
report to and consult with the President and Board of Trustees with respect
to pending and recommended legislation.



      (11)   Enforcement of ordinances.  The Village Administrator
shall assure that all village ordinances are effectively enforced, prepare
correspondence needs to direct or document village business decisions and
assist any citizens, outside agencies, developers, local community groups,
utility companies and the like and village staff in resolving governmental or
operation problems, bringing important matters to the attention of the Board
of Trustees.



      (12)   Economic development.  The Village Administrator shall
promote and assist the economic development and the controlled planned growth
of the village.



      (13)   Village spokesperson.  The Village Administrator shall
appear before citizen groups and other organizational meetings, make
speeches, attend ceremonial functions, and serve as a spokesperson for the
village in situations of mutual interest and concern with neighboring
municipalities as well as with federal and state agencies.



      (14)   Investigation of complaints.  The Village
Administrator shall investigate all nonpolice department complaints and
inquiries in relation to matters concerning the administration of the
government of the village and services maintained by the public utilities in
the village and shall see that all franchises, permits and privileges created
by the village are faithfully observed.



      (15)   General duties and powers.  The Village Administrator
shall perform such other duties and have such other powers as prescribed from
time to time by the President and Board of Trustees, including, but not
limited to, what is set forth on the Village Administrator job description
attached to Ordinance 1777 and incorporated by reference as if set forth in
full herein.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91; Am. Ord. 1297, passed 5-5-03; Am. Ord. 1684, passed 1-16-12; Am.
Ord. 1777, passed 5-15-14)



§ 31.54  COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.



   The Village Administrator shall be paid such compensation as from time
to time is approved by motion or resolution of the Board of Trustees and
shall be reimbursed upon prior approval by the Board of Trustees for
out-of-pocket expenses incurred while in the performance of duties on behalf
of the village.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.55  OATH AND BOND.



   The Village Administrator shall take an oath prescribed by law and
furnish a bond before entering upon the duties of his office in such sum as
may be required by the President and Board of Trustees.  The amount of the
bond shall not be less than the amount which may be required from time to
time by state statutes or the Board of Trustees.  The bond shall be
conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties and shall be
conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of
duty or any act of the Village Administrator.  The cost of the bond shall be
paid by the village.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.56  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   The Village Administrator shall not be interested directly or
indirectly in any contract, work or business of the village, or in the sale
of any article to the village, or in the purchase of any property belonging
to the village or property sold for taxes or assessments or sold by virtue of
legal processes as a result of suit by the village.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.57  OUTSIDE ACTIVITIES.



   The Village Administrator shall devote his entire time, attention and
energies to the business of the village and shall not be engaged in any other
business, teaching or consulting activity whether or not such activity is
pursued for gain, profit or other pecuniary advantage without the express
prior approval of the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.58  EFFECT OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR ON POWERS OF PRESIDENT AND BOARD
OF TRUSTEES.



   The Village Administrator shall be subject to the authority and
direction of the President and Board of Trustees.  All functions, powers and
duties conferred or imposed on the Village Administrator shall be subject to
the superior right and power of the President and Board of Trustees to
supervise and administer the local government and affairs of the village. 
Except for internal administrative matters, the Village Administrator does
not set policy for the village; it is the duty and responsibility of the
Village Administrator to see that the policies and directives of the
President and Board of Trustees are implemented.  However, all acts and
things done by the Village Administrator pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter shall, unless otherwise expressly provided herein, be final and
conclusive unless and until superseded by the action of the President and the
Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.59  ABSENCE OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.



   During the absence or disability of the Village Administrator, the
Village President, with the advice and  consent of the Board of Trustees, 
may  designate some properly qualified village employee to act as temporary
Village Administrator.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.60  PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.



   The Village Administrator shall be evaluated, in writing, at least once
a year.  The evaluation will be based upon the performance of his duties and
shall not reflect personality difference.  All criticisms that appear in the
written evaluation shall have been discussed with the Village Administrator
prior to the evaluation so that he will have had an opportunity to correct
any problems.  When a criticism is entered into the written evaluation, a
complete record will be entered, reflecting the exact nature of the problem
and what improvements have been made.  The written evaluation will be a
summary of the evaluations submitted by the President and the Trustees.  It
will be signed by the President and the Trustees.  The Village Administrator
will be presented the written evaluation in closed session and he will
examine its contents.  At that time he will have an opportunity to state his
opinion of the evaluation.  He shall be permitted to write on the evaluation
his opinion of the evaluation and discuss any section.  He will sign and
date the evaluation to denote that he has read it and has had an opportunity
to enter his written comments.  The original evaluation will be placed in a
history folder kept in the office of the President.  The folder will be
accessible to the Village Administrator and Trustees when accompanied by the
President.  The Village Administrator will receive a personal copy of the
evaluation.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



§ 31.61  REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION.



   The Village Administrator is an employee at will and may be removed at
any time upon the recommendation of the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91; Am. Ord. 1777, passed 5-5-14)



§ 31.62  PERSONNEL POLICY.



   The Village Administrator shall be salaried employee who shall be
subject to the provisions of the Personnel Policy of the village.  If there
is a conflict between this subchapter and the Personnel Policy, the
provisions of this subchapter shall control.



(Ord. 211, passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. 234, passed 12-3-79; Am. Ord. 656, passed
6-24-91)



VILLAGE ATTORNEY



§ 31.70  APPOINTMENT; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Village Attorney shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees as provided by
statute at a fee fixed by resolution and shall hold office until his
successor is appointed and qualified.  He shall prosecute and defend all
suits at law or in equity when the village is a party or interested therein
or against or by any official on behalf of the village whenever authorized to
do so by the Corporate Authorities, provided that in all suits or proceedings
before courts or commissions, he may be paid a negotiated fee for same,
commensurate with and as agreed with the Corporate Authorities. He shall,
when requested, render advice on all legal questions arising concerning the
Village or its officers or employees and, upon request, shall reduce and
submit the same in writing.  He shall attend meetings of the Corporate
Authorities as required.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



VILLAGE AUDITOR



§ 31.80  APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.



   The Village Auditor shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees and shall perform the duties
as required by law.  Upon completion of the annual audit of all village
monies, the Auditor shall provide the village  with sufficient copies of
same and file  certified copies with the appropriate state officials.  The
rate of compensation shall be determined by the Corporate Authorities prior
to each annual audit.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



VILLAGE ENGINEER



§ 31.90  APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.



   The Village Engineer shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Trustees and shall hold office until his
successor is appointed and qualified.  He shall advise the Corporate
Authorities with respect to professional engineering matters when requested
by the Corporate Authorities.  He shall make current corrections to the
Village Map, Official Comprehensive Plan Map and the Village Zoning Map.  He
shall render professional engineering advice to the various committees,
boards and commissions of the village as required by law or as authorized by
the Corporate Authorities.  He shall be compensated in such manner as shall
be fixed by resolution.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER



§ 31.95  POSITION CREATED.



   There is hereby created with the Village of Channahon the position of
Human Resource Manager.



(Ord. 1761, passed 12-16-13)



§ 31.96  QUALIFICATION AND APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The position of Human Resource Manager is an at-will position
which will be appointed by the Village President with advice and consent of
the Village Board and may be removed in the same manner.



   (B)   The Human Resource Manager will report directly to the Village
Administrator.



(Ord. 1761, passed 12-16-13)



§ 31.97  AUTHORITY.



   The Human Resource Manger is an administrative exempt salaried position.



(Ord. 1761, passed 12-16-13)



CHAPTER 32:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Directors of Departments



   32.01   Duties



   32.02   Appointment



Finance/Human Resource Department



   32.10   Established; duties



Community and Legislative Affairs



   32.20   Established; duties



Public Works Department



   32.30   Established; duties



Community Development Department



   32.40   Established; duties



Public Safety/Emergency Support



   32.50   Established; duties



Technology/Community Image/Code Enforcement



   32.60   Established; duties



Planning and Zoning Commission



   32.70   Created



   32.71   Membership and appointment



   32.72   Term of members



   32.73   Compensation



   32.74   Powers and duties



   32.75   Meetings



   32.76   Actions and decisions



   32.77   Fees



   32.78   Records



   32.79   Prior decisions and recommendations



Citizens Advisory Commission



   32.105   Created



   32.106   Composition



   32.107   Appointments; terms



   32.108   Organization; meetings



   32.109   Duties



Board of Fire and Police Commissioners



   32.115   Created



   32.116   Appointment of Board members



   32.117   Quorum



   32.118   Qualification; oath; bond; removal



   32.119   (Reserved)



   32.120   Annual report; budget request



   32.121   Secretary of Board; duties; seal of Board



   32.122   Rooms and funds for operation of Board



   32.123   Compensation of Secretary and members of Board



   32.124   Powers and duties



   32.125   Rules; publications



   32.126   Authorization to adopt rules and regulations



   32.127   Fee to applicants to Police Department



Water and Sewer Advisory Committee



   32.135  Created



   32.136  Composition



   32.137  Appointment of members



   32.138  Term



   32.139  Chairman



   32.140  Secretary



   32.141  Meeting



   32.142  Compensation



   32.143  Scope of Committee



Community Events Council



   32.150   Established; duties



DIRECTORS OF DEPARTMENTS



§ 32.01  DUTIES.



   The Director of the various operating departments shall implement the
administrative details of specific departments in a manner that the Corporate
Authorities approve.  The Director of the various departments shall make
monthly reports to the Corporate Authorities and oftener if required, of the
matters and things pertaining to their respective departments showing
expenditures thereof.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 32.02  APPOINTMENT.



   The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall appoint the Finance/Human Resource Department Trustee, the
Community and Legislative Affairs Trustee, the Public Works Department
Trustee, the Community Development Department Trustee, the Public
Safety/Emergency Support Trustee and the Technology/Community Image/ Code
Enforcement Trustee.



(Ord. 1298, passed 5-5-03; Am. Ord. 1392, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 1743,
passed 5-6-13)



FINANCE/HUMAN RESOURCE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.10  ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby established a position within the village
which shall be known as the Finance/Human Resource Department Trustee, who
shall be a member of the Board of Trustees.  The Finance/Human Resource
Department Trustee shall serve as a liaison between the Corporate
Authorities, the Village Administrator, the Finance Director and the Human
Resource Director with respect to matters and policies concerning:



      (1)   The finances and revenue of the village;



      (2)   The accounts and records of the village and all
officers, boards or departments required to keep or make accounts, records or
reports;



      (3)   The management and control of all monies collected and
paid out by the village and collection of money due the village;



      (4)   The Village Treasurer and auditing of the village
accounts and accounts of all special boards;



      (5)   The bonding of all of the officers and employees, who
have care and custody of any village funds;



      (6)   Insurance;



      (7)   Public health issues;



      (8)   The Village Employee Manual updates;



      (9)   Matters respecting collective bargaining;



      (10)   The updating and maintaining of new employee evaluation
forms;



      (11)   The impact of various employment related state and
federal regulations; and



      (12)   The coordination of employee benefits and insurance
policies.



   (B)   The Finance/Human Resource Department Trustee shall make such
reports to the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them
informed on all matters pertaining to the Finance Department, including any
failure to make payments or receive money due to the village and to all
records in relation to any such matters as he or she deems proper for action
by the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 1298, passed 5-5-03; Am. Ord. 1392, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 1743,
passed 5-6-13)



COMMUNITY AND LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS



§ 32.20  ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby established a position within the village
which shall be known as the Community and Legislative Affairs Trustee who
shall be a member of the Board of Trustees.  The Community and Legislative
Affairs Trustee shall serve as a liaison between the Village Administrator
and the Corporate Authorities with respect to matters and policies relating
to:



      (1)   Senior citizens;



      (2)   Handicapped;



      (3)   The sanitary condition of the village;



      (4)   Liaison between the village and the Community Events
Council;



      (5)   The Three Rivers Festival;



      (6)   Various community events;



      (7)   All issues pertaining to legislative affairs;



      (8)   Cable television;



      (9)   Solid waste disposal; and



      (10)   Recycling.



   (B)   The Community and Legislative Affairs Trustee shall make such
reports to the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them
informed on all matters pertaining to community affairs and shall make
records in relation to any such matters as he or she deems proper for action
by the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 1298, passed 5-5-03; Am. Ord. 1392, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 1743,
passed 5-6-13)



PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT



§ 32.30  ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby established a position within the village
which shall be known as the Public Works Department Trustee who shall be a
member of the Board of Trustees.  The Public Works Department Trustee shall
serve as a liaison between the Village Administrator and the Corporate
Authorities with respect to matters and policies relating to:



      (1)    The care, maintenance and repair of all streets, alleys
and storm sewers and the construction of all street improvements, paving,
sidewalks, storm sewers, culverts and bridges; and



      (2)   The property of the village, both real and personal.



      (3)   The village water and sanitary sewage works.



      (4)   Telephone, natural gas and electricity franchises and
related issues.



   (B)   The Public Works Department Trustee shall make such reports to
the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them informed on all
matters pertaining to the Department and shall make recommendations in
relation to any such matters as he or she deems proper for action by the
Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77;  Am. Ord. 295, passed 11-2-82; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 6-18-90; Am. Ord. 794, passed 3-21-94; Am. Ord. 1039, passed 5-3-99)



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT



§ 32.40  ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby established a position within the village
which shall be known as the Community Development Department Trustee, who
shall be a member of the Board of Trustees. The Community Development
Department Trustee shall serve as a liaison between the Corporate
Authorities, the Village Administrator and the Director of Community
Development with respect to matters and policies concerning:



      (1)   Zoning, building and related ordinances of the village;



      (2)   Annexation of property to the village;



      (3)   Reviewing and amending the comprehensive plan and zoning
map; and



      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (B)   The Community Development Department  Trustee shall make such
reports to the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them
informed on all matters pertaining to the Department and shall make such
records in relation to any such matters as he or she deems proper for action
by the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 1298, passed 5-5-03; Am. Ord. 1743, passed 5-6-13)



PUBLIC SAFETY/EMERGENCY SUPPORT



§ 32.50  ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby established a position within the village
which shall be known as the Public Safety/Emergency Support Trustee, who
shall be a member of the Board of Trustees.  The Public Safety/Emergency
Support Trustee shall serve as a liaison between the Corporate Authorities,
the Village Administrator and the Police Chief with respect to matters and
policies relating to:



      (1)   The enforcement of all penal ordinances of the village
in addition to all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations relative to
street parking, traffic regulations and the like.



      (2)   The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners;



      (3)   The Police Pension Board;



      (4)   Coordination of emergency preparedness efforts between
the village administration, Public Works Department, Building Safety
Department, Police Department, emergency management agency and fire
protection district to prepare responses for a variety of emergencies; and



      (5)   Development and preparation of emergency preparedness
educational presentations to businesses, residents and village employees.



   (B)   The Public Safety/Emergency Support Trustee shall make such
reports to the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep them
informed on all matters pertaining to the Department and shall make records
in relation to any such matters as he or she deems proper for action by the
Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77;  Am. Ord. 295, passed 11-1-82; Am. Ord. 596,
passed 6-18-90; Am. Ord. 794, passed 3-21-94; Am. Ord. 1743, passed 5-6-13)



TECHNOLOGY/COMMUNITY IMAGE/CODE ENFORCEMENT



§ 32.60  ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.



   (A)   There is hereby established a position within the village
which shall be known as the Technology/Community Image/Code Enforcement
Trustee who shall be a member of the Board of Trustees. The
Technology/Community Image/Code Enforcement Trustee shall serve as a liaison
between the Corporate Authorities and the Village Administrator Information
Systems Coordinator with respect to matters and policies concerning:



      (1)   New computers or technology related equipment;



      (2)   Review of short- and long-range planning for
technological improvements;



      (3)   Work with economic development groups to continuously
foster positive community image and economic growth; and



      (4)   Periodically review code enforcement policies.



   (B)   The Technology/Community Image/Code Enforcement Trustee shall
make such reports to the Corporate Authorities as may be necessary to keep
them informed on all matters pertaining to his or her duties and shall make
records in relation to any such matters as he or she deems proper for action
by the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 1298, passed 5-5-03; Am. Ord. 1392, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 1743,
passed 5-6-13)



PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



§ 32.70  CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Village.  The Commission shall be known as the Planning and Zoning
Commission (PZC).



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.71  MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The PZC shall consist of a total of seven members appointed by
the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.  Each
member shall reside in the village.  The President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees may remove any members of the Commission for
cause following public hearing after notice to the member and to the public.



   (B)   The President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees shall appoint one of the members of the PZC to act as its
Chairperson.  The term of the Chairperson shall be two years.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.72  TERM OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The terms of members of the previously existing members of the
Plan Commission and the force and effect and all such members currently
serving shall be deemed to be members of the PZC until the expiration of
their previously established terms.



   (B)   Upon expiration of the terms established under the prior Plan
Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals Ordinances, members of the PZC shall
be appointed for a term of five years. Members of the PZC shall serve until
their successors have been duly appointed and qualified.  Appointments to
fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired term of the member whose place has
become vacant.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.73  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the PZC shall receive compensation in the amount of $50 for
each regular, special, reconvened, or adjourned meeting that they attend. 
The Chairperson shall receive compensation in the amount of $60 per
meeting.  The village, upon presentation of a receipt in proper form, will
reimburse actual expenses of the PZC or its members.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96; Am. Ord. 1105, passed 5-15-00)



§ 32.74  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the PZC shall include the following:



   (A)   To hear and consider appeals taken from a decision of the
Building Inspector; and



   (B)   To hear and consider applications for variations of uses from
the Zoning Ordinance; and



   (C)   To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the village; and



   (D)   Recommend to the corporate authorities ordinances to implement
the comprehensive plan; and



   (E)   Recommend to the corporate authorities from time to time
changes in the official comprehensive plan; and



   (F)   Prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities from time
to time plans for specific improvements in furtherance of the official
comprehensive plan; and



   (G)   Give aid to the village officials charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the comprehensive plan to
further the making of these projects, and, generally, to promote the
realization of the official comprehensive plan; and



   (H)   Recommending to the corporate authorities reasonable
requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public
streets and highways, alley ways for public service gutters, facilities,
curbs, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of
lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply
and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment; and



   (I)   Prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities schemes for
regulating or forbidding structures or activities which may hinder access to
solar energy systems necessary for the proper functioning of solar energy
systems; and



   (J)   Hold hearings on petitions for reclassification of zoning
districts and for amendments to the zoning ordinance and to make
recommendations on such petitions and amendments to the corporate
authorities; and



   (K)   Make recommendations to the corporate authorities regarding
the subdivision ordinance and to review all plats of subdivision and site
plans for development and make recommendation to the corporate authorities on
such plats and site plans; and



   (L)   Review all annexation and disconnection proposals and submit
recommendations to the corporate authorities with regard to such proposals
and recommend a zoning classification for such land upon annexation; and



   (M)   Hear, consider, and make recommendations to the corporate
authorities on applications for and petitions for revocation of planned unit
developments; and



   (N)   Rear, consider, and make recommendations to the corporate
authorities on applications for and petitions for revocation of special use
permits; and



   (O)   Exercise such other powers and duties germane to the powers
and duties granted by state statutes and this chapter as may from time to
time be conferred on the PZC by the corporate authorities.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.75  MEETINGS.



   All meetings of the PZC shall be at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the PZC may determine.  The Chairman, or in his absence
the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.  All meetings of the PZC shall be open to the public.  The PZC
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon
every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and 
shall  also keep  records of  its examinations and other official
actions.  No  hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the PZC being
present, which shall consist of a majority of all the members.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.76  ACTIONS AND DECISIONS.



   All actions and decisions of the PZC with regard to the powers
enumerated in § 32.74(A) and (B) are final administrative decisions and
shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the Illinois Administrative
Review Act.  All other actions taken by the PZC shall be recommended to the
corporate authorities.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.77  FEES.



   The corporate authorities shall establish from time to time the fees
necessary to appear and conduct business before the PZC, including fees for
auction of any public records of the Board.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.78  RECORDS.



   Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every
order, requirements, decision or determination of the PZC shall immediately
be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and shall be public record. 
These records are available for inspection  by the public during regular
office hours in accordance with state statutes and ordinances of the village.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



§ 32.79  PRIOR DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.



   All prior decisions and recommendations of the previously existing
Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission shall be deemed valid and to
survive the adoption of this subchapter.



(Ord. 917, passed 10-21-96)



CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 32.105  CREATED.



   A Citizens Advisory Commission to the village President and Board of
Trustees is hereby established.



(Ord. 681, passed 12-2-91)



§ 32.106  COMPOSITION.



   The Citizens Advisory Commission shall consist of 22 residents of the
village, two of which shall be high school students.



(Ord. 681, passed 12-2-91; Am. Ord. 798, passed 4-18-94)



§ 32.107  APPOINTMENTS; TERMS.



   (A)   Appointment to Commission.  The President of the village,
with the advise and consent of the Board of Trustees shall appoint all
members to the Commission.



   (B)   Terms.  All terms on the Advisory Commission shall be for a
one-year period.  Advisory Commission members shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified.



(Ord. 681, passed 12-2-91)



§ 32.108  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.



   (A)   Commission chairperson.  The Advisory Commission shall elect
one of its members to serve as its Chairperson.



   (B)   Meetings.



      (1)   A majority of the members of the Commission then holding
office shall be required to conduct its business.



      (2)   The Commission shall elect one of its members as
Secretary to take and prepare complete and accurate minutes of its meetings
and shall distribute and make copies of those minutes to the Village
President and Board of Trustees.



      (3)   The Commission shall meet at least monthly. Other
special meetings may be called either upon the written notice by the
Commission Chairperson or a majority of the members of the Committee.  At
least four days notice is required to all Commission members of any special
meeting.



(Ord. 681, passed 12-2-91)



§ 32.109  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Citizens Advisory Commission shall be advisory, and its
duties shall include:



      (1)   To provide a forum for the village and its residents to
discuss and address their ideas and comment upon issues facing the village.



      (2)   To evaluate the feasibility of various village projects
and to investigate revenue sources to implement the projects.



      (3)   To investigate the feasibility of a “Tree City”
program.



      (4)   To promote an exchange of ideas between the village and
its residents.



      (5)   To participate in such projects as may from time to time
be requested by the Village Board.



      (6)   To offer the Village Board suggestions and ideas for the
betterment of the village.



(Ord. 681, passed 12-2-91)



BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.115  CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners,
hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "Board," consisting of three members
whose terms of office shall be three years and until their respective
successors are appointed to the Board and have qualified, except that the
term of the first three members appointed shall be:  one of the members
shall be appointed to serve until the end of the then current municipal
fiscal year (for convenience, sometimes referred to as Commissioner 1),
another to serve until the end of the municipal fiscal year next ensuing (for
convenience, sometimes referred to as Commissioner 2), and the third to serve
until the end of the municipal fiscal year second next ensuing (for
convenience, sometimes referred to as Commissioner 3).  The Board members
shall elect a Chairperson to serve during each municipal fiscal year. 
Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment of the member whose office is vacant.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94)



§ 32.116  APPOINTMENT OF BOARD MEMBERS.



   Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advise and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, provided that no
appointment shall be made by the President within 30 days before the
expirations of his/her term of office.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94)



§ 32.117  QUORUM.



   A majority of the Board members constitutes a quorum for the conduct of
all business.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94)



§ 32.118  QUALIFICATION; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL.



   (A)   The members of the Board shall be considered officers of the
municipality, and each member shall file with the Village Clerk an oath and a
fidelity bond in the sum of Five Thousand ($5,000) Dollars.



   (B)   No person holding an office under a municipality shall be a
member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or the Secretary
thereof.  The acceptance of any such office by a member of the Board shall
be treated as a resignation of his/her office as a member of the Board or the
Secretary thereof.  No person shall be appointed a member of the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage up
to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the village.  No
more than two members of the Board shall belong to the same political party
existing in the municipality at the time of the appointments and as defined
in Section 10-2 of the Illinois Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5 §§ 10 et
seq. (1992)).  If only one or not political party exists in the municipality
at the time of the appointments,  then state or national political party
affiliations shall be considered in making the appointments.  Party
affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a
member of the Board.



   (C)   Board members shall not be subject to removal, except for
cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within 30
days in his/her or their own defense, before a meeting of the Village
Board.  A majority vote of the elected members of the Village Board shall be
required to remove any Board member from office.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94; Am. Ord. 978, passed 4-6-98)



§ 32.119  (RESERVED).



§ 32.120  ANNUAL REPORT; BUDGET REQUEST.



   On or before the 1st of January of each year, the Board shall submit to
the Village President a report  of its activities commencing from the date
of its last report, and of the rules in force and the practical effect
thereof.  In this report the Board may make suggestions which the Board
believes would result in greater efficiency in the Police Department.  In
addition and concurrently the Board shall submit an annual budget request to
the Village President.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94; Am. Ord. 978, passed 4-6-98)



§ 32.121  SECRETARY OF BOARD; DUTIES; SEAL OF BOARD.



   The Board may employ a Secretary, or may designate one of its own
members to act as Secretary.  The Secretary shall keep the minute of the
Board's proceedings; be the custodian of all records pertaining to the
business of the Board; keep a record of all examinations held; perform all
other duties the Board prescribes; and be custodian of the seal of the Board,
if one is adopted.  The board is hereby authorized to adopt an official seal
and to prescribe the form thereof by resolution of the Board.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94)



§ 32.122  ROOMS AND FUNDS FOR OPERATION OF BOARD.



   The corporate authorities shall provide suitable rooms for the Board
and shall allow reasonable use of public buildings for holding examinations
and other duties performed by the Board and shall further provided adequate
funds in the annual appropriation ordinance for the operation of the Board.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94)



§ 32.123  COMPENSATION OF SECRETARY AND MEMBERS OF BOARD.



   The Secretary and members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94)



§ 32.124  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall conduct itself and possess the rights, authority,
powers, obligations and duties as may from time to time be granted it by
law/ordinance including as set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 §§ 10.2-1-1 et
seq. provided, however, that the Board shall not make initial appointments to
the position of police officer or Chief of Police.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94; Am. Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 32.125  RULES; PUBLICATIONS.



   (A)   The Board shall make rules to carry out the purpose of ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10.2-1-1 et seq. and for promotions, suspensions and
removals in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 §§
10.2-1-1 et seq.  The Board, from time to time, may make changes in these
rules.



   (B)   All these rules and changes therein shall be printed
immediately for distribution.  The Board shall give notice of the places
where the printed rules may be obtained, and of the date, not less than ten
days subsequent to the time of publication, when the rules or changes therein
shall go into operation.  This notice shall be published in one or more
newspapers published in the village.



   (C)   These rules of the Board shall apply only to the conduct of
examinations for promotions, and to the conduct of hearings on charges
brought against a member of the Police Department.  No such rule shall be
made by the Board to govern the operation of the Police Department or the
conduct of its members unless the President and Board of Trustees
specifically authorizes the Board to make such rules; however, the President
and Board of Trustees may also rescind such authorization.



(Ord. 797, passed 4-20-94; Am. Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 32.126  AUTHORIZATION TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The village does hereby adopt the provisions set forth in the
exercise of its home rule powers.



   (B)   The village hereby approves and authorizes its Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners to adopt the rules and regulations marked as Exhibit
A of Ord. 811, which is incorporated herein as if set out in its entirety,
and further the actions of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in
adopting the rules and regulations are hereby ratified.



(Ord. 811, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.127  FEE TO APPLICANTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   All applicants for a position in the Police Department shall pay an
application fee of $15.  The application fee shall be submitted with the
application.



(Ord. 1102, passed 5-1-00)



WATER AND SEWER ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 32.135  CREATED.



   There is hereby created a Committee of the village  to  be known as
the Water and  Sewer  System Advisory Committee (hereafter referred to as
"the Committee") which shall be a subcommittee to the Citizen's Advisory
Commission.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.136  COMPOSITION.



   The Committee shall consist of up to ten residents of the village, who
may also be members of the Citizen's Advisory Commission.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.137  APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   Members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Village President
with the advise and consent of the Board of Trustees; members may be removed
from the Committee in the same manner.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.138  TERM.



   All terms of the Committee shall be for a period of one year. 
Committee members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.139  CHAIRMAN.



   The Chairman of the Committee shall be the Public Works Trustee.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.140  SECRETARY.



   The Committee shall elect one of its members to serve as Secretary of
the Committee; the Secretary shall record and prepare the minutes of the
meeting, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the President and Board of
Trustees.  In the absence of the Secretary, the Chairman shall appoint a
member to serve as the Temporary Secretary.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.141  MEETING.



   The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman.  A  majority 
of  the  members  of  the  Committee is required to conduct business.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.142  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



§ 32.143  SCOPE OF COMMITTEE.



   The Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Public Works
Trustee and the President and Board of Trustees with regard to matters
concerning:



   (A)   Investigating and studying proposed major expansions to the
system.



   (B)   Serving as liaison between village residents and the President
and Board of Trustees with regard to consumer issues concerning the System.



   (C)   Performing such other functions and duties as the Committee
may from time to time be directed to perform by the President and Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 810, passed 7-18-94)



COMMUNITY EVENTS COUNCIL



§ 32.150 ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.



   (A)   Established.  A Community Events Council is hereby
established.



   (B)   Composition of Council.  The Community Events Council shall
consist of nine residents of the village and one of the positions shall be
filled by the Community and Legislative Affairs Trustee, who shall be a
liaison between the village and the Council.



   (C)   Appointments to Council; Terms. 



      (1)   Appointments.  The President of the village with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees shall appoint all members to the
Council.



      (2)   Terms.  All terms on the Council shall be for a
one-year period.  Council members shall serve until their successors are
appointed and qualified.



   (D)   Organization; meetings. 



      (1)   Quorum.  A majority of the members of the Council then
holding office shall be required to conduct its business.



      (2)   Minutes.  The Council shall take and prepare complete
and accurate minutes of its meetings and shall distribute and make copies of
those minutes to the Village President and Board of Trustees.



      (3)   Meetings.  The Council shall meet at least monthly at
Village Hall.  At least four days notice is required to all Council members
before any special meeting.



   (E)   Duties.  The Council shall be advisory and its duties shall
include:



      (1)   To set and carry out specific community events.



      (2)   To develop a budget for such event to be approved by the
President and Board of Trustees.



      (3)   To promote an exchange of ideas between the Village and
its residents relative to the type and number of events to be held.



      (4)   To participate in such events as may  from time to time
be requested by the Village Board.



      (5)   To offer the Village Board suggestions and ideas or
events for the betterment of the village.



(Ord. 1389, passed 6-20-05)



CHAPTER 33:  ELECTIONS



Section



   33.01   Election procedure



   33.02   Inauguration of elected officers



§ 33.01  ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   Elections of municipal officers and all special elections shall be held
as provided at the time prescribed by law.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77)



§ 33.02  INAUGURATION OF ELECTED OFFICERS.



   The terms of municipal officers elected at the consolidated election
conducted the first Tuesday in April of odd-numbered years shall commence at
the first regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities of the
village, whichever such meeting occurs first, in the month of May immediately
following such consolidated election, at which meeting the newly elected
municipal officers shall be inaugurated and seated.



(Ord. 252, passed 4-6-81)



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCE



Section



   34.01   Fiscal year



   34.02   Payment of certain bills authorized



   34.03   Depository for village funds



   34.04   Payment of revenue bonds



   34.05   Participation in Police Protection Fund and Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund



   34.06   Fee for returned checks



   34.07   Village reimbursement agreement for professional fees



   34.08   Investment policy



Annual Budget Process



   34.20   Budget process adopted



   34.21   Budget Officer; powers and duties



   34.22   Preparation of budget



   34.23   Separate fund



   34.24   Revision of budget



   34.25   Money set aside for contingency purposes



   34.26   Inspection of tentative annual budget



   34.27   Time of adoption



Authorized Depositories



   34.40   Policy



   34.41   Designated depositories



   34.42   Qualified depositories



 



   34.99   Penalty



§ 34.01  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the village shall commence on the 1st day of May of
each year and terminate on the 30th day of April of each year.



(Ord. 161, passed 3-21-77;  Am. Ord. 718, passed 6-15-92)



§ 34.02  PAYMENT OF CERTAIN BILLS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)      Certain bills may be paid without individual prior
approval when the bills are regularly recurring in nature, such as but not
limited to the following:



      (1)   Wages of village employees;



      (2)   Utility bills;



      (3)   Bills for supplies and maintenance and all other bills
of a routine and regularly recurring nature.



   (B)   Purchase orders shall be signed by an appropriate department
head and/or the Village Administrator thereafter paid by the Village
Treasurer.



   (C)   All other bills and invoices shall be paid only on approval of
the corporate authorities at the regular monthly meeting and in accordance
with ordinances and resolutions in effect on the date of the passage of this
section.



(Ord. 197, passed 11-6-78;  Am. Ord. 727, passed 8-17-92)



§ 34.03  DEPOSITORY FOR VILLAGE FUNDS.



   (A)   The Tri-County Bank is hereby designated a depository for the
funds and money of the village.



   (B)   The corporate authorities shall notify the sureties of the
Village Treasurer of this designation, in writing, at least five days before
the transfer of any funds to  the Tri-County Bank.



   (C)   The Tri-County Bank shall be qualified to receive funds and
money from the village when it has furnished the corporate authorities with
copies of the last two sworn statements of resources and liabilities which 
the Tri-County Bank is required to furnish to the Commissioner of Banks and
Trust Companies or to the Comptroller of Currency, or the most recent
statement if two sworn statements are not available.



   (D)   The Tri-County Bank shall also furnish the corporate
authorities with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities which
it is required to furnish to the Commissioner of Banks and Trust Companies or
to the Comptroller of Currency.



(Ord. 203, passed 12-4-78; Am. Ord. 574, passed 3-19-90)



§ 34.04  PAYMENT OF REVENUE BONDS.



   (A)   The village shall require a non-refundable fee of $2,500 to
process any application for industrial development revenue bond or pollution
control revenue bond financing.  Said fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk
simultaneously with the filing of the application and shall be applied to the
payment of any fees, costs and expenses of the village.  This fee shall be
credited toward the issuance fee as set forth in division (B) upon the sale
of the bonds.



   (B)   Each applicant shall pay an issuance fee to the village in an
amount equal to one percent of the total amount of the bonds to be issued,
provided, however, that such fee shall in no event exceed an amount of more
than one-eighth of one percent of the yield on the bonds as computed under
the arbitrage regulations of Section 103(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or
the maximum amount permitted under such arbitrage regulations in effect from
time to time.  Such processing fee must be due and payable at the time of
the closing of the sale of bonds.



   (C)   Each applicant shall also pay all professional fees and
expenses of the village in connection with such bond issue whether or not
said bonds are sold.  The fees and expenses shall be billed to the applicant
at the normal and customary corporate hourly rate of the professional.  An
agreement shall be executed between the parties to evidence said
understanding.  In addition, the applicant shall reimburse the village for
any and all other fees, costs and expenses incurred by the village in
connection with all proceedings relating directly or indirectly to the
issuance of said bonds, including preliminary investigations and specifically
including the fees for all services rendered by any and all officers,
employees, and other consultants of the village.  The applicant shall also
pay all fees and expenses of the bond counsel, printing of the bonds, etc.,
in connection with said bond issues.  Each applicant shall immediately
reimburse the village for all fees, costs and expenses incurred by the
village upon receipt of an invoice for the same from the village.  No fees,
costs or expenses provided for in this section shall be paid later than the
closing of the sale of any such bonds.



   (D)   Any of the above mentioned fees, expenses and costs may be
repaid as project costs from bond proceeds or other sources if and when such
bonds are issued.



(Ord. 279, passed 4-12-82)



§ 34.05  PARTICIPATION IN POLICE PROTECTION FUND AND ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL
RETIREMENT FUND.



   (A)   The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund, effective January 1, 1989.



   (B)   The standard for IMRF participation shall be a position
normally requiring performance of duty for 1,000 hours per year.



(Ord. 457, passed 6-20-88)



   (C)   The village does hereby authorize the commencement of a Police
Protection Tax Fund and Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund in order to
deposit the necessary tax monies into said respective funds as they are
earned from the levies on said taxes by the corporate authorities.



   (D)   The proper officers of the village are hereby authorized to do
all things necessary and incidental toward the commencement of said funds.



(Ord. 471, passed 8-1-88)



§ 34.06  FEE FOR RETURNED CHECKS.



   (A)   A fee of $35 shall be charged for each check the village
receives that is returned to the village marked “NSF” or “account
closed.”  The fee shall be paid by the person, entity or firm who is the
signatory on the returned check.



   (B)   This section shall be in addition to any and all rights and
remedies available to the village under law, including but not limited to the
payment of treble damages and reasonable attorney’s fees.



(Ord. 634, passed 2-4-91; Am. Ord. 1864, passed 7-5-16)



§ 34.07  VILLAGE REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT FOR PROFESSIONAL FEES.



   The Village Reimbursement Agreement designated as Exhibit A on Ord.
739, passed 11-16-92, shall be utilized by the village in conjunction with
all projects for which village ordinances require the reimbursement of
professional fees.



(Ord. 739, passed 11-16-92)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.08  INVESTMENT POLICY.



   (A)   Policy. It is the policy of the Village of Channahon, Illinois
to invest public funds in a manner which will provide the highest investment
return while maintaining the maximum security and meeting the daily cash flow
demands of the Village of Channahon and conforming to all state and local
statutes governing the investment of public funds.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   AGENCIES.  Federal agency securities.



   ASKED.  The price at which securities are offered.



   BANKERS ACCEPTANCE (BA).  A draft or bill or exchange accepted by a
bank or trust company. The accepting institution guarantees payment of the
bill, as well as the issuer.



   BID.  The price offered by a buyer of securities.



   BROKER.  A broker brings buyers and sellers together for a commission
paid by the initiator of the transaction or by both sides; he or she does not
position. In the money market, brokers are active in markets in which banks
buy and sell money and in interdealer markets.



   CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT (CD).  A time deposit with a specific maturity
evidenced by a certificate. Large denomination CD’s are typically
negotiable.



   COLLATERAL.  Securities, evidence of deposit or other property which a
borrower pledges to secure repayment of a loan. Also refers to securities
pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.



   COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR).  The official annual
report for the Village of Channahon, Illinois. It includes five combined
statements and basic financial statements for each individual fund and
account group in conformity with GAAP, it also includes supporting schedules
necessary to demonstrate compliance with finance-related legal and
contractual provisions, extensive introductory material, and a detailed
Statistical Section.



   COUPON. 



      (1)   The annual rate of interest that a bond’s issuer
promises to pay the bondholder on the bond’s face value;



      (2)   A certificate attached to a bond evidencing interest due
on a payment date.



   DEALER.  A dealer acts as a principal in all transactions, buying and
selling for his own account.



   DEBENTURE.  A bond secured only by the general credit of the issuer.



   DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT.  There are two methods of delivery of
securities: delivery versus payment and delivery versus receipt (also called
free). DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT is delivery of securities with an exchange of
money for the securities. Delivery versus receipt is delivery of securities
with an exchange of a signed receipt for the securities.



   DERIVATIVES. 



      (1)   Financial instruments whose return profile is linked to,
or derived from, the movement of one or more underlying index or security,
and may include a leveraging factor; or



      (2)   Financial contracts based upon notional amounts whose
value is derived from an underlying index or security (interest rates,
foreign exchange rates, equities or commodities).



   DISCOUNT.  The difference between the cost price of a security and its
value at maturity when quoted at lower than face value. A security selling
below-original offering price shortly after sale also is considered to be at
a discount.



   DISCOUNT SECURITIES.  Non-interest bearing money market instruments
that are issued at a discount and redeemed at maturity for full face value.



   DIVERSIFICATION.  Dividing investment funds among a variety of
securities offering independent returns.



   FEDERAL CREDIT AGENCIES.  Agencies of the Federal Government set up to
supply credit to various classes of institutions and individuals.



   FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC). A federal agency that
insures bank deposits, currently up to $100,000 per deposit.



   FEDERAL FUNDS RATE.  The rate of interest at which Fed funds are
traded. This rate is currently pegged by the Federal Reserve through
open-market operations.



   FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS (FHLB).  Government sponsored wholesale banks
(currently 12 regional banks) which lend funds and provide correspondent
banking services to member commercial banks, thrift institutions, credit
unions and insurance companies. The mission of the FHLBs is to liquefy the
housing related assets of its members who must purchase stock in their
district Bank.



   FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (FNMA). FNMA, like GNMA was
chartered under the Federal Mortgage Association Act of 1938. FNMA is a
federal corporation working under the auspices of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development, (HUD). It is the largest single provider of
residential mortgage funds in the United States. Fannie Mae, as the
corporation is called, is a private stockholder-owned corporation. The
corporation’s purchases include a variety of adjustable mortgages and
second loans in addition to fixed-rate mortgages. FNMA’s securities are
also highly liquid and are widely accepted. FNMA assumes and guarantees that
all security holders will receive timely payment of principal and interest.



   FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE (FOMC).  Consists of seven members of
the Federal Reserve Board and five of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank Presidents.
The President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank is a permanent member
while the other President serve on a rotating basis. The Committee
periodically meets to set Federal Reserve guidelines regarding purchases and
sales of Government Securities in the open market as a means of influencing
the volume of bank credit and money.



   FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM.  The central bank of the United States created
by Congress and consisting of a seven member Board of Governors in
Washington, D. C, 12 regional banks and about 5,700 commercial banks that are
members of the system.



   GOVERNMENT NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (GNMA OR GINNIE MAE). 
Securities influencing-the volume of bank credit guaranteed by GNMA and
issued by mortgage bankers, commercial banks, savings and ban associations,
and other institutions. Security holder is protected by full faith and credit
of U.S. Government. GNMA securities are backed by FHA, VA or FMHM mortgages.
The term “pass-throughs” is often used to describe Ginnie Maes.



   ILLINOIS FUNDS.  An agency of the State of Illinois that invests and
distributes member funds through the State of Illinois’ Treasurer’s
office.



   LIQUIDITY.  A liquid asset is one that can be converted easily and
rapidly into cash without a substantial loss of value.



   MARKET VALUE.  The price at which a security is trading and could
presumably be purchased or sold.



   MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT.  A written contract covering all future
transactions between the parties to repurchase-reverse repurchase agreements
that establish each party’s rights in the transactions. A master agreement
will often specify the right of the buyer-lender to liquidate the underlying
securities in the event of the default by the seller-borrower.



   MATURITY.  The date upon which the principal or stated value of an
investment becomes due and payable.



   MONEY MARKET.  The market in which short term debt instruments are
issued and traded.



   OFFER.  The price asked by a seller of securities.



   OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS.  Purchases and sales of government and certain
other securities in the open market by the New York Federal Reserve Bank as
directed by FOMC in order to influence the volume of money and credit in the
economy. Purchases inject reserves into the bank system and stimulate growth
of money and credit; sales have the opposite effect. OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS
are the Federal Reserve’s most important and most flexible monetary tool.



   PORTFOLIO.  Collection of securities held by an investor.



   PRIMARY DEALER.  A group of government securities dealers who submit
daily reports of market activity and positions and monthly financial
statements to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and are subject to
informal oversight. PRIMARY DEALERS include Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC)-registered securities.



   PRUDENT PERSON RULE.  An investment standard. In some states the law
requires that a fiduciary, such as a trustee, may invest money only in a list
of securities selected by the custody state - the so-called legal list. In
other states the trustee may invest in a security if it is one which would be
bought by a prudent person of discretion and intelligence who is seeking a
reasonable income and preservation of capital.



   QUALIFIED PUBLIC DEPOSITORIES.  A financial institution which does not
claim exemption from the payment of any sales or compensating use or ad
valorem taxes under the laws of this state, which has segregated for the
benefit of the commission eligible collateral having a value of not less than
its maximum liability and which has been approved by the Public Deposit
Protection Commission to hold public deposits.



   RATE OF RETURN.  The yield obtainable on a security based on its
purchase price or its current market price. This may be the amortized yield
to maturity on a bond or the current income return.



   REPURCHASE AGREEMENT (RP or REPO).  A holder of securities sells these
securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a fixed
price on a fixed date.



   SAFEKEEPING.  A service to customers rendered by banks for a fee
whereby securities and valuables of all types and descriptions are held in
the bank’s vaults for protection.



   SECONDARY MARKET.  A market made for the purchase and sale of
outstanding issues following the initial distribution.



   SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION.  An agency created by Congress to
protect investors in securities transaction by administering securities
legislation.



   TREASURY BILLS.  A non-interest bearing discount security issued by
the U.S. Treasury to finance national debt. Most bills are issued to mature
in three months, six months, or one year.



   TREASURY BONDS.  Long-term coupon-bearing U.S. Treasury securities
issued as direct obligations of the U.S. Government and having initial
maturities of more than ten years.



   TREASURY NOTES.  Medium-term coupon-bearing U.S. Treasury securities
issued as direct obligations of the U.S. Government and having initial
maturities of from one to ten years.



   UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE.  Securities and Exchange Commission
requirement that member firms as well as nonmember broker-dealers in
securities maintain a maximum ratio of indebtedness to liquid capital of 15
to 1; also called net capital rule and net capital ratio. Indebtedness covers
all money owed to a firm, including margin loans and commitments to purchase
securities. One reason new public issues are spread among members of
underwriting syndicates. Liquid capital includes cash and assets easily
converted into cash.



   YIELD.  The rate of annual income return on an investment, expressed
as a percentage, (a) income yield is obtained by dividing the current dollar
income by the current market price for the security, (b) net yield or yield
to maturity is the current income yield minus any premium above par or plus
any discount from par in the purchase price, with the adjustment spread over
the period from the date of purchase to the date of maturity of the bond.



   (C)   Scope. This investment policy applies to all financial assets
of the Village of Channahon, Illinois. These funds are accounted for in the
Village of Channahon’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) and
include:



      (1)   General Fund;



      (2)   Special Revenue Funds;



      (3)   Capital Project Funds;



      (4)   Enterprise Funds;



      (5)   Trust and Agency Funds;



      (6)   Retirement/Pension Funds; and



      (7)   Any new funds created by the legislative body, unless
specifically exempted.



   (D)   Prudence.



      (1)   Investments shall be made with judgement and care-under
circumstances then prevailing-which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital as well as the probable income to be derived.



      (2)   the standard of prudence to be used by investment
officials shall be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in
the context of managing an overall portfolio. Investment officers acting in
accordance with written procedures and the investment policy and exercising
due diligence shall be relived of personal responsibility for an individual
security’s credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from
expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken
to control adverse developments.



   (E)   Objective. The primary objectives, in priority order, of the
Village of Channahon, Illinois investment activities shall be:



      (1)   Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of
the investment program. Investments of the Village of Channahon, Illinois
shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of
capital in the overall portfolio. To attain this objective, diversification
is required in order that potential losses on individual securities do not
exceed the income generated from the remainder of the portfolio.



      (2)   Liquidity. The Village of Channahon, Illinois’
investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the Village of
Channahon, Illinois to meet all operating requirements which might be
reasonably anticipated.



      (3)   Return on investment. The Village of Channahon,
Illinois’ investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of
obtaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles
taking into account the Village of Channahon, Illinois’ investment risk
constraints and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.



   (F)   Delegation of authority. Authority to manage the Village of
Channahon, Illinois’ investment program is derived from the State of
Illinois Statutes. Management responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Finance Director, who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with this
investment policy. Procedures should include reference to: safekeeping, PSA
repurchase agreements, wire transfer agreements, collateral/depository
agreements and banking service agreements. Such procedures shall include
explicit delegation of authority to persons responsible for investment
transactions. No person may engage in an investment except as provided under
the terms of this policy and the procedures established by the Finance
Director. The Finance Director shall be responsible for all transactions
undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the
activities of subordinate officials.



   (G)   Ethics and conflicts of interest. Officers and employees
involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business
activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment program,
or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions.
Employees and investment officials shall disclose to the Finance Director any
material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business
within this jurisdiction, and they shall further disclose any large personal
financial/investment positions that could be related to the performance of
the Village of Channahon’s portfolio. Employees and officers shall
subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the Village of
Channahon, particularly with regard to the time of purchases and sales.



   (H)   Authorized financial dealers and institutions.



      (1)   The Finance Director will maintain a list of financial
institutions authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list
will also be maintained of approved security broker/dealers selected by
credit worthiness who maintain an office in the State of Illinois. These may
include “primary” dealers or regional dealers that qualify under the
Securities & Exchange Commission Rule 15C3-1. No public deposit shall be made
except in a qualified public depository as established by state laws.



      (2)   All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire
to become qualified bidders for investment transactions must supply the
Finance Director with the following:



         (a)   Audited financial statements;



         (b)   Proof of National Association of Security Dealers
Certification; and



         (c)   Proof of state registration.



      (3)   An annual review of the financial condition and
registrations of qualified bidders will be conducted by the Finance Director.



      (4)   A current audited financial statement is required to be
on file for each financial institution and broker/dealer in which the Village
of Channahon invests.



   (I)   Authorized and suitable investments.



      (1)   The Village of Channahon, Illinois is empowered by state
statute to invest in the certain types of securities as provided in the
Illinois Compiled Statutes.



      (2)   Except as modified herein all investments purchased
under this policy shall be guided by the Public Funds Investment Act, ILCS
Ch.  235 et seq. and all revisions thereto, as may be made by the Illinois
Legislature. Below is a summary of acceptable investments as determined by
the Village Finance Director in compliance with the applicable statute:



         (a)   U.S. government obligations, U.S. government
agency obligations and U.S. government instrumentality obligations, which
have a liquid market with a readily determinable market value and are rated A
or better by a nationally recognized ratings agency.



         (b)   Certificates of deposit and other evidences of
deposit at financial institutions, bankers’ acceptances and commercial
paper, rated in the three highest tier (e.g., A-1, P-1, D-1 or F-1 or higher)
by a nationally recognized rating agency.



         (c)    Investment-grade obligations (rated A or better
by a nationally recognized ratings agency) of state, provincial and local
governments and public authorities.



         (d)   Money market mutual funds regulated by the
Securities and Exchange Commission and whose portfolios consist only of
dollar-denominated securities.



         (e)   Local government investment pools.



      (3)   Investment in derivatives shall be prohibited without
the approval of the Board of Trustees of the above instruments shall require
authorization by the appropriate governing authority.



   (J)   Investment pools. A thorough investigation of the pool/fund is
required prior to investing, and on a continual basis. There shall be a
questionnaire developed which will answer the following general guidelines:



      (1)   A description of eligible investment securities, and a
written statement of investment policy and objectives.



      (2)   A description of interest calculations and how it is
distributed, and how gains and losses are treated.



      (3)   A description of how securities are safeguarded
(including the settlement processes), and how often are the securities priced
and the program audited.



      (4)   A description of who may invest in the program, how
often, what size deposit and withdrawal.



      (5)   A schedule for receiving statements and portfolio
listings.



      (6)   Are reserves, retained earnings, etc. utilized by the
pool/fund?



      (7)   A fee schedule, and when and how is it assessed.



      (8)   Is the pool/fund eligible for bond proceeds and /or will
it accept such proceeds?



   (K)   Collateralization.



      (1)   Collateralization will be required on two types of
investments: certificates of deposit and repurchase (and reverse) agreements.
In order to anticipate market changes and provide a level of security for all
funds, the Collateralization level will be no less than 102% of market value
of principal and accrued interest



      (2)   The Village of Channahon chooses to limit collateral to
the limits provided in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, ILCS Ch. 85, Act 901
et seq.



      (3)   Collateral will always be held by an independent third
party with whom the entity has a current custodial agreement. A clearly
marked evidence of ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be supplied to the
Village of Channahon and retained.



      (4)   The right of collateral substitution is granted.



   (L)   Safekeeping and custody. All security transactions, including
collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the Village of
Channahon shall be conducted on a deliver-versus-payment (DVP) basis.
Securities will be held by a third party custodian designated by the Finance
Director and evidenced by safekeeping receipts.



   (M)   Diversification. The Village of Channahon will diversify its
investments by security type and institution. With the exception of U.S.
Treasury securities and authorized pools, no more than 50% of the village’s
total investment portfolio will be invested in a single security type or with
a single financial institution.



   (N)   Maximum maturities.



      (1)   To the extent possible, the Village of Channahon will
attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements.
Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the Village of Channahon will not
directly invest in securities maturing more than five years three months from
the date of purchase. However, the Village of Channahon may collateralize its
repurchase agreements using longer-dated investments not to exceed five years
three months to maturity.



      (2)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding
five years three months if the maturity of such investments are made to
coincide as nearly as practicable with the expected use of the funds.



   (O)   Internal control. The Finance Director shall establish an
annual process of independent review by an external auditor. This review will
provide internal control by assuring compliance with policies and procedures.



   (P)   Performance standards. The investment portfolio shall be
designed with the objective of obtaining a rate of return throughout
budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the Village of
Channahon’s investment risk constraints and cash flow needs.



   (Q)   Market yield (benchmark). The Village of Channahon’s
investment strategy is active. Given this strategy, the basis used by the
Finance Director to determine whether market yields are being achieved shall
be the 90 day national average CD as published in newspapers of national
circulation.



   (R)   Reporting.



      (1)   The Finance Director is charged with the responsibility
of including a market report on the investment activity and returns in the
Village of Channahon’s Monthly Financial Report.



      (2)   The Finance Director shall, also, provide to the Village
Board of Trustee’s a quarterly investment report which provides a clear
picture of the status of the current investment portfolio. The management
report should include comments on the fixed income markets and economic
conditions, discussions regarding restrictions on percentage of investment by
categories, possible changes in the portfolio structure going forward and
thoughts on investment strategies.



      (3)   Schedules in the quarterly report should include the
following:



         (a)   A listing of individual securities held at the end
of the reporting period by authorized investment category.



         (b)   Average life and final maturity of all investments
listed.



         (c)   Coupon, discount or earnings rate.



         (d)   Par value, amortized book value and market value.



         (e)   Percentage of the portfolio represented by each
investment category.



   (S)   Investment policy adoption. The Village of Channahon’s
investment policy shall be adopted by ordinance of the Village of
Channahon’s legislative authority. The policy shall be reviewed on an
annual basis by the Finance Committee of the Board of Trustees and any
modifications made thereto must be approved by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 880, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 1069-A, passed 11-1-99; Am. Ord. 1869,
passed 9-6-16)



ANNUAL BUDGET PROCESS



§ 34.20  BUDGET PROCESS ADOPTED.



   (A)   The village hereby adopts the municipal budget process as set
out in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-2-9.1 et seq. (the "budget process").



   (B)   The budget process shall be in lieu of the annual
Appropriation Ordinance as provided by the Illinois Municipal Code.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



§ 34.21  BUDGET OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Village President, with the advise and consent of the
Board of Trustees, shall appoint a Village Budget Officer.  The Budget
Officer shall take an oath and pose a bond as provided by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§ 3.1-10-25 and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-30 respectively.



   (B)   The Budget Officer shall have the following powers and duties:



      (1)   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient
planing, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal
management procedures in all village departments, commissions, and boards.



      (2)   Compile an annual budget in accordance with § 34.22.



      (3)   Examine all books and records of all village
departments, commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the
village, village departments, commissions, and boards, debts and accounts
receivable, amounts owed by or to the village, village departments,
commissions, and boards.



      (4)   Obtain such additional information from the village,
village departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the budget
officer for purposes of compiling a village budget, such information to be
furnished by the village, village departments, commissions, and boards in the
form required by the budget officer.  Any department, commission or board
which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the
budget officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any
subsequent budget for the village until such village department, commission,
or board shall comply in full with the request of the Budget Officer.



      (5)   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure
that no expenditures are made by the village, village departments,
commissions, or board except as authorized by the budget.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



§ 34.22  PREPARATION OF BUDGET.



   The Budget Officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain
estimates of revenues available to the village  for the  fiscal year for
which the budget  is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the
village and all of the village's departments, commissions, and boards. 
Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a
manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. 
Substantial conformity to a chart of accounts, now or in the future,
recommended by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting, or the
Auditor of Public Accounts of the State of Illinois, or the Division of Local
Governmental Affairs and Property Taxes of the State Department of Revenue or
successor agencies shall be deemed proof of such conformity.  The budget
shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two years
immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared.  So
far as is possible, the fiscal data for such two preceding fiscal years shall
be itemized in a manner which is in conformity with the chart of accounts
approved above. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each
anticipated expenditure shall be made.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



§ 34.23  SEPARATE FUND.



   An amount not to exceed 3% of the equalized assessed value of property
subject to taxation by the village may be accumulated in a separate fund for
the purpose or purposes of specific capital improvements, repairs, and/or
replacements of specific types of village equipment or other tangible
property, both real and personal, to be designated as the "Capital
Improvement, Repair, or Replacement Fund".  Expenditures from the Capital
Improvements, Repair, or Replacement Fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal
year in which the capital improvement, repair, or replacement will occur. 
Upon the completion or abandonment of any object for which the Capital
Improvement, Repair, or Replacement Fund, or should any surplus monies remain
after the completion or abandonment of any object for which the Capital
Improvement, Repair, or Replacement Fund was inaugurated, then such funds no
longer necessary for capital improvement, repair, or replacement shall be
transferred into the general corporate fund of the municipality on the first
day of the fiscal year following such abandonment, completion, or discovery
of surplus funds.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



§ 34.24  REVISION OF BUDGET.



   The corporate authorities may delegate authority to heads of municipal
departments, boards, or commissions to delete, add to, change, or create
sub-classes within object classes budgeted previously to the department,
board, or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior
approval by the Budget Officer or the Village Administrator as the corporate
authorities, upon a two-thirds vote of the corporate authorities then holding
office, may establish.  By a vote of two-thirds of the members of the
corporate authorities then holding office, the annual budget for the village
may be revised by deleting, adding to, changing or creating sub-classes
within object classes and object classes themselves.  No revision of the
budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not
available to effectuate the purpose of the revision.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



§ 34.25  MONEY SET ASIDE FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES.



   The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes
not to exceed 10% of the total budget, less the amount set aside for
contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a
majority vote of the corporate authorities then holding office.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



§ 34.26  INSPECTION OF TENTATIVE ANNUAL BUDGET.



   The corporate authorities shall make the tentative annual budget
conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten days prior to
the passage of the annual budget, by publication in the journal of the
proceedings of the corporate authorities or by posting same at the Village
Hall. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual
budget, and prior to final action on the budget, the corporate authorities
shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget, after
which hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further revised and
passed without any further inspection, notification or hearing.  Notice of
this hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the village at least one week prior to the time of the hearing.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



§ 34.27  TIME OF ADOPTION.



   The annual budget shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal
year to which it applies.



(Ord. 897, passed 4-1-96)



AUTHORIZED DEPOSITORIES



§ 34.40  POLICY.



   It is the policy of the village to invest in public funds, in
accordance with the Investment Policy Ordinance 880-A.



(Ord. 906, passed 6-17-96; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 5-6-13)



§ 34.41  DESIGNATED DEPOSITORIES.



   Exhibit A of Ordinance No. 1744, passed 5-6-13, which is incorporated
herein as if set out in its entirety, is a list of designated depositories
which the village designates as depositories for the funds and money of the
village as set forth in § 34.42.  The Exhibit can only be changed with the
approval of the corporate authorities.



(Ord. 906, passed 6-17-96; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 5-6-13)



§ 34.42  QUALIFIED DEPOSITORIES.



   All the banks and investment pools listed on Exhibit A of Ordinance No.
1744 are qualified to receive funds and money from the village when they have
furnished the corporate authorities with:



   (A)   Their most recent audited financial statements;



   (B)   Proof of National Association of Security Dealers
Certification for brokers;



   (C)   Proof of State Registration; and



   (D)   A copy of all statements of resources and liabilities which it
is required to file with the Commissioner of Banks and Trust Companies or to
the Comptroller of Currency or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC).



(Ord. 906, passed 6-17-96; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 5-6-13)



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   Any person convicted of violating § 34.07 or any provision thereof
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for the first offense and
not less than $100 nor more than $500 for the second and succeeding
offenses.  Every day upon which a violation exists shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation.  In addition, the village shall have all
such other rights and remedies as may be available to it at law or equity.



(Ord. 739, passed 11-16-92)



CHAPTER 35:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   35.01   Creation and purposes of Department



   35.02   Duties and powers of officers



   35.03   Oath



   35.04   Witness fees



   35.05   Political contributions



   35.06   Residence not required



   35.07   Chief of Police



   35.08   Qualifications



   35.09   Duties of the Chief of Police



   35.10   Powers of the Chief of Police



   35.11   Probation period



   35.12   Suspension or discharge



   35.13   Applicability



   35.14   Deputy Chief



   35.15   Appointment



   35.16   Promotions



   35.17   Suspensions and terminations



   35.18   Police Sergeants



   35.19   [Reserved]



   35.20   Probationary period



Cross-reference:



   Procedure for PSEBA claims, see §§ 36.10 through 36.14



§ 35.01  CREATION AND PURPOSES OF DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Creation and composition. There is hereby created a Police
Department of the village. The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of
Police and such other police officers and employees as shall from time to
time be determined as necessary by the Corporate Authorities.



   (B)   Purposes and functions. The purpose and functions of the
Police Department shall include:



      (1)   To suppress crime;



      (2)   To protect life and property;



      (3)   To preserve law and order;



      (4)   To enforce the laws of the United States of America, the
State of Illinois and the ordinances of the village;



      (5)   To detect and apprehend criminal and traffic offenders;



      (6)   To recover stolen property, and



      (7)   Such other duties and responsibilities as may from time
to time be imposed by the Corporate Authorities and the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.02  DUTIES AND POWERS OF OFFICERS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of each police officer to preserve order,
peace and quiet and enforce all laws and ordinances in the village.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of each police officer to the report of
the Chief of Police at such time and places as he or she may require, to
devote such time and attention to the discharge of prescribed duties as a
police officer and to obey the rules, regulations, orders, instructions and
directives of the Chief of Police and the Police Department.



   (C)   Each police officer shall have the power to arrest, with or
without process as provided by the laws of the village, the State of Illinois
and the United States of America.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.03  OATH.



   Before entering upon the duties of a police officer, each police
officer, including the Chief of Police, shall take and subscribe the
following oath:



I,                           , do solemnly swear or affirm that
I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of
the State of Illinois and that I faithfully discharge the duties of police
officer of the Village of Channahon according to the best of my ability.



Notary Public: The oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the Office of the
Village Clerk.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.04  WITNESS FEES.



   A police officer shall appear as a witness whenever it is necessary or
convenient in a prosecution for the violation of federal or state law or
village ordinance. Any witness fee paid to the police officer for such
services in any action or suit shall be immediately turned over to the
Village Clerk.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.05  POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.



   No member of the Police Department shall be under any obligation to
contribute any funds or to render any political service. No person shall be
removed or otherwise prejudiced for refusing to do so. No member of the
Police Department shall discharge, promote, reduce or in any manner change
the official rank or compensation of any other person in such service, or
promise or threaten to do so, for withholding or refusing to make any
contribution of money or service or any other valuable thing for any
political purpose, or in any other manner, directly or indirectly, use his or
her official authority or influence to compel or induce any other person to
pay or render any political assessment, subscription, contribution or service.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.06  RESIDENCE NOT REQUIRED.



   Any qualified person may be appointed and serve as a member of the
village Police Department even though that person may not reside in the
incorporated limits of the village.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.07  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the President with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees. Any change in the status of the Chief
of Police shall be made by the President with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.08  QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The following are mandatory qualifications for the position of
Chief of Police of the village:



      (1)   The individual shall be at least 25 years of age;



      (2)   The individual must possess a high school diploma or an
equivalent high school education;



      (3)   The individual must be a person of good moral character
and not an habitual drunkard, drug user or seller, gambler or a person who
has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude;



      (4)   The individual must submit his or her fingerprints to
the Illinois Department of Law Enforcement and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation for any possible criminal record;



      (5)   The individual must be in good physical health;



      (6)   The individual must be certified by the Illinois Local
Government Law Enforcement Officers Training Board attesting to the
successful completion of the Minimum Standards Basic Law Enforcement Training
Course;



      (7)   The individual must have successfully completed a
24-hour course of training in the use of a suitable type of firearm approved
by the Illinois Local Governmental Law Enforcement Officers Training Board;



      (8)   The individual must possess a valid State of Illinois
driver's license; and



      (9)   Such other qualifications as may be mandated by law or
prescribed by the Corporate Authorities.



   (B)   The following are discretionary qualifications for the
position of Chief of Police of the village:



      (1)   The successful completion of advance police training
such as, but not limited to, law enforcement studies at an accredited college
or university;



      (2)   The successful completion of any physical agility,
psychological, polygraph, credit and background check, and written, oral or
medical tests as may be prescribed for an applicant by the Corporate
Authorities;



      (3)   Significant police supervisory experience;



      (4)   Knowledge of financing, budgeting and funding; and



      (5)   Such other qualifications as may be prescribed by the
Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.09  DUTIES OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have such duties as may be
prescribed from time to time by law and by the Corporate Authorities.



   (B)   The duties shall include:



      (1)   To act as the chief executive officer of the Police
Department and direct, manage, supervise and control all activities and
officers and employees of the Police Department;



      (2)   To organize the Police Department in such a manner as he
or she may deem necessary to efficiently and properly conduct the duties and
responsibilities prescribed by law including preparation of employee work and
vacation schedules;



      (3)   To prescribe and enforce such rules, regulations,
orders, instructions and directives as may be necessary and convenient to
carry out the provisions of the ordinances of the village and the laws of the
state and the United States;



      (4)   To establish and execute personnel rules, regulations
and policies within the Police Department so as to effectively administer his
or her responsibilities;



      (5)   To have control over and be responsible for all
equipment, materials and other personal property of the Police Department;



      (6)   To maintain a roster of the Police Department which
shall contain the name, address, age, date of appointment, place of birth,
badge number, job description and other appropriate information of all
officers and employees;



      (7)   To maintain or cause to be maintained accurate and
appropriate records of all matters pertaining to the Police Department,
including employee evaluation reports and all receipts and disbursements of
the Police Department;



      (8)   To control expenditures of departmental appropriations
and prepare annual budget estimates;



      (9)   To prescribe the proper badge and uniforms of the Police
Department;



      (10)   To be the keeper of the jail and to have the custody of
all persons incarcerated therein;



      (11)   To be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property recovered by the village;



      (12)   To establish and maintain a regular continuing
education and training program with minimum competency and performance
standards for such training for all officers and personnel;



      (13)   To attend such conferences and seminars and participate
in such training as may be necessary from time to time; and



      (14)   To devote his or her entire time, attention, knowledge
and skills to the position of the Chief of Police and shall not, without the
express written consent of the Corporate Authorities, directly or indirectly
be interested in the operation, conduct or control of any other business,
trade, profession or industry; engage in any activity competitive with or
adverse to the business of police or security work or perform any other work,
employment, labor or service for pecuniary gain, whether alone, as a partner,
officer, director, employee or shareholder of any other corporation or as a
trustee, fiduciary or representative of any other activity, for anyone other
than the village.



(Ord.1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.10  POWERS OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have such powers as may be
prescribed from time to time by law and by the Corporate Authorities.



   (B)   The powers shall include:



      (1)   To discipline and reprimand members of the Police
Department;



      (2)   To suspend without pay any officer for a period of up to
but not exceeding five working days;



      (3)   To file written allegations with the Board of Police and
Fire Commissioners requesting the discharge or suspension of a police
officer; and



      (4)   To make the initial appointment of officers as provided
in § 35.15.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.11  PROBATION PERIOD.



   The Chief of Police shall be on probation for a period of 12 months
from the date of his or her appointment, confirmation and qualification
according to village ordinances and the statues of the state. During this
12-month period, the Chief of Police may be suspended or discharged with or
without cause by the President upon the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees following written notice to the Chief of Police and an opportunity
for the Chief of Police to respond to said notice before the Corporate
Authorities. The provisions of any other hearing requirements shall not apply
to the Chief of Police during the probationary period.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.12  SUSPENSION OR DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Authorization.  The Chief of Police may be suspended or
discharged following the probationary period only for cause in accordance
with the provisions set forth by this section.



   (B)   Allegations.  Allegations for the suspension or discharge of
the Chief of Police shall be verified in writing to the Corporate
Authorities. The Corporate Authorities shall within ten days of the receipt
of such allegations convene and determine by majority vote if from the
allegations it appears there is probable cause to believe the allegations are
worthy of suspension or discharge. If the majority of the Corporate
Authorities find probable cause, the allegations shall be personally served
upon the Chief of Police not less than 15 days to hearing with a copy filed
with the Village Clerk.



   (C)   Hearing. A fair and impartial hearing shall be commenced not
more than 30 days after written allegations for the suspension or discharge
have been served upon the Chief of Police. The hearing shall be held before
the Corporate Authorities who shall be designated as the hearing board with
the President serving as the chairman. The hearing may be continued from time
to time in the discretion of the Corporate Authorities for good cause shown.
The President shall appoint a special prosecutor to bring the charges before
the hearing board. The rules of evidence and conduct of said hearing shall be
as consistent as possible with practice before administrative agencies.
Motions or objections to the sufficiency must be filed or made prior to or at
the hearing before the hearing board. The Chief of Police shall be entitled
to counsel and a formal record of the proceedings shall be kept and all
testimony shall be sworn and subject to cross-examination. In the conduct of
the hearing, the President shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations. The hearing board shall have the power to promulgate such other
rules as they may deem necessary and proper.



   (D)   Cause. Cause is defined as some substantial shortcoming which
renders continuance in employment in some way detrimental to the discipline
and efficiency of public service and something which the law and sound public
opinion recognize as cause for the Chief of Police no longer occupying his or
her position, including any violation of the ordinances of the village or the
laws of the state or the United States. The right to determine what
constitutes cause is with the hearing board.



   (E)   Suspension pending hearing . The Corporate Authorities may by
a majority vote suspend the Chief of Police pending the hearing with or
without pay but not to exceed 30 days.



   (F)   Action of hearing board and Corporate Authorities. Any
allegations must be proven against the Chief of Police by a preponderance of
the evidence which is defined as the greater weight of the evidence and is
more convincing as to its truth when weighed against the evidence in
opposition thereto. If the Chief of Police is found guilty of the allegations
by a majority of the hearing board, a majority of the Corporate Authorities
may discharge or suspend the Chief of Police without pay for period of time
as they determine to be warranted by the allegations. If the hearing board
determines that the charges are not sustained, the Chief of Police shall be
reimbursed for all wages and benefits withheld, if any.  The findings and
decision of the hearing board shall be preserved in writing and notice of
said findings and decision mailed to the Chief of Police and his or her
counsel.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.13  APPLICABILITY.



   Sections 35.11 and 35.12 shall not apply to a Chief of Police hired
after the effective date of this chapter or employed by the village pursuant
to a contract. Any sworn officer of the village appointed to the rank of
Chief of Police shall retain his or her sworn rank within the Police
Department and may only be terminated from employment by the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.14  DEPUTY CHIEF.



   (A)   Creation of position. There is hereby created within the
Police Department two positions of Deputy Chief.



   (B)   Qualifications and appointment.



      (1)   The position of Deputy Chief shall be an exempt rank in
the Police Department and shall not be subject to the rules, regulations and
authority of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.



      (2)   The Deputy Chief shall be appointed by the Chief of
Police (the "Chief") and shall serve at the discretion of the Chief.



      (3)   The Chief may remove the Deputy Chief at any time.



      (4)   In the event that the Deputy Chief is removed from the
position of Deputy Chief, he or she shall revert back to the rank currently
held.



      (5)   In order to be eligible the office of Deputy Chief the
person appointed must have been employed as a full-time sworn officer of the
Police Department for five years.



      (6)   The Deputy Chief shall be permitted to take promotional
exams and may be promoted to a higher classified rank than he or she
currently holds without having to resign the position of Deputy Chief.



   (C)   Authority. The Deputy Chief shall be immediately below the
Chief in the Department chain of command. The Deputy Chief has the authority
to direct and issue orders to any members of the Department except the Chief.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 1748, passed 9-16-13)



§ 35.15  APPOINTMENT.



   Appointments to the position of police officer shall be made by the
Chief of Police in conformance with the Department of Human Resources and
Police Department Information for Police Officer Recruitment Policy as from
time to time adopted and amended by the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.16  PROMOTIONS.



   Promotions within the ranks of the Police Department shall be made in
accordance with the rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and
applicable law.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.17  SUSPENSIONS AND TERMINATIONS.



   Police officers may be suspended from duty or be terminated in
accordance with the rules of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and
applicable law.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.18  POLICE SERGEANTS.



   (A)   Rank created. There is hereby created within the Police
Department the rank of Sergeant.



   (B)   Duties. The duties of a Sergeant shall include all prescribed
by the Chief of Police.



   (C)   Number of Sergeant positions. There shall be within the Police
Department so many Sergeants as may from time to time be authorized by the
Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



§ 35.19  [RESERVED].



§ 35.20  PROBATIONARY PERIOD.



   All police officers shall serve a probationary period of 18 months.
Officers may be terminated without cause by the Chief of Police during the
probationary period.



(Ord. 1622, passed 5-17-10)



CHAPTER 36:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section




General Provisions




   36.01   Personnel rules/Employee Handbook adopted by reference




Procedure for PSEBA Claims




   36.10   Purpose



   36.11   Definition



   36.12   Application procedure



   36.13   Administrative hearing officer



   36.14   Administrative hearing



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  PERSONNEL RULES/EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The personnel rules of the village as attached to Ordinance 1330 as
Exhibit A, as they may be subsequently amended, and the Employee Handbook, as
it may subsequently be amended, are specifically incorporated herein by
reference with the same force and effect as if the same were fully set forth
herein.



(Ord. 322, passed 8-1-83;  Am. Ord. 879, passed 12-18-95; Am. Ord. 1330,
passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 1402, passed 10-3-05; Am. Ord. 1441, passed 10-16-06;
Am. Ord. 1538, passed 6-2-08; Am. Ord. 1640, passed 2-21-11; Am. Ord. 1760,
passed 12-16-13; Am. Ord. 1920, passed 1-2-18)



PROCEDURE FOR PSEBA CLAIMS



§ 36.10  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a fair and efficient
method for determining the eligibility of a full-time law enforcement officer
for the benefits enumerated under PSEBA through an administrative process,
including if necessary, an administrative hearing.



(Ord. 1925, passed 3-5-18)



Cross-reference:



   Village Police Department, see Ch. 35



§ 36.11  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CATASTROPHIC INJURY. An injury resulting in a line of duty disability
pension as defined by the Illinois Supreme Court in Bremer v. City of
Rockford,  2016 IL 119889 (2016), or any subsequent decisions rendered by
the Illinois Supreme Court.



(Ord. 1925, passed 3-5-18)



§ 36.12  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Full time law enforcement officers, or family member(s) of an
injured or deceased full time law enforcement officer, (“applicant”) must
file a full and complete PSEBA application in writing within 30 days of
filing a pension claim with the village (the “PSEBA application”). The
village shall notify applicant if the PSEBA application is incomplete and
applicant shall have five days to remedy their application.



   (B)   A complete PSEBA application includes the following:



      (1)   The name of the applicant, date of hire, detailed
information regarding the incident from which the claim arises (the
“incident”), including information relating to how the injury was
sustained in the line of duty (date, time, place, nature of injury, and other
factual circumstances surrounding the incident giving rise to said claim);



      (2)   The applicant’s firsthand knowledge detailing how the
injury/death qualifies the applicant for benefits under the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act (the “Act”);



      (3)   A signed and sufficient medical authorization release
which authorizes the collection of information related to the incident
including, but not limited to, disability pension proceedings, worker’s
compensation records, and medical records and specifies the name and address
for pertinent health care provider(s);



      (4)   A signed and sufficient general information release
specifying the name and signature of the applicant or his or her authorized
representative along with legal proof of said representation authorizing the
collection of information pertinent to the review and analysis of the PSEBA
application;



      (5)   The name(s) and addresses of witnesses to the incident;



      (6)   The name(s) and addresses of witnesses the applicant
intends to call at the PSEBA hearing;



      (7)   Information and supporting pension documentation filed
with the Police Pension Board;



      (8)   Information supporting the PSEBA eligibility
requirements; and



      (9)   Other sources of health insurance benefits currently
enrolled in or received by the applicant and/or family members if the
applicant is deceased.



   (C)   The PSEBA application must be submitted to the Village
Administrator.



   (D)   The PSEBA application must be sworn and notarized to certify
the truthfulness of the content of the information. A review of the
application shall not occur until the application is complete.



   (E)   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by
the village, the completed application shall then be submitted to the village
as the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date stamped and
provided to the applicant.



   (F)   Upon receipt of a complete PSEBA application , the village
shall set the matter for an administrative hearing before a hearing officer
to make a determination on whether to grant the applicant PSEBA benefits
based on the applicable law and the evidence presented at the administrative
hearing.



   (G)   The applicant will be given written notice of the date for the
scheduled administrative hearing to



be served not less than ten days prior to the commencement of the hearing. If
the applicant, upon receiving written notice of the administrative hearing,
cannot attend said date, the applicant must contact the hearing officer in
writing within seven days after being served. The hearing officer shall
establish an alternative hearing date which is within 30 days of the original
hearing date. Failure to appear at the administrative hearing shall result in
denial of PSEBA benefits.



(Ord. 1925, passed 3-5-18)



§ 36.13  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.



   The administrative hearing shall be scheduled and conducted by a
hearing officer whose authority and limitations are as follows:



   (A)   Authority of the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall
have all of the authorities granted to him or her under law relative to the
conduct of an administrative hearing, including the authority to:



      (1)   Preside over village hearings involving PSEBA;



      (2)   Administer oaths;



      (3)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to
the issue of eligibility under PSEBA;



      (4)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the
parties or their representatives;



      (5)   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;



      (6)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and
all exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing; and



      (7)   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at
the hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include
a written finding of fact, decision and order.



   (B)   Hearing officer. The Village President is hereby authorized to
appoint a person to hold the position of hearing officer for each hearing on
PSEBA benefits that shall come before this village. In making said selection,
the following information should be considered, at a minimum:



      (1)   The individual’s ability to comply with the job
description as set forth herein; and



      (2)   The individual must be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the State of Illinois and have knowledge of and experience in
employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence, and
administrative practice.



(Ord. 1925, passed 3-5-18)



§ 36.14  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   The system of administrative hearings for the determination of
eligibility for benefits under PSEBA shall be initiated by the village after
the submission of a full and complete PSEBA application. An administrative
hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the applicant is
eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the
benefits shall be consistent with the Act.



   (A)   Record. The village shall ensure that all hearings are
attended by a certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings
shall be made by said certified court reporter and, if requested, a copy be
provided to the applicant within 28 days of the date of the administrative
hearing.



   (B)   Procedures. The village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at said administrative hearing and present
witnesses, testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and
may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant
witnesses or the production of relevant documents.



   (C)   Evidence. The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the
extent practicable unless, by such application, the hearing officer
determines that application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the
introduction of evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably
prudent person in the conduct of her or his affairs. Such determination shall
be in the sole discretion of the hearing officer. The hearing officer must
state on the record his or her reason for that determination.



   (D)   Final determination. A written determination by the hearing
officer of whether the petitioning applicant is eligible for the benefits
under PSEBA shall constitute a final administrative determination for the
purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.



   (E)   Burden of proof. At any administrative hearing, the applicant
shall have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant
is eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in
all hearings conducted under this subchapter shall be by the preponderance of
the evidence.



   (F)   Administrative records. All records pertaining to the
administrative process shall be held in a separate file under the
applicant’s name with the village.



(Ord. 1925, passed 3-5-18)



CHAPTER 37:  TAXATION



Section



Municipal Automobile Renting Use Tax



   37.01   Tax imposed



   37.02   Responsibility for payment



   37.03   Payment



Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax



   37.15   Tax imposed



   37.16   Report



   37.17   Payment



Replacement Vehicle Tax



   37.30   Tax imposed



   37.31   Collection



Industrial Tax Abatements



   37.40   Abatement requirements and limits



   37.41   Criteria for abatement decision



Village Privilege Tax on the Purchase of Motor Fuel at Retail



   37.55   Entitlement



   37.56   Definitions



   37.57   Tax imposed



   37.58   Liability for payment



   37.59   Collection of tax



   37.60   Filing of return



   37.61   Rules and regulations



   37.62   Failure to pay tax



   37.63   Records



   37.64   Suspension or revocation of license for failure to pay tax;
hearing



   37.65   Disposition of proceeds of tax



Transfers and Conveyances of Real Property Tax



   37.75   Definitions



   37.76   Tax imposed



   37.77   Liability of tax



   37.78   Declaration forms



   37.79   Deeds; exemptions



   37.80   Revenue stamps required



   37.81   Transfer in trust



   37.82   Recordation of deeds



   37.83   Proceeds of tax



   37.84   Violation of provisions



   37.85   Payment of other municipal charges and accounts



Home Rule Municipal Retailer's and Service Occupation Tax



   37.95   Tax imposed



   37.96   Collection; enforcement



   37.97   Filing



Hotel and Motel Accommodations Tax



   37.110   Definitions



   37.111   Imposition of tax



   37.112   Liability for payment



   37.113   Collection of tax



   37.114   Filing of return



   37.115   Failure to pay tax



   37.116   Records



   37.117   Revocation of licenses



   37.118   Proceeds of tax



Locally Imposed and Administered Taxes



   37.130   Title



   37.131   Scope



   37.132   Definitions



   37.133   Notices



   37.134   Late payment



   37.135   Payment



   37.136   Certain credits and refunds



   37.137   Audit procedure



   37.138   Appeal



   37.139   Hearing



   37.140   Interest and penalties



   37.141   Abatement



   37.142   Installment contracts



   37.143   Statute of limitations



   37.144   Voluntary disclosure



   37.145   Publication of tax ordinances



   37.146   Review procedures



   37.147   Application



Use Tax



   37.160   Title



   37.161   Definitions



   37.162   Tax imposed



   37.163   Village retailers to collect tax



   37.164   Transactions not subject to tax



   37.165   Records to be kept



   37.166   Purchaser’s direct payment of tax



   37.167   Confidential information



   37.168   Tax returns; filing



Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax



   37.170   Definitions



   37.171   Simplified municipal tax imposed



   37.172   Collection of tax by retailers



   37.173   Returns to Department



   37.174   Resellers



   37.175   Maintaining books and records



 



   37.999   Penalty



MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX



§ 37.01  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at
the rate of one percent of the rental price of such automobile while this
subchapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5,  § 8-11-8.



(Ord. 273, passed 1-4-82)



§ 37.02  RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.



   The tax provided for in this subchapter shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being in this village.



(Ord. 273, passed 1-4-82)



§ 37.03  PAYMENT.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue.



(Ord. 273, passed 1-4-82)



MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING  OCCUPATION TAX



§ 37.15  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one percent of the gross
receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5,  § 8-11-7.



(Ord. 274, passed 1-4-82)



§ 37.16  REPORT.



   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on
or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by §§ 2 and 3 of "An Act in Relation to a
Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal
Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as
amended.



(Ord. 274, passed 1-4-82)



§ 37.17  PAYMENT.



   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



(Ord. 274, passed 1-4-82)



REPLACEMENT VEHICLE TAX



§ 37.30  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed on any motor vehicle  in the village as
defined in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,  § 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
purchased by or on behalf of an insurance company to replace the vehicle of
an insured person in settlement of a total loss claim.  The tax shall be at
a rate of $50 per motor vehicle.



(Ord. 350, passed 4-16-84)



§ 37.31  COLLECTION.



   The tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the motor vehicle is
replaced.



(Ord. 350, passed 4-16-84)



INDUSTRIAL TAX ABATEMENTS



§ 37.40  ABATEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITS.



   (A)   Requirements.  After a determination of the assessed
valuation of all real property within the village, the Board of Trustees,
upon a majority vote, may order the County Clerk to abate any portion of
village real property taxes on the real property of any industrial firm
meeting any of the following requirements:



      (1)   The industrial firm locates within the village during
the immediately preceding calendar year from another state, territory, or
country; or



      (2)   The industrial firm is newly created within the village
during the immediately preceding calendar year; or



      (3)   The industrial firm expands a previously existing
facility located within the village.



(Ord. 277, passed 3-1-82)



   (B)   Duration and limit of abatement.  Any such abatement shall
not exceed a period of ten years and the total aggregate amount of abated
real property taxes shall not exceed $1,000,000.



(Ord. 277, passed 3-1-82)



§ 37.41  CRITERIA FOR ABATEMENT DECISION.



   (A)   The following criteria may be used by the Corporate
Authorities in deciding whether to abate the real property taxes for any
industrial firm meeting any of the requirements of § 37.40(A):



      (1)   The industrial firm eligible for further consideration
under this subchapter may be so defined in conjunction with the term
industrial project as provided for in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 § 11-74-2 as
amended from time to time;



      (2)   The industrial firm may be only properly zoned in the
village as an industrial district;



      (3)   The industrial firm shall provide the village with
increased:



         (a)   Annual sales;



         (b)   Number of service jobs;



         (c)   Personal income;



         (d)   Bank deposits; and



         (e)   Number of retail businesses.



(Ord. 277, passed 3-1-82)



VILLAGE PRIVILEGE TAX ON THE PURCHASE OF MOTOR FUEL AT RETAIL



§ 37.55  ENTITLEMENT.



   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Village Privilege
Tax on the Purchase of Motor Fuel at Retail Subchapter,” and the tax herein
imposed shall be known as the “Village Privilege Tax on the Purchase of
Motor Fuel.”



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.56  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEALER.  Every person engaged in the business of selling motor fuel,
and who has an established place of business for such purpose in the village.



   DIESEL FUEL.   A motor fuel used for internal combustion in diesel
engines.



   MOTOR FUEL.  All volatile and inflammable liquids produced, blended or
compounded for the purpose of, or which are suitable or practicable for,
operating motor vehicles.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or
otherwise.  Whenever the term PERSON is used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners
or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.



   PURCHASER.  Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or
otherwise, but does not include any unit of local government.



   RETAIL.  The sale for any good and valuable consideration to a person
for use as a consumer.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 3-2-09)



§ 37.57  TAX IMPOSED.



   There is hereby imposed and shall accrue and be collected a tax upon
the privilege of purchasing diesel fuel at retail in the village at the rate
of $0.11 per gallon and all other motor fuels at the rate of $0.04 per gallon.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 3-2-09; Am. Ord. 1841,
passed 4-4-16; Am. Ord. 1907, passed 11-20-17)



§ 37.58  LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.



   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be
borne by the purchaser.  Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
impose the tax upon the occupation of selling motor fuel.  It shall be the
duty of every dealer to secure the tax from each purchaser and pay over to
the village the tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the Village
Administrator and as otherwise provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.59  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   Every dealer required to collect the tax levied by this subchapter
shall secure the tax from the purchaser at the time he collects payment for
the motor fuel.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.60  FILING OF RETURN.



   On the 20th day of each month the dealer shall transmit a report of
sale of motor fuel in the previous month to the village on such forms and in
such manner as prescribed by the Village Administrator.  Each report of sale
of motor fuel shall be accompanied by a remittance of the appropriate amount
of tax applicable to the sale reported.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.61  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Village Administrator may promulgate rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter concerning the
enforcement and application of this subchapter.  The term RULES AND
REGULATIONS includes, but is not limited to, a case by case determination of
whether or not the tax imposed herein applies.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.62  FAILURE TO PAY TAX.



   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, the dealer shall pay a
penalty at the rate of 2% per month on the amount of tax which remains due
but unpaid.  Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein
provided, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village
Administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment
of the tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.63  RECORDS.



   (A)   Each dealer shall keep books and/or records which minimally
include:



      (1)   The number of gallons of motor fuel sold at retail each
day in the village; and



      (2)   The actual motor fuel tax collected for each day.



   (B)   The Village Administrator or his/her designate shall at all
reasonable times have full access to the records.



   (C)   In  order  to  protect  the  dealer's  right  to
privacy, the financial records of any dealer submitted pursuant to this
subchapter or any rule and regulation promulgated hereunder shall not be
available for public inspection.



   (D)   The records required by this section shall state separately
the number of gallons of diesel fuel and the number of gallons of other motor
fuels sold at retail each day in the village.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 1574, passed 3-2-09)



§ 37.64  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR FAILURE TO PAY TAX;
HEARING.



   If after a hearing, as provided herein, the Village President finds
that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this
subchapter, the President may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by
such person.  The Village President shall provide written notice to the
dealer of any hearing to be conducted pursuant to this subchapter, the notice
shall be mailed by regular mail not less than five business days prior to the
hearing date and shall be addressed to the dealers last known place of
business.  The dealer shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing
and may be represented by Counsel.  The suspension or revocation of any
license shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any action to recover
monies due the village or prosecution under village ordinances.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.65  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
subchapter, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the
village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general corporate fund.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92)



TRANSFERS AND CONVEYANCES OF REAL  PROPERTY TAX



§ 37.75  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEED.  All documents transferring or reflecting the transfer of legal
title, equitable title or both legal and equitable title to real property, or
the beneficial interest in a land trust.  Delivery of any deed shall be
deemed to have occurred when the transferee or purchaser, or his
representative or agent, receives possession of the deed or in the case of a
land trust when the trustee receives possession of a valid assignment of a
beneficial interest.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, municipal corporation,
political subdivision of the state, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise, and the
United States or any instrumentality thereof.  Whenever the term PERSON is
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to
associations shall mean the owners thereof, and as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.



   RECORDATION.  The recording of deeds with the office of the Recorders
of Deeds of the county in which the real property is situated.



   VALUE.  The amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer
covered hereunder, including the amount of any mortgage or other lien assumed
by the grantee or purchaser.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.76  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed on the transfer of title to real property
located in the village as evidenced by the recordation of a deed by any
person or by the delivery of any deed or assignment of interest of the real
property, made after April 24, 1992, whether vesting the owner with the
beneficial interest in or legal title to the property or merely the
possession or use thereof for any purpose or to secure future payment of
money or the future transfer of any such real property.  The tax imposed
shall be $3.00 for every $1,000 of value, or fraction thereof, as stated in
the declaration.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.77  LIABILITY FOR TAX.



   The liability for payment of the tax shall be borne by the grantee or
buyer involved in any such transaction unless otherwise negotiated by
contract.  However, it shall be unlawful for the grantee or purchaser to
accept a conveyance if the transfer tax has not been paid.  The tax herein
levied shall be in addition in any and all other taxes.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 952, passed 10-6-97)  Penalty, see §
37.999



§ 37.78  DECLARATION FORMS.



   At the time the tax is paid, or an exemption is applied for, there
shall also be presented to the Village Administrator or his/her designee, on
a form prescribed by the Village Administrator, a declaration in substantial
accordance with the Real Estate Transfer Tax Act as set forth in ILCS Ch. 35,
Act 305, § 1 et seq.  However, the execution by at least one of the
grantors or sellers or their agents, shall be deemed sufficient under this
section.  The information required to be provided in the declaration shall
be given under the oath of the person affixing his signature thereto that the
matters contained therein are true and correct.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.79  DEEDS; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Every deed shall show the date of the transaction which it
evidences, the names of the grantor and grantee, and a legal description of
the property to which it relates.



   (B)   The following deeds or trust documents shall be exempt from
the provisions of this subchapter except as hereinafter provided:



      (1)   Deeds or trust documents representing real estate
transfers made on or before April 24, 1992.  In addition to the foregoing, a
transfer shall be considered to have been made prior to April 24, 19992, if a
valid written contract of sale therefore was executed by the buyer and seller
prior to April 13, 1992, and the property transferred, if in a subdivision,
was a lot of record on April 13, 1992.



      (2)   Deeds or trust documents relating to property acquired
by any governmental body or from any governmental body or deeds to or
documents relating to property or interests transferred between governmental
bodies, or by or from any corporation, society, association, foundation or
institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or
educational purposes, except that such deeds or trust documents, other than
those in which the Administrators of Veterans' Affairs of the United States
of America is the grantee pursuant to a foreclosure proceeding, shall not be
exempt from filing the declaration.



      (3)   Deeds of trust documents which secure debt or other
obligation.



      (4)   Deeds or trust documents which, without additional
consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement a deed or trust
document previously recorded.



      (5)   Tax deeds.



      (6)   Deeds or trust documents of release of property which is
security for a debt or other obligation.



      (7)   Deeds of partition.



      (8)   Deeds or trust documents made pursuant to mergers,
consolidations, or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of
corporations pursuant to plans of reorganization.



      (9)   Deeds or trust documents made by a subsidiary
corporation to its parent corporation for no consideration other than the
cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary's stock.



      (10)   Deeds wherein there is an actual exchange of real
estate and trust documents wherein there is an actual exchange of beneficial
interests, except that money difference or money's worth paid from one to the
other shall not be exempt from the tax.



      (11)   Deeds representing transfers subject to the imposition
of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States,
except that such deeds shall not be exempt from filing the declaration.



      (12)   Deeds issued to a holder of a mortgage, as defined in
Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, § 15-103, pursuant to mortgage foreclosure
proceedings or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of foreclosure.



      (13)   Deeds or trust documents where the actual consideration
is less than $100.



      (14)   Transfers of a single-family or multi- family dwelling
unit where the purchaser has been a resident of the village for at least one
year preceding the date of the deed and certifies his or her intent to
establish the unit purchased as their primary residence. In order to be
eligible for this exception, the purchaser shall present sufficient credible
evidence to demonstrate such residency.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 1608, passed 1-4-10)



§ 37.80  REVENUE STAMPS REQUIRED.



   The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the Village
Administrator or his/her designee through the sale of a revenue stamp(s),
which shall be caused to be prepared by the Village Administrator in such
quantities, denominations and/or description as the Village Administrator may
from time to time prescribe.  Such revenue stamp(s) shall be available for
sale at and during the regular business hours of the village office or at
other locations designated by the Village Administrator.  Upon payment of
the tax herein levied and imposed, the revenue stamps so purchased shall be
affixed to the deed or other instrument of conveyance.  Any person so using
and affixing a revenue stamp or stamps shall cancel it and so deface it as to
render it unfit for use by marking it with his initials and the day, month
and year when the affixing occurs.  Such markings shall be made by writing
or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or punch. 
However, the revenue stamp(s) shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready
determination of its denomination and genuineness.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.81  TRANSFER IN TRUST.



   No trustee of real estate shall accept or acknowledge an assignment of
beneficial interest in real estate located in the village without first
obtaining a real estate transfer declaration from the assignor and assignee
and unless revenue stamps in the required amount, as set forth in this
section, have been affixed to the assignment.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.82  RECORDATION OF DEEDS.



   After the April 24, 1992, no deed conveying real property within the
corporate limits of the village shall be entitled to recordation by the
Recorder of Deeds for the county unless such deed shall bear either a village
real estate transfer tax stamp in the amount required by this section, or a
duly certified statement of exemption.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.83  PROCEEDS OF TAX.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
section, including interest and penalties, shall be paid to the village and
shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the village.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.84  VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   In the event of failure by any person to pay the tax required
in this subchapter when the same shall be due, simple interest shall
accumulate and be due upon the tax at the rate of 1½% per month commencing
as of the first day following the day when the deed was recorded or the
assignment of beneficial interest was accepted by the trustee.  In addition,
a penalty of 50% of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected
against any person who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this subchapter.



   (B)   In addition to any other provision of this subchapter, any
person found in violation of this subchapter shall be punished as set forth
in § 37.999.  The imposition of any find shall not relieve any person from
the liability to pay the tax imposed herein.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



§ 37.85  PAYMENT OF OTHER MUNICIPAL CHARGES AND ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   No real estate transfer tax stamps shall be issued for any
parcel of land located within the village unless any and all debts due the
village with respect to said parcel have been paid in full, including without
limitation, water use charges, sewer use charges, water connection fees,
sewer connection fees, license fees, permit fees, application fees,
inspection fees, certificate fees, board-up fees, weed cutting fees or
demolition fees, whether or not such fees and accounts are secured by liens
or other securities and whether or not the village may have other remedies at
law or in equity.



   (B)   Any person liable for the payment of the tax imposed herein,
or authorized representative thereof, upon written request may obtain from
the Village Administrator or his/her designee a statement of debts that may
be due the village with respect to the parcel.



(Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92)



HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILER'S AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



§ 37.95  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged  in the 
business of  selling tangible  personal property, other than an item of
tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this
state's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged
in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate
of 1% of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by
such servicemen as incident to a sale of service.  Such "Home Rule Municipal
Retailer's Occupation Tax" and the "Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation
Tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which
is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, medical
appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by
diabetics.



   (B)   The imposition of these home rule taxes are in accordance with
the provisions of Section 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the "Illinois
Municipal Code" (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1 and 8-11-5 (1992 State Bar
Edition)).



(Ord. 771, passed 8-30-93; Ord. 774, passed 10-18-93)



§ 37.96  COLLECTION; ENFORCEMENT.



   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the State
Department of Revenue. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 771, passed 8-30-93; Ord. 774, passed 10-18-93)



§ 37.97  FILING.



   The Municipal Clerk is hereby directed to immediately file a certified
copy of this ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue.



(Ord. 771, passed 8-30-93; Ord. 774, passed 10-18-93)



HOTEL AND MOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX



§ 37.110  DEFINITIONS.



   HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS; MOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS.   A room or rooms in any
building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the
public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, dormitory
or place, where sleeping, rooming, office, conference or exhibition
accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals
on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis.



   PERSON.   Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity trust, estate, firm,
co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
nonprofit, or otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall
mean the owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)



§ 37.111  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed and shall immediately accrue and be collected,
a tax upon the rental or leasing of any hotel or motel accommodation in the
village at the rate of 5% of the gross rental or leasing charge.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)



§ 37.112  LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.



   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall
be borne by the person leasing or operating (hereinafter, "owner, manager or
operator") any such hotel or motel accommodations. The tax herein levied
shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. Every owner, manager or
operator of hotel or motel accommodations shall secure said tax from the
lessee or tenants of said hotel or motel accommodations. Such taxes shall be
paid over to the village under rules and regulations prescribed by the
village and as otherwise provided by this subchapter.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)



§ 37.113  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager or
operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge or rent
to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice,
receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable
upon which the hotel or motel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged,
and shown separately.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)



§ 37.114  FILING OF RETURN.



   Every owner, manager or operator of hotel or motel accommodations
within the village shall file a sworn tax return on a monthly basis with the
village on forms prescribed by the Director of Finance, showing tax receipts
received with respect to hotel or motel accommodations rented or leased
during the preceding monthly period. At the time or filing of said tax
return, the owner, manager or operator of hotel or motel accommodations shall
pay to the village all taxes due for the period to which the tax return
applies. The dates upon which said monthly returns are to be filed shall be
provided by rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of Finance.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)  Penalty, see § 37.999



§ 37.115  FAILURE TO PAY TAX.



   If for any reason any tax is not paid to the village when due, a
penalty at the rate of 2% per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid
shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax
as herein provided, upon the request of the Director of Finance, the Village
Attorney shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment
of said tax in behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)



§ 37.116  RECORDS.



   Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations in the village
shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents or charges made or
charged, and occupancies taxable under this subchapter. The Director of
Finance, or his designate, shall at all reasonable times have full access to
said books and records.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)  Penalty, see § 37.999



§ 37.117  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   If the Village Administrator, after a hearing held by or for him, shall
find that any person willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this
subchapter, he may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by said tax
evader. The owner, manager or operator of the hotel or motel accommodations
shall have opportunity to be heard at such hearing which shall be held not
less than five days after notice of the time and place of the hearings is
given by mail of facsimile addressed to the owner, manager or operator at
this last known place of business. The suspension or revocation of any
license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of
hotel or motel accommodations from his civil liability for the payment of the
tax nor for prosecution of such offense.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)



§ 37.118  PROCEEDS OF TAX.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
subchapter, including penalties, shall be paid into the Village Treasury, and
shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of the village and
may be expended for any lawful purpose.



(Ord. 1144, passed 9-5-00)



LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAXES



§ 37.130  TITLE.



   This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally
Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance."



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.131  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the village's
procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.132  DEFINITIONS.



   Certain words or terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them as
follows:



   ACT.   The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act."



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.   The Village President and Board of Trustees.



   HEARING OFFICER.   The Village Administrator or his/her designee.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.   The Village Finance Director, charged with
the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized
by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms
of this subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter. The exercise of
such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with
this subchapter and the Act.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX.   Each tax imposed by the
village that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under §§ 37.75 - 37.85 or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.



   NOTICE.   Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE.   Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes or
has imposed any locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER.   Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the village.



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Channahon, Illinois.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.133  NOTICES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:



      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or



      (2)   Personal service or delivery.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.134  LATE PAYMENT.



   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the village pursuant to any tax shall be considered late unless it is
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with
adequate postage prepaid.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.135  PAYMENT.



   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order:



   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;



   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and



   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.136  CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to havepaid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has
not paid the amounts directly to the village.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.



      (2)   Within ten days of receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax
administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in
whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for
refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of 4% per annum, based on a
year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.137  AUDIT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this
subchapter.  Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



      (4)   The notice shall clearly state who will be conducting
the audit.



   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and
if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within 30 days, approved in writing, that
is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.



   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the village.



   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the
taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit
within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax
determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination
of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.



   (F)   If an audit determines that there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, the written
notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30
days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (G)   If an overpayment is discovered which results from the
application of some or all of the taxpayer's tax payment to an incorrect
local government, then upon request by a unit of local government, the audit
information must be given to any unit of local government that may be
affected by an overpayment.



   (H)   If the audit is conducted by a third-party provider, such
third-party provider must be provided with written authorization from the
local tax administrator to review the books and records of the taxpayer and
no contract with the taxpayer may be made until the written authorization is
received by the taxpayer.



   (I)   Upon request by the taxpayer, the auditor must sign a
confidentiality agreement with the taxpayer.



   (J)   Upon completion of the audit, the local tax administrator must
provide an audit closure letter to the taxpayer with the result of the audit.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01; Am. Ord. 1783, passed 6-3-14)



§ 37.138  APPEAL.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice
of tax due, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax.
The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligation of the village during the audit, appeal,
refund and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator
within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45 day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with the interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 60 days after the expiration of the 45 day period.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.139  HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 37.138, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. The taxpayer may
request that a hearing officer conduct the hearing rather than the local tax
administrator.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. 
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days.



   (C)   At the hearing, the local tax administrator/ hearing officer
shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to
the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax
administrator/hearing officer shall make a written determination on the basis
of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall
be provided with a copy of the written decision.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.140  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.



   (A)   Interest.  The village hereby provides for the amount of
interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the
tax to be 5% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days
elapsed.



   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties.  If a tax return is not
filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a
latefiling penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on
a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due
shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by
the controlling ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall
be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting
period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or
payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by
the controlling ordinance.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.141  ABATEMENT.



   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate
any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if
the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay
or failure to make a filing.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.142  INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.



   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer
for the payment of taxes under the controlling ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14 day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local tax
administrator, the installment contract shall be cancelled without further
notice to the taxpayer.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.143  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review
all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.



   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return
for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (C)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year
period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by
the village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (D)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.144  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.



   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the
amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date
of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty
for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the
taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed
as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.145  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.



   Any locally administered tax shall be published via normal or standard
publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall
satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all ordinances shall be made
available to the public upon request at the Village Clerk's office.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.146  REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:



   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;



   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and



   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



§ 37.147  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the village's tax ordinances.  To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this
subchapter shall be controlling.



(Ord. 1162, passed 1-15-01)



USE TAX



§ 37.160  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Village of
Channahon Use Tax. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the
Illinois Municipal Code, specifically ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.161  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:



   MOBILE HOME.  A transportable, factory built home, designed to be used
as a year round residential dwelling.



   TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Mobile homes and no other property.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.162  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   Every purchaser through a sale at retail of tangible personal
property that is titled or registered with an agency of the state to an
address within the corporate limits of the village, shall be liable for a tax
on the purchase at the rate of 1% of the selling price of that property. 
Evidence that titled or registered tangible personal property was sold at
retail to a person or business with an address in the corporate limits of the
village for title or registration shall be prima facie evidence that the
tangible personal property was sold for use in the village.



   (B)   For a purchase or use of tangible personal property to be
taxable under this subchapter, the tangible personal property must have been
purchased from a retailer.



   (C)   If the property that is purchased at retail from a retailer is
acquired outside the village and used outside the village before being
brought to the village for use here, the use is nevertheless taxable
hereunder. However, the selling price on which the tax is computed shall be
reduced by an amount which represents a reasonable allowance for depreciation
for the period of such prior out-of-village use. Depreciation will be
calculated using Internal Revenue Service life values and straight line
depreciation.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.163  VILLAGE RETAILERS TO COLLECT TAX.



   Every retailer of titled or registered tangible personal property which
is subject to the tax herein imposed located in the corporate limits of the
village shall be required to collect the use tax from any purchaser who
titles or registers such taxable tangible personal property to any address in
the corporate limits of the village.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.164  TRANSACTIONS NOT SUBJECT TO TAX.



   The following items of tangible personal property shall not be subject
to the tax imposed by this subchapter:



   (A)   Purchases of tangible personal property by any governmental
body or by any corporation, society, association, foundation, or institution
organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious, or educational
purposes. This exemption shall include purchases of tangible personal
property by any not-for-profit corporation, society, association, foundation,
institution, or organization which has no compensated officers or employees
and which is organized and operated primarily for the recreation of persons
55 years of age or older.



   (B)   Tangible personal property purchased by interstate carriers
for hire as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce or purchases or uses
by lessors under a lease of one year or longer executed or in effect at the
time of purchase of tangible personal property to interstate carriers
for-hire for use as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce so long as
used by those interstate carriers for hire.



   (C)   Purchase or use by owners, lessors, or shippers of tangible
personal property which is utilized by interstate tangible personal property
which is utilized by interstate carriers for-hire for use as rolling stock
moving in interstate commerce so long as so used by interstate carriers for
hire. The rolling stock exemption applies to rolling stock used by interstate
carrier for hire, even just between points in Illinois if such rolling stock
transports for hire, persons whose journeys or property whose shipments
originate or terminate outside the village.



   (D)   Purchases made for resale.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.165  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   (A)   It shall be presumed that all purchases or uses of tangible
personal property purchased at retail are subject to tax under this
subchapter until the contrary is established, and the burden of proving that
a transaction is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the person who would be
required to pay the tax or remit the tax to the village if the transaction is
taxable. In the course of any audit or investigation or hearing by the
village with reference to a given purchaser, if the village finds that the
person lacks documentary evidence needed to support the claim that no tax is
due hereunder, the village is authorized to notify that person in writing to
produce evidence, and that person shall have 60 days subject to the right in
the village to extend this period either on request for good cause shown or
on its own motion from the date when the notice is sent by certified or
registered mail (or delivered if the notice is served personally) in which to
obtain and produce evidence for the village’s inspection failing which the
matter shall be closed and the transaction shall be conclusively presumed to
be taxable hereunder.



   (B)   Every person using, in this village, tangible personal
property purchased at retail from a retailer on or after the effective date
hereof shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent books,
documents, memoranda and papers as the village shall require, in such form as
the village shall require. For the purpose of administering and enforcing the
provisions hereof, the village, or any officer or employee of the village
designated, in writing, by the Village Administrator thereof, may hold
investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered herein and may
examine any books, papers, records, documents or memoranda of any retailer or
purchaser bearing upon the sales or purchases of tangible personal property,
the privilege of using which is taxed hereunder, and may require the
attendance of such person or any officer or employee of such person, or of
any person having knowledge of the facts, and may take testimony and require
proof for its information.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.166  PURCHASER'S DIRECT PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   With respect to tangible personal property for which title and
registration by a state agency is required, a purchaser of such tangible
personal property for use in this village, who purchases such tangible
personal property from an out-of village retailer, shall file with the
village, upon a form to be prescribed and supplied by the village, a return
for each such item of tangible personal property purchased.  Such return
shall be filed not later than 30 days after such mobile home is brought into
this village for use.



   (B)   With each return filed with respect to tangible personal
property for which title and registration by a state agency is required, the
purchases shall remit the proper amount of tax due (or shall submit
satisfactory evidence that the sale is not taxable if that is the case), to
the village or its agents, whereupon the village shall issue, in the
purchaser's name, a tax receipt or a certificate of exemption if the village
is satisfied that the particular sale is tax exempt.



   (C)   Upon payment of use tax determined to be due and owing, the
village, upon the purchaser's request, shall issue an appropriate receipt to
such purchaser showing that he or she has paid such tax to the village. 
Such receipt shall be sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further
liability for the tax to which such receipt may refer.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.167  CONFIDENTIAL  INFORMATION.



   (A)   All information received by the village from returns filed
under this subchapter, or from any investigation conducted under this
subchapter, shall be confidential, except for official purposes, and any
person who divulges any information in any matter, except in accordance with
a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, shall be punished by
a jail sentence not to exceed six months or a fine of $500 or both.



   (B)   The furnishing, upon request, to the village's Finance
Director or his or her authorized agents, for official use, of returns filed
and information related thereto under this subchapter is deemed to be an
official purpose within the meaning of this subchapter.



   (C)   Where an appeal or a protest has been filed by an attorney or
other authorized representative on behalf of a taxpayer, furnishing the
attorney with copies of the taxpayer's filed returns and information related
thereto is deemed to be an official purpose within the meaning of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



§ 37.168  TAX RETURNS; FILING.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every retailer
required or authorized to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter shall,
on or before the last day of each calendar month, file a return for the
proceeding calendar month with the village.  The return shall be filed on
forms prescribed by the village and shall furnish such information as the
village may reasonably require.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this subchapter
concerning the time within which a retailer may file his or her return, in
the case of any retailer who ceases to engage in a kind of business which
makes him or her responsible for filing returns under this subchapter, the
retailer shall file a final return required by this subchapter with the
village not more than one month after discontinuing the business.



   (C)   Where the same person has more than one business registered
with the village under separate registrations as required by this subchapter,
that person may not file each return that is due as a single return covering
all registered businesses but shall file separate returns for each registered
business.



   (D)   Refunds to purchasers made by the retailer during the
preceding return period, on account of tangible personal property returned to
the seller, shall be allowed as a deduction, if the retailer has therefore
included the receipts from the sale in a return filed by him or her and had
remitted the tax from the sale in a return filed by him or her and had
remitted the tax imposed by this subchapter with respect to those receipts.



   (E)   Where the retailer is a corporation, the return filed on
behalf of the corporation shall be signed by the president, vice-president,
secretary, or treasurer, by the properly accredited agent of the corporation,
the chief executive officer or highest ranking manager.



   (F)   The president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, chief
executive officer, proprietor, owner, or highest ranking manager shall sign
any return required to be filed under this section to certify the accuracy of
the information contained therein. Any person who willfully signs any return
containing false or inaccurate information shall be guilty of a violation of
the subchapter and punished accordingly. The return forms prescribed by the
village shall include a warning that the person signing the return may be
personally liable for a penalty as provided by this subchapter.



(Ord. 940, passed 4-21-97)



SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



§ 37.170  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in
such municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.



   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.



   GROSS CHARGE.   The amount paid for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in the city and for all services
and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. Gross charges for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel termination point within a municipality that has
imposed a tax under this subchapter and, charges for the portion of the
inter-office channels provided within that municipality. Charges for that
portion of the inter-office channel connecting two or more channel
termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional
boundary of such municipality, shall be determined by the retailer by
multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination
points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the
municipality and the denominator of which is the total number of channel
termination points connected by the inter-office channel. However, GROSS
CHARGE shall not include any of the following:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a
charge made pursuant to:



         (a)   The tax imposed by this subchapter;



         (b)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise
Tax Act;



         (c)   The tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal
Revenue Code;



         (d)   911 surcharges; or



         (e)   Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the
provisions of the Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5,  §§ 9-221 or
9-222, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act.



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside of such municipality.



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement.



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt
under ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1 to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and
Economic Opportunity.



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the
tax imposed under this subchapter has already been paid to a retailer and
only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the
corporation rendering such service.



      (7)   Bad debts (defined as any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made).



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated
telecommunication devices.



      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



      (10)   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications
if:



         (a)   Those charges are aggregated with other charges
for telecommunications that are taxable;



         (b)   Those charges are not separately stated on the
customer bill or invoice; and



         (c)   The retailer can reasonable identify the
nontaxable charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular
course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be
identified, the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable
services or telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed
to the taxable services or telecommunications. The burden or proving
nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.



   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either
originate or terminate outside this state.



   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate
and terminate within this state.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited
liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including
state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other
political subdivision of this state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.



   RETAILER.  Includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this section. The Department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this
state, who, to the satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate
security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be
issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it
shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject
to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within
this state. The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Includes any
retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities,
sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the
retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or
agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.



   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between
a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly
owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may
not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems,
and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary
use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. 
For air to ground systems and the like, service address shall be the location
of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by
telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are
sent.



   TAXPAYER.  A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability
as authorized by this subchapter.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  In addition to the meaning ordinarily and
popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, digital telecommunication networks, private line services, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services,
cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio,
stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and
portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of
messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or
similar facilities. As used in this subchapter, PRIVATE LINE means a
dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or
group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end
communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for
use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into,
end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for
resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered
telecommunications subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter. For
purposes of this section, PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that
term as defined in the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35,  Act 120,
§ 2-27.



(Ord. 1668, passed 9-19-11)



§ 37.171  SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or
privileges:



   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or
receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a
rate of 5% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act
or privilege that is subject to taxation under this division, any taxpayer,
upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that
event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or
authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly
due and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit
against any other municipal tax.



   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or
receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a
rate of 5% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal
taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this
division, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in
another state or municipality in this state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to
the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other
state or such tax properly due and paid in a municipality in this state which
was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax
in this state.



   (C)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on such act
or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by the municipality.



(Ord. 1668, passed 9-19-11)



§ 37.172  COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.



   (A)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from
the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and
shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department
shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall
collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for
the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold
for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by
this subchapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until
paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the
original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the
tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax
directly to the Department in the manner provided by the Department.



   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter
shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from
the gross charge for telecommunications.



(Ord. 1668, passed 9-19-11)



§ 37.173  RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.



   Commencing on passage of this subchapter, the tax imposed under this
subchapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate
forms and information as required by the Department pursuant to the Illinois
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35,  Act 636, §§
5-1 et seq., as amended, and any accompanying rules and regulations created
by the Department to implement this Act.



(Ord. 1668, passed 9-19-11)



§ 37.174  RESELLERS.



   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications
claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply
to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which
will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax
authorized by this subchapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such
additional information as the Department may reasonably require.



   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign
a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the
applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication
tax free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer
applies because of the person having discontinued the making of resales.



   (C)   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale.



(Ord. 1668, passed 9-19-11)



§ 37.175  MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, every
retailer authorized or required to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter
and every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or
exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the English language
and, at all times during business hours of the day, shall be subject to and
available for inspection by the city.



(Ord. 1668, passed 9-19-11)



§ 37.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 37.55 through 37.65 and §§
37.75 through 37.85, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $25 nor more than $500.  Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 37.110 through 37.118, except
when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by fines of not less than $25 and not more that $500.  Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 710, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 711, passed 4-13-92; Am. Ord. 1144,
passed 9-5-00)



CHAPTER 38:  VILLAGE POLICIES



Section



Public Records



   38.01   Request for access to records



   38.02   Retrieval of records



   38.03   Fees



   38.04   Denial of request; appeal



   38.05   Records to be prepared by Clerk and Police



Recording of Open Meetings



   38.15   Registration required



   38.16   Duration of application



   38.17   Energy source, equipment and lighting



   38.18   Limitations imposed to avoid disruption



   38.19   Cameras to be placed in designated areas



   38.20   Taping to be stopped when disruptive



   38.21   Closed sessions



   38.22   Notice that meeting is being recorded



   38.23   Exemption from regulations



Drug Free Workplace



   38.35   Regulations of a drug free workplace



   38.36   Sanctions and remedies



Prevailing Rate of Wages



   38.45   Prevailing rate of wages



Ethics Provisions



   38.70   Definitions



   38.71   Prohibited political activities



   38.72   Gift ban



   38.73   Ethics Advisor



 



   38.99   Penalty



PUBLIC RECORDS



§ 38.01  REQUEST FOR ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The Village Administrator is hereby designated as the Village Freedom
of Information Act Officer.  All requests for public records are to be made
to the Village Administrator.  Such requests must be made in writing.  The
Village Administrator may delegate his or her duties to a deputy or deputies
designated to receive and process requests for public records.



(Ord. 416, passed 8-4-86; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 1569,
passed 12-15-08; Am. Ord. 1605, passed 12-21-09)



§ 38.02  RETRIEVAL OF RECORDS.



   Any public records which are the subject of a request under the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act shall be retrieved from such place as
they are stored by an employee of the village acting under the direction of
the Freedom of Information Act Officer.  In no event shall records be
retrieved by the party requesting them or by any person who is not employed
by the village.



(Ord. 416, passed 8-4-86; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 1605,
passed 12-21-09)



§ 38.03  FEES.



   If a copy of a public record is requested, the fee for the reproduction
is determined by the State of Illinois Freedom of Information Act.



(Ord. 416, passed 8-4-86; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 1605,
passed 12-21-09)



§ 38.04  DENIAL OF REQUEST; APPEAL.



   In the event that a request for a public record is denied by the
Village Freedom of Information Act Officer, the denial may be appealed to the
Public Access Counselor of the Illinois Attorney General's Office as
prescribed by law.



(Ord. 416, passed 8-4-86; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 1605,
passed 12-21-09)



§ 38.05  RECORDS TO BE PREPARED BY CLERK  AND POLICE.



   The Village Clerk shall prepare copies of the requests for fees as set
forth in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 1545.  The Village Police shall
prepare documents requested for fees as set forth in Exhibit B to Ordinance
1545.



(Ord. 416, passed 8-4-86; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 1605,
passed 12-21-09)



RECORDING OF OPEN MEETINGS



§ 38.15  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person desiring to record any open meeting of Board of
Trustees of the village or any subsidiary body of the village shall register
with the office of the Village Clerk at least 48 hours prior to any regular
meeting and at least two hours prior to any special or emergency meeting. 
Registration shall include completing and executing an application provided
by the Village Clerk.



   (B)   Such application shall minimally include:



      (1)   The name or names of the individual or individuals
seeking to tape a meeting;



      (2)   The date of the meeting or meetings to be taped;



      (3)   The firm, group or company represented by that
individual;



      (4)   A statement that the individual has read and understands
the recording rules and regulations set forth herein and that said individual
will comply with and conform to these rules and regulations;



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)  Penalty, see § 38.99



§ 38.16  DURATION OF APPLICATION.



   Any individual who has properly completed the application required by
this subchapter may return to record additional meetings by giving oral
notice to the Village Clerk within the time period prescribed by this
subchapter without the necessity of filing a written application provided,
however, that if an individual does not exercise his taping rights for a
period of three consecutive months, such individual must again file a written
application with the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)



§ 38.17  ENERGY SOURCE, EQUIPMENT AND LIGHTING.



   (A)   Individuals must provide their own energy source to operate
their equipment.  Electricity will not be provided by the village.



   (B)   All recording equipment must be of a type that will operate
quietly and unobtrusively so as not to disturb or disrupt the meeting.



   (C)   No artificial lighting may be used in conjunction with the
recording of a meeting.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)



§ 38.18  LIMITATIONS IMPOSED TO AVOID DISRUPTION.



   The President and Board of Trustees, in order to avoid disruptions and
to maintain the solemnity of their meeting, may in their discretion, limit
the number of persons allowed to tape a particular meeting.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)



§ 38.19  CAMERAS TO BE PLACED IN DESIGNATED AREAS.



   Video cameras and equipment shall only be placed  in  designated 
areas and located  in  such  a manner so as not to obstruct the visibility
of other spectators.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)  Penalty, see § 38.99



§ 38.20  TAPING TO BE STOPPED WHEN DISRUPTIVE.



   Individuals must stop taping when to continue in the opinion of the
meeting Chairperson would be disruptive to the conduct of business.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)  Penalty, see § 38.99



§ 38.21  CLOSED SESSIONS.



   All video equipment must be removed from the meeting room prior to the
commencement of any closed session.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)  Penalty, see § 38.99



§ 38.22  NOTICE THAT MEETING IS BEING RECORDED.



   The Chairperson shall announce at the beginning of each recorded
meeting the fact that said meeting is being recorded, and that anyone who
speaks at the meeting shall be deemed to have given his or her consent to the
recording of their likeness and speech.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)



§ 38.23  EXEMPTION FROM REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Any recording of a meeting by the Village Clerk, Deputy
Village Clerk or Secretary of any subsidiary body of the village shall be
exempt from these rules and regulations.



   (B)   Any bona fide news medium as determined by the Village
President shall be exempt from §§ 38.20, 38.21, 38.23 and 38.25.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89)



DRUG FREE WORKPLACE



§ 38.35  REGULATIONS OF A DRUG FREE WORKPLACE.



   The village, as provided for in Public Act 86-1459, shall provide a
drug free workplace by:



   (A)   Publishing a statement:



      (1)   Notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture,
distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance,
including cannabis, is prohibited in the workplace of the village.



      (2)   Specifying the actions that will be taken against
employees for violations of such prohibition.



      (3)   Notifying the employee that, as a condition of
employment on such contract or grant, the employee will:



         (a)   Abide by the terms of the statement; and



         (b)   Notify the village of any criminal drug statute
conviction for a violation occurring in the village not later than five days
after such conviction.



   (B)   Establishing a drug free awareness program to inform employees
about:



      (1)   The dangers of drug abuse in the workplace;



      (2)   The policy of the village for maintaining a drug free
workplace;



      (3)   Any available drug counseling, rehabilitation and
employee assistance programs; and



      (4)   The penalties that may be imposed upon employees for
drug violations.



   (C)   Making it a requirement to give a copy of the statement
required by division (A) to each employee and to post the statement in a
prominent place in the workplace.



   (D)   Imposing a sanction on, or requiring the satisfactory
participation in a drug abuse assistance or rehabilitation program by any
employee who is so convicted as required by § 38.41.



   (E)   Assisting employees in selecting a course of action in the
event drug counseling, treatment and rehabilitation is required and
indicating that a trained referral team is in place.



   (F)   Making a good faith effort to continue to maintain a drug free
workplace through implementation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 640, passed 3-4-91)



§ 38.36  SANCTIONS AND REMEDIES.



   (A)   The village shall, within 30 days after receiving notice from
an employee of a conviction of a violation of a criminal drug statute
occurring in the workplace:



      (1)   Take appropriate personnel action against such employee
up to and including termination; or



      (2)   Require the employee to satisfactorily participate in a
drug abuse assistance or rehabilitation program approved for such purposes by
a federal, state, or local health, law enforcement, or other appropriate
agency.



(Ord. 640, passed 3-4-91)



PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES



§ 38.45  PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES.



   (A)   To the extent and as required by “An Act regulating wages of
laborers, mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by State,
County, City or public body or any political subdivision or by any one under
contract for public works,” approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workers engaged in construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction
of the Village of Channahon is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Will and Grundy County
area as determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of
June 2018, a copy of that determination being attached to Ordinance No. 1932
and incorporated herein by reference. As required by said Act, any and all
revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the Department of Labor of the
State of Illinois shall supersede the Department’s June determination and
apply to any and all public works construction undertaken by the Village of
Channahon. The definition of any terms appearing in this section which are
also used in aforesaid Act shall be the same in said Act.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said
general prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment except public works construction of the Village of Channahon to
the extent required by the aforesaid Act.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for
inspection by any interested party in the main office of the Village of
Channahon this determination or any revisions of such prevailing rate of
wage. A copy of this determination or of the current revised determination of
prevailing rate of wages then in effect shall be attached to all contract
specifications.



   (D)   The Village Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to
any employer, to any association of employers, and to any person or
association of employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting
copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular
class of workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.



   (E)   The Village Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of
these provisions with both the Secretary of State Index Division and the
Department of Labor of the State of Illinois.



   (F)   The Village Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the area a copy of these provisions, and such
publication shall constitute notice that the determina-tion is effective and
that this is the determination of this public body



(Ord. 1053, passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. 1180, passed 7-2-01; Am. Ord. 1502,
passed 9-4-07; Am. Ord. 1539, passed 6-16-08; Am. Ord. 1585, passed 6-15-09;
Am. Ord. 1623, passed 6-7-10; Am. Ord. 1653, passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 1698,
passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 1746, passed 6-3-13; Am. Ord. 1782, passed 6-3-14;
Am. Ord. 1808-B, passed 6-1-15; Am. Ord. 1848, passed 5-16-16; Am. Ord. 1894,
passed 6-5-17; Am. Ord. 1932, passed 5-21-18)



ETHICS PROVISIONS



§ 38.70  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE.   Any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of
any individual to any federal, state, or local public office, or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include  activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's
official duties.



   CANDIDATE.   A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at a regular election, as defined in the Election Code.



   CATERED.   Food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume
which are delivered by any means.



   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.   This term shall be as defined in the Illinois
Public Labor Relations Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3).



   COMPENSATED TIME.   With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but does not include any
designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off
or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.  With respect to
officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, COMPENSATED TIME includes
any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the
employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or
her official duties, regardless of location.



   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF.   Authorized time off earned by or awarded to
an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.



   CONTRIBUTION.   This term shall be as defined in the Election Code
(ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4).



   EMPLOYEE.   A person employed by the village, whether on a full-time
or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.



   EMPLOYER.   The Village of Channahon.



   GIFT.   Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or
the official position of an officer or employee.



   INTER-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT.   Any gift given to an officer or employee by
an officer or employee of another government entity.



   INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT.   Any gift given to an officer or employee
from another officer or employee.



   LEAVE OF ABSENCE.   Any period during which an employee does not
receive:



      (1)   Compensation for employment;



      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and



      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.



   OFFICER.   A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.



   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's
official duties.



   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk
under the provisions of the Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3), but
only with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board
of Elections or a county clerk.



   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.   Any of the following shall fall under
this definition:



      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any
political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.



      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to
the purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for
any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.



      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing
any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.



      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public
opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office, on behalf of
a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.



      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or
actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection
with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.



      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any
political organization, candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.



      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective
office, a political organization or for or against any referendum question or
helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.



      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating,
reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.



      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for
elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for
elective office.



      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate
questionnaires.



      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing
campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.



      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against
any referendum question.



      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.



      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a
political party convention.



      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the
outcome of any election.



   PROHIBITED SOURCE.   Any person or entity who:



      (1)   Is seeking official action by an officer or by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;



      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business with the officer
or with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;



      (3)   Conducts activities regulated by the officer or by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or



      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or
employee.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-17-04)



§ 38.71  PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined in §
38.70.  No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.



   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require
any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:



      (1)   As part of that officer or employee's duties;



      (2)   As a condition of employment; or



      (3)   During any compensated time off (such as holidays,
vacation, or personal time off).



   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or
her participation in any prohibited political activity.



   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her
official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee
on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this subchapter.



   (E)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized
merit principles of public employment, or in a position the salary for which
is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable
to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee,
of a political party, or of a political organization or club.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-17-04)  Penalty, see § 38.99



§ 38.72  GIFT BAN.



   (A)   Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or
employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance.  No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section.



   (B)   Exceptions.  Division (A) above is not applicable to the
following:



      (1)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available
on the same conditions as for the general public;



      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or
her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value;



      (3)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the
Election Code, or activities associated with a fundraising event in support
of a political organization or candidate;



      (4)   Educational materials and missions;



      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;



      (6)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to
the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle,
aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half
brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or
fiancee;



      (7)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a
personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under
the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member
and not because of the personal friendship.  In determining whether a gift
is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:



         (a)   The history of the relationship between the
individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any
previous exchange of gifts between those individuals;



         (b)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient
the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and



         (c)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient
the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or
similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members;



      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in
value on a single calendar day, provided that the food or refreshments are
consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared, or
catered;



      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other
benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or
employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the
official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances;



      (10)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts;



      (11)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; or



      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during
any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.



   (C)   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually
exclusive and independent of every other.



   (D)   Disposition of gifts.  An officer or employee, his or her
spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee,
does not violate this section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable
action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source, or gives the
gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt
from income taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-17-04)  Penalty, see § 38.99



§ 38.73  ETHICS ADVISOR.



   (A)   The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the village.  The duties of
the Ethics Advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the village.



   (B)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter and state ethics laws.  The Ethics Advisor
shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the President and/or
Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-17-04)



§ 38.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 38.20
through 38.28 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
and on which a violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of
§ 38.71 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution
other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be
fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.



      (2)   A violation of § 38.71 may be prosecuted as a criminal
offense by an attorney for the village by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense.  The prosecution
shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure.  Conviction
shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a
reasonable doubt.



   (C)   (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of
§ 38.72 is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not
more than $5000.



      (2)   A violation of § 38.72 may be prosecuted as a
quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the village, or, if an Ethics
Commission has been created, by the Commission through the designated
administrative procedure.



   (D)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of §§ 38.71 and/or 38.72 to the local
enforcement authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement
official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution
other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be
fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.



   (E)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable,
whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates
any provision of §§ 38.71 and 38.72 is subject to discipline or discharge.



(Ord. 519, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. 1346, passed 5-17-04)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



    Chapter



         50.   GARBAGE



         51.   SEWERS



         52.   WATER



         53.   STORMWATER



         54.   CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



         55.   ELECTRIC SERVICE



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE



Section



Disposal and Collection



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Uncovered garbage



   50.03   Wind-blown refuse



   50.04   Deposits on streets



   50.05   Consent of owner for placement of garbage



   50.06   Disposal



   50.07   Containers



   50.08   Time of placement for collection



Removal by Village



   50.15   Action by Board of Trustees



   50.16   Notice to be provided



   50.17   Information to be contained in notice



   50.18   Failure to remove



   50.19   Removal by village; cost



   50.20   Lien



   50.21   Foreclosure of lien



Termination of Services



   50.30   Termination of Municipal Refuse Services



 



   50.99   Penalty



DISPOSAL AND COLLECTION



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES.  Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.



   GARBAGE.  Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   REFUSE.  Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood
furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to,
metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces
of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including
but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt,
contents of litter receptacles.  Provided, refuse shall not include earth
and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes
resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food
processing wastes, boiler-house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)



§ 50.02  UNCOVERED GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the
village any garbage or other material subject to decay other than leaves or
grass, excepting in a tightly covered metal or plastic container.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  WIND-BLOWN REFUSE.



   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes,
or trash of such a material that it can be blown away by the wind anywhere in
the village excepting in a covered container.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  DEPOSITS ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any
garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the village;
provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing
garbage, refuse or ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this
chapter preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the
manner provided herein.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  CONSENT OF OWNER FOR PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse or ashes on
any premises in the village without the consent of the owner of such premises.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  DISPOSAL.



   It shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage, refuse or ashes
anywhere in the village excepting in an incinerator, or disposal device,
properly constructed and operated or in a lawfully established garbage or
refuse dump.  Such material not so properly disposed of shall be placed in
containers for collection by the village as hereinafter prescribed.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  CONTAINERS.



   All garbage, refuse and ashes for collection by a garbage collection or
refuse disposal company shall be placed in metal or plastic containers and
covered or sealed.  No such container shall have a capacity of less than ten
gallons or more than 20 gallons.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.08  TIME OF PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited or placed
along, within or within 30 feet of the right-of-way of any public street,
road or alley within the corporate limits of the village more than 12 hours
prior to its collection by any garbage collection facility or refuse disposal
company doing business within the corporate limits of the village.



   (B)   Any garbage or refuse of any kind which shall be placed for
collection in containers other than as set forth and provided in this
subchapter or prior to the time limits herein provided is hereby declared to
be nuisance and subject to the penalties herein set forth.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)  Penalty, see § 50.99



REMOVAL BY VILLAGE



§ 50.15  ACTION BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   From time to time, as deemed necessary, the Board of Trustees may
direct that garbage and debris be removed from private property within the
corporate limits of the village.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-4-74)



§ 50.16  NOTICE TO BE PROVIDED.



   Upon such direction the Village Clerk shall give written notice by
United States mail to the owner or owners of the property upon which garbage
or debris exists; and in the event that the name of the owner or owners of
said property is unable to be determined, the Clerk shall give such notice to
the last assessee of the general real estate taxes on said real estate.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-4-74)



§ 50.17  INFORMATION TO BE CONTAINED IN NOTICE.



   The aforesaid notice to be given by the Village Clerk shall designate
the real estate, the garbage or debris thereon to be removed, and shall
provide that if the same is not removed from the said real estate within ten
days after the posting of such notice, that the village will cause the same
to be removed and collect the reasonable cost thereof from the owner or
owners of said real estate.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-4-74)



§ 50.18  FAILURE TO REMOVE.



   Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the owner or owners of any real
estate upon which garbage or debris exist to remove the same within ten days
after the posting of notice as above provided, the Village Clerk shall notify
the appropriate village employees to remove said garbage or debris from said
property, and such employees shall forthwith cause said garbage and debris to
be removed.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-4-74)



§ 50.19  REMOVAL BY VILLAGE; COST.



   The village employees removing garbage and debris from any private
property, pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, shall designate in
writing to the Village Clerk the reasonable cost incurred in the removal of
the same.  The Village Clerk shall then bill the owner or owners of said
real estate for the reasonable cost of the removal of said debris, posting
the same by United States mail.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-4-74)



§ 50.20  LIEN.



   In the event the owner or owners of any real estate from which garbage
and debris has been removed, pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter,
fails to pay the cost thereof within 15 days after posting of the bill for
the same, the Village Clerk shall cause a notice of lien to be filed in the
office of the County Recorder of Deeds, which notice shall consist of a sworn
statement setting out a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof; the amount of money representing the cost and
expenses incurred or payable for the service; and the date or dates when such
cost and expense was incurred by the village.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-4-74)



§ 50.21  FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.



   In the event the costs incurred by the village for the removal of any
garbage or debris from private property, pursuant to the terms of this
subchapter, are not paid by the owner or owners of said real estate within 18
months from the date of the filing of the notice of lien therefor, the
Village Clerk shall advise the Board of Trustees of the same to enable it to
designate whether foreclosure of the lien for the same should be commenced.



(Ord. 136, passed 2-4-74)



TERMINATION OF SERVICES



§ 50.30  TERMINATION OF MUNICIPAL REFUSE SERVICES.



   (A)   If charges for refuse services are not paid in full  within 
45  calendar  days  from the date of  billing and/or if the refuse
customer is in violation of any village ordinance relating to refuse
services, the village refuse customer may be notified in writing of the
village's intent to terminate refuse services prior to any such termination.



   (B)   The pre-termination notice required herein shall contain the
following:



      (1)   The ordinance being violated, and how such violation can
be corrected, if applicable;



      (2)   The number of days the account is in arrears;



      (3)   The balance due, including late charges as of the notice
date;



      (4)   That the refuse customer may contact a representative of
the village and request an informal hearing to resolve disputes as to the
correctness of bills, arrearages and/or violations of ordinance prior to
termination of services;



      (5)   The name, business address and telephone number of the
village representative to contact to schedule such informal hearing;



      (6)   That unless the customer contacts the appropriate
village representative in writing within ten days of receipt of the
pre-termination notice requesting an informal hearing on the correctness of
the refuse bill his or her refuse service shall be terminated; and



      (7)   The date on or after which termination will be effected.



   (C)   That an informal hearing shall be held, upon written request
of the refuse customer, within ten days after written request is made to the
Village President of his or her designee (sometimes herein collectively
referred to as village representative).  The purpose of the informal hearing
is to allow the refuse customer an opportunity to present information
regarding the correctness of that customer’s refuse bill and/or matters
with respect to other alleged violations.



   (D)   That if the village representative finds merit to the
customer’s contentions regarding the correctness of the refuse bills and/or
alleged violations no action shall be taken to terminate service and the
customer’s bill shall be adjusted accordingly by the village 
representative  with  such  adjusted bill  to  be paid by the refuse
customer within seven days of receipt of the determination by the village
representative.



   (E)   That if the village representative finds no merit to the
customer’s contentions regarding the correctness of the refuse bills and/or
violations, the decision shall be mailed to the refuse customer within ten
days after the informal hearing and the refuse customer shall be informed in
said notice that termination of service will be affected without further
notice unless all refuse bills are paid in full and/or violations corrected
within seven days after receipt of such determination without further notice.



   (F)   That if service is terminated as herein provided, no refuse
service shall be reinstated until such time as all violations are corrected
and/or all outstanding refuse bills are paid in full in addition to the
payment of a $5 reinstatement fee.



   (G)   All refuse customers shall timely pay the undisputed portion
of the refuse bill.



   (H)   For purposes of this section, any notice herein shall be given
to the refuse customer in the account name and address indicated in the
village refuse customer records.  Any notices required by this section may
be given either by certified mail, return receipt requested, with sufficient
postage prepaid, by personally delivering a copy to the utility customer, by
attaching a copy to the front door of the refuse customer’s service
address, or by United States first class mail. If village refuse customer
records indicate a billing address different than the service address, then
notification shall be made to both addresses.  For purposes of this section,
notices transmitted through the United States mail shall be deemed received
by the utility customer two days after mailing.



(Ord. 924, passed 12-16-96; Am. Ord. 1752, passed 10-21-13)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 50.02 through 50.08 shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $200 and each day that
said violation continues shall be construed as a separate violation.



(Ord. 112, passed 10-2-72)



CHAPTER 51: SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Protection of sewage works from damage



   51.03   Supervision and management of system



   51.04   Bills



   51.05   Nonpayment of bills; lien



   51.06   Termination of service



   51.07   Revenues



   51.08   Accounts



   51.09   Access to records



Use of Public Sewers Required



   51.20   Prohibited deposits on public or private property



   51.21   Prohibited discharges



   51.22   Privies, septic tanks, and cesspools



   51.23   Toilet facilities



Building Sewers and Connections



   51.35   Permit required



   51.36   Standards for compliance



   51.37   Classes of permits



   51.38   Application



   51.39   Reserved capacity required



   51.40   Costs and expense borne by owner



   51.41   Separate and independent building sewers



   51.42   Old building sewers



   51.43   Size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction



   51.44   Overhead sewers



   51.45   Prohibited connections



   51.46   Connection requirements



   51.47   Notification when ready for inspection



   51.48   Excavations and restoration



Use of Public Sewers



   51.60   Stormwater and other unpolluted waters



   51.61   Prohibited waters or wastes



   51.62   Prohibited substances



   51.63   Options if waters or wastes are proposed



   51.64   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   51.65   Preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities



   51.66   Control manholes



   51.67   Measurements of waters and wastes



   51.68   Number, type, and frequency of analyses



   51.69   Methods of measurement



   51.70   Special agreements



Wastewater Service Charges



   51.80   Wastewater service charges



   51.81   Basic user charge



   51.82   Debt service charge



   51.83   Capital improvement charge



   51.84   Surcharge



   51.85   Review



   51.86   Notice



   51.87   Measurement of flow



   51.88   Surcharge rates



   51.89   Fee schedule



Administration and Enforcement



   51.90   Powers and authority of inspectors



 



   51.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   For stormwater retention regulations, see Ch. 53.



   GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.   The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.



   BASIC USER CHARGE.   The basic assessment levied on all users of the
public sewer system.



   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND ).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.



   BUILDING DEPARTMENT.   The Building Department of the Village.



   BUILDING DRAIN.   That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or
other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside
the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.   The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE.   A charge levied on users to improve,
extend or reconstruct the sewage treatment works.



   COMBINED SEWER.   A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.



   COMMERCIAL USER shall include transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering
services.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.   A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior
drop. The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.   The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding.



   DIRECTOR.   The Director of Public Works.



   EASEMENT.   An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   EFFLUENT CRITERIA are defined in any applicable "NPDES Permit".



   FEDERAL ACT.   The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 466 et seq.) as
amended (Pub. L. 95-217).



   FEDERAL GRANT.   The U.S. government participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II—Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.



   FLOATABLE OIL.   Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.  A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with
the collection system.



   GARBAGE.   Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
food.



   INDUSTRIAL USERS shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials
of substance into products.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.   Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial
or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER shall include schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.



   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE.   Charges for costs other than the
operation, maintenance and replacement costs, i.e. debt service and capital
improvement costs.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY.   An industrial user of the publicly
owned treatment works that: Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average
work day; or has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste; or has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic
amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal
Act; or is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER.   A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent.  It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of
water.  It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million,
to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water
and wastewater analysis.



   NATURAL OUTLET.   Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   NPDES PERMIT.   Any National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the Administrator,
or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Clean
Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of
the Federal Act.



   PERSON.   Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.



   pH.   The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA
Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   POPULATION EQUIVALENT.   A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population
equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD
and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids.



   ppm.   Parts per million by weight.



   PRETREATMENT.   The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.   The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have seen shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.



   REPLACEMENT.   Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain thecapacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed.  The term "operation and maintenance"
includes replacement.



   RESIDENTIAL USER.   All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.



   SANITARY SEWER.   A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or
a combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.



   SEPARATE DWELLING UNIT.   A room or combination of rooms leased or
sold for occupancy by one individual or family contained within an apartment
or other multi-family building.



   SEWAGE is used interchangeably with WASTEWATER .



   SEWER.   A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.  PUBLIC SEWER
shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village.  It shall also include sewers within or outside the village
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the
village sanitary (or combined sewer system), even though those sewers may not
have been constructed with village funds.



   SEWERAGE.   The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.



   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.



   SLUG.   Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STATE ACT.   The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.



   STATE GRANT.   The State of Illinois participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois
Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.



   STORM SEWER.   A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of the precipitation that is drained
into the sewers.



   SURCHARGE.   The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and
debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater
in strength than the concentration values established in Schedule A.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER .  Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   USEFUL LIFE.   The estimated period during which the collection system
and/or treatment works will be operated.



   USER CHARGE.   A charge levied on users of treatment works for the
cost of operation, maintenance and replacement.



   USER CLASS.   The type of user RESIDENTIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL, COMMERCIAL, or INDUSTRIAL as defined herein.



   UTILITIES FUND.   The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system.



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Channahon.



   WASTEWATER.   The spent water of a community.  From this standpoint
of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES.   The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.



   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.   The charge per quarter or month levied on
all users of the Wastewater Facilities.  The service charge shall be
computed as outlined in § 51.93 and shall consist of the total or the basic
user charge, the local capital cost and surcharge, if applicable.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS.   An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"pollution control plant".



   WATERCOURSE.   A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS are defined in the Water Pollution Regulations
of Illinois.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.02  PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   The Director and such other agents and/or employees as
designated by the Corporate Authorities shall have the supervision,
management and control of the maintenance and operation of the system.



   (B)   The Director shall have the supervision over all buildings and
equipment used and the furnishings of sewer service in the village, and shall
see that the sewer system is operated properly, efficiently and
economically.  In this regard, it shall be the duty of the Director and all
employees and agents of said department to enforce all of the provisions of
this chapter and to observe, obey and carry out the orders and directions of
the Corporate Authorities. The Director shall prepare and keep in his or her
office a complete atlas of the sewer works system together with all pipe,
manholes, pump station, and treatment plant locations.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.04  BILLS.



   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly.  The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and
the service is furnished on the premises by the village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.



   (B)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the Village
Finance Director by the tenth day of the month succeeding the period for
which the service is billed.  All sewer bills are due and payable on the
last day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is
billed.  A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the last
day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1147, passed 11-6-00)



§ 51.05  NONPAYMENT OF BILLS; LIEN.



   (A)   The village shall have a continuing lien upon the premises and
real estate upon or for which sewer is used or supplied for all sewer rates
or benefits accruing by reason of the provisions of this chapter.  Every
such lien shall, upon compliance with the conditions set forth in this
chapter, become and be prior and superior to the rights and interest of
creditors, encumbrances, purchasers and other parties in interest in the
premises and real estate.  Liens shall be filed following three consecutive
months of nonpayment for sewer service charges to the village.  A release of
lien shall be provided to the customer upon payment of all charges and fees;
such release may be recorded by the customer.



   (B)   Whenever it is necessary to record a lien, in addition to all
other fees and charges, the utility customer and the owner of the property
shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of a lien fee in the amount
of $150.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1847, passed 5-2-16)



§ 51.06  TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   If charges for sewer/water services are not paid in full
within 45 calendar days from the date of billing or if the utility customer
is in violation of any village ordinance, regulation or law, the utility
customer may be notified in writing of the village'sintent to terminate
sewer/water service prior to any such termination.  In the event charges for
sewer/water services are not paid within 45 days after the rendition of the
bill for such services, such sewer/water services shall be discontinued as
hereinafter provided and shall not be reinstated until such time as all
violations are corrected and all outstanding utility bills are paid in full
in addition to the payment of the reinstatement fee set forth in Schedule A.



   (B)   The pre-termination notice required herein shall contain the
following:



      (1)   The ordinance being violated and how such violation can
be corrected, if applicable;



      (2)   The number of days the account is in arrears;



      (3)   The balance due, including late charges as of the notice
date;



      (4)   That the utility customer may contact a representative
of the village and request an informal hearing the resolve disputes as to the
correctness of bills, arrearages and violations of ordinances prior to
termination of service;



      (5)   The name, business address and telephone number of the
village representative to contact to schedule such informal hearing;



      (6)   That unless the customer contacts the appropriate
village representative in writing within ten days of receipt of the
pre-termination notice requesting an informal hearing, the customer's sewer
or water service shall be terminated; and



      (7)   The date on or after which termination will be effected.



   (C)   That upon written request of the utility customer, an informal
hearing shall be held within ten days after the written request is made to
the Village President or his or her designee (sometimes herein collectively
referred to as village representative).  The purpose of the informal hearing
is to allow the utility customer an opportunity to present information
regarding the correctness of that customer’s utility bill and matters with
respect to other alleged violations.



   (D)   That if the village representative finds merit to the
customer's contentions regarding the correctness of the utility bills and/or
alleged violations, no action shall be taken to terminate service and the
customer's bill shall be adjusted accordingly by the village representative
with such adjusted bill to be paid by the utility customer within seven days
of receipt of the determination by the village representative.



   (E)   That if the village representative finds no merit to the
customer's contentions regarding the correctness of the utility bills or
violations, the decision shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the
utility customer within ten days after the informal hearing together with
notice that termination of service will be effected without further notice
unless all utility bills are paid in full and violations corrected within
seven days after receipt of the determination without further notice.



   (F)   In the event a hearing is requested by a residential utility
customer wherein the customer establishes that he or she or a member of his
or her immediate family residing with the customer has a life threatening
medical condition certified by a doctor licensed by the state or the customer
establishes that he or she is financially unable to pay the utility charge in
full or part, the village representative may allow service continuance so
long as the utility customer makes satisfactory financial arrangements to pay
for past and future utility charges.



   (G)   That if service is terminated as herein provided no utility
service shall be reinstated until such time as all violations are corrected
and all outstanding utility bills are paid in full addition to the payment of
a reinstatement fee as set forth in Schedule A.



   (H)   All utility customers shall timely pay the undisputed portion
of the utility bill.



   (I)   For purposes of this section, any notice herein required shall
be given to the utility customer in the account name and address indicated in
the village utility customer records.  Any notices required by this section
may be given either by certified mail, return receipt requested, with
sufficient postage prepaid, by personally delivering a copy to the utility
customer, by attaching a copy to the front door of the utility customer’s
service address, or by United States first class mail. If the village utility
customer records indicate a billing address different than the service
address, then notification shall be made to both addresses. For purposes of
this section, notices transmitted through the United States mail shall be
deemed received by the utility customer two days after mailing.



   (J)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit immediate termination
in the event that the Director determines that such immediate termination is
in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the system users.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1752, passed 10-21-13)



§ 51.07  REVENUES.



   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the utility account of the utility fund.  All
such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village Finance Director
separate and apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from
all other funds of the village and all of said sum, without any deductions
whatever, shall be delivered to the Village Finance Director no more than ten
days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may
from time to time be directed by the President and Board of Trustees.  The
Village Finance Director shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such
system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the “Utility Fund of the Village”. 
The Finance Director shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by statute of the “Revised Cities and Villages Act”,
effective January, 1942.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.08  ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The Village Finance Director shall establish a proper system
of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to
the sewerage system, and at regular intervals he or she shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer
service charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations.  In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:



      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the
wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.



      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per
fiscal year.



      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.



      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.



      (5)   Number of non-metered users.



      (6)   A list of users discharging non-domestic and industrial
wastes and volume of waste discharged.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.09  ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to
the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with
the terms of the loan agreement and rules of any state loan.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED



§ 51.20  PROHIBITED DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human, or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.21  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.22  PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, AND CESSPOOLS.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.23  TOILET FACILITIES.



   The owner of any dwelling, residence, structure, place of business,
public building or other properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any
street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the village, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 250 feet
(76 meters) of the dwelling, structure or building.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 51.35  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the village.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.36  STANDARDS FOR COMPLIANCE.



   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.37  CLASSES OF PERMITS.



   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:  for
residential,  wastewater  service;  and for commercial,
institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service.  In either
case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the village.  Sewer permits will not be required for
residential subdivision lots where an approved IEPA sewer extension permit
has been obtained for the development.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.38  APPLICATION.



   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the village.  A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the
application is filed.  The industry, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics, and type of activity.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.39  RESERVED CAPACITY REQUIRED.



   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.40  COSTS AND EXPENSE BORNE BY OWNER.



   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify
the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.41  SEPARATE AND INDEPENDENT BUILDING SEWERS.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, structure, or condo except that where one building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard,
or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to
the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.  A
separate connection fee is required for each building sewer in a multiple
unit building including townhomes, apartments and condominiums.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.42  OLD BUILDING SEWERS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the village, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.43  SIZE, SLOPE, ALIGNMENT, AND MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the village.  Sewer service pipe shall be Polyvinyl Chloride
(PVC) pipe, D-3034, SDR-26, six-inch minimum diameter.  The sewer line
exiting the structure shall be a minimum of four inch, class 52 Ductile Iron
pipe and extend a minimum of ten feet past the foundation wall.  A caulder
(rubber mission) coupling with stainless steel bands shall be used to connect
the four inch Ductile Iron pipe to the six inch SDR-26 PVC.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.44  OVERHEAD SEWERS.



   All building sewers shall be "overhead" type.  This requires an
ejector pit for any basement floor drains or basement fixtures.  The
sanitary line shall exit the foundation wall not less than 18 inches above
the basement floor.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.45  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   No person(s) shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building  sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.46  CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village or the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.  All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight.  Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the village before
installation.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.47  NOTIFICATION WHEN READY FOR INSPECTION.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the village
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.48  EXCAVATIONS AND RESTORATION.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades so as to protect the public from hazard.  Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 51.60  STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED WATERS.



   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the village. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the Director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.61  PROHIBITED WATERS OR WASTES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.



   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.



   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a Ph lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.



   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.62  PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers'
sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream; or can  otherwise  endanger  life,  limb,  public
property, or constitute a nuisance.  In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Director will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree
of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies.  The substances prohibited are:



   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(65° C.).



   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials;
or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.).



   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Building Department.



   (D)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.



   (E)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by any state or federal regulations for such materials.



   (F)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by any state or federal regulations as necessary after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to receiving waters.



   (G)      Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by any applicable state or
federal regulations.



   (H)   Any wastes or waters having a Ph lower than 5.5 or in excess
of 9.5.



   (I)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l
as Hg at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.



   (J)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.6 mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.



   (K)   Materials which exert or cause:



      (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);



      (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



      (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works;



      (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined herein.



   (L)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.63  OPTIONS IF WATERS OR WASTES ARE PROPOSED.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 51.62, and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26,
1978 and any amendments thereto,  and which in the  judgment of the 
village may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Director may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of § 51.70.



   (B)   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the village, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.64  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the village they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the village, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.65  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his expense.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.66  CONTROL MANHOLES.



   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.
Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the village. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.67  MEASUREMENTS OF WATERS AND WASTES.



   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses
of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any
special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.68  NUMBER, TYPE, AND FREQUENCY OF ANALYSES.



   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met.  The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such
a manner as prescribed by the village.  The owner shall bear the expense of
all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the village.  At such
times as deemed necessary the village reserves the right to make measurements
and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.69  METHODS OF MEASUREMENT.



   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided,
or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole.  In the event that no
special manhole has been required the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property.  The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken.  Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.70  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment
therefore, by the industrial concern provided such payments are in accordance
with federal and state guidelines for user charge system.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES



§ 51.80  WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Basis for charges.  The wastewater service charge for the use
of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village shall
consist of a basic user charge, a debt service charge, a capital improvement
charge and applicable surcharges.



   (B)   Computation of charge.  The wastewater service charge shall
be computed by the following formula:



   CW = CC + CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU + CS



Where   CW =   Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing
period.



      CC =   Capital Improvement Charge.



      CD =   Debt Service Charge.



      CM =   Minimum Charge for Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement.



      Vu =   Wastewater Volume for the billing period.



      X  =   Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum
charge.



      CU =   Basic User Charge for Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement.



      CS =   Surcharges, if applicable.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.81  BASIC USER CHARGE.



   (A)   The basic user charge is levied on all users to recover the
operation, maintenance plus replacement (O, M & R) costs and shall be based
on water usage as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for wastes having
the following normal domestic concentrations:



      (1)   A five day, 20 C BOD of 250 mg/l.



      (2)   A suspended solids content of 250 mg/l.



   (B)   The basic user charge shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Estimate the annual wastewater volume, pounds of BOD and
pounds of SS to be treated.



      (2)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to
operate and maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund
for the year, for all works categories.



      (3)   Proportion the estimated O, M & R costs to each user
class by volume, BOD and SS.



      (4)   Proportion the estimated O, M & R costs to wastewater
facility categories by volume, BOD and SS.



      (5)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal domestic
strength sewage.



      (6)   Compute surcharge costs per pound for BOD and SS
concentrations in excess of normal domestic strengths.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.82  DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.



   The debt service charge is computed by apportioning the annual debt
service as a charge per 1,000 gallons.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.83  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE.



   The capital improvement charge is levied on users to provide for
capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of the sewage treatment
works.  The capital improvement charge is computed by apportioning the
annual amount to be accrued as a charge per 1,000 gallons.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.84  SURCHARGE.



   (A)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed
the normal domestic concentrations of BOD (250 mb/l) and SS (250 mg/l).  The
surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters or sewage
meters for all wastes which exceed the 250 mg/l concentrations for BOD and SS.



   (B)   The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges
shall be established by waste sampling.  Waste sampling shall be performed
as often as may be deemed necessary by the Director and shall be binding as a
basis for surcharges.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.85  REVIEW.



   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not
less often than annually, by Certified Public Accountants for the village in
their annual audit report.  The wastewater service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or O, M & R costs.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.86  NOTICE.



   The users of the wastewater treatment services will be notified
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of
the user charges which are attributable to the wastewater operation,
maintenance and replacement.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.87  MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.



   The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as follows:



   (A)   Per lb. of BOD:  $0.37.



   (B)   Per lb. of SS:  $0.66.



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1752, passed 10-21-13)



§ 51.88  SURCHARGE RATES.



   The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as follows:



   (A)   Per lb. of BOD:  $0.14



   (B)   Per lb. of SS:  $0.25



(Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 51.89  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Sewer service reinstatement fee (for customers without water
service):   $ 45



   (B)   Sewer turn on fee (for customers without water
service):   $ 45



   (C)   Connection fee:



 



 

Resident

 

Non-resident




(1)   For each detached single family unit

 

$ 3,250

 

$ 4,875




(2)   For separately water-metered units in a multiple dwelling unit

 

$ 3,250

 

$ 4,875




 



      (3)   For all other buildings and uses, the connection charge
shall be based on the water tap size as described below:



 


Tap Size (Inches)

 

Meter Size

 

Amount Resident

 

Amount Non-resident






1

 

¾" or 1"

 

$3,250

 

$ 4,875




1½

 

1" or 1½"

 

10,400

 

15,600




2

 

1½" or 2"

 

13,520

 

20,280




3

 

2" or 3"

 

16,770

 

25,155




4

 

2" meter set

 

16,900

 

25,350




4

 

3" meter set

 

20,150

 

30,225




4

 

4" meter set

 

33,540

 

50,310





 


 

For one meter set

 

For one meter set




6

 

1" meter set

 

7,800 +  3,250*

 

11,700  + 4,875*




6

 

1½" meter set

 

11,700  + 10,400*

 

17,550  + 15,600*




6

 

2" meter set

 

18,720  + 13,520*

 

28,080  + 20,280*




6

 

3" meter set

 

21,970  + 16,770*

 

32,955  + 25,155*




6

 

4" meter set

 

41,340  + 33,540*

 

62,010  + 50,310*




6

 

6" meter set

 

52,520 + ------*

 

78,780 + ------**



*for each additional meter set


**For a water tap size over six inches, the connection charge shall be
established by the President and Board of Trustees.




 



      (4)   Connection charges shall be increased 3% annually
beginning May 1, 2010.



   (D)   Basic user charge:



      (1)   Account charge per account   $5.00



      (2)   During months of June through August for each 1,000
gallons as metered and averaged for the previous months of November through
January   $5.24



      (3)   During the months of September through May for each
1,000 gallons of metered water   $5.24



      (4)   The rate per 1,000 gallons shown above shall be
increased by 3% on May 1 of every year beginning in 2012.  In addition to
the above 3% increase, the rate per 1,000 gallons shall be increased by an
additional 5% on May 1 in 2014, 2015 and 2016.



      (5)   If the Director of Public Works determines that an
account exhibits a water usage profile where the application of divisions (2)
and (3) above would result in clear overcharging or undercharging for sewer
usage, the service charge shall be based on the actual volume of water
metered during the billing cycle.



(Ord. 1086, passed 3-6-00; Am. Ord. 1252, passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord. 1614,
passed 4-19-10; Am. Ord. 1648, passed 4-18-11; Am. Ord. 1696, passed 5-7-12;
Am. Ord. 1752, passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 1776, passed 4-21-14)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.90  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the
village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.  The Director or his representative
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.



   (B)   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the
village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement.  All entry and subsequent work,
if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
except § 51.02 shall be served by the village with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.  The village
may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any
provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Any violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $25 and not more than $500 for each offense.  Each day that a
violation shall continue to exist shall be considered as a separate
offense.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reasons of such violation.



(Ord. 916, passed 10-7-96; Am. Ord. 1060-W, passed 8-16-99)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section



General Provisions; Administration



   52.001   Definitions



   52.002   Reserved.



   52.003   Supervision and management of system



   52.004   Accounts and records



   52.005   Reading meters



   52.006   Connection permit required; application



   52.007   Access to premises



   52.008   Water main installation or repair permit



   52.009   Tapping to be done by authorized employee



Use of Water Mains



   52.020   Connection required



   52.021   Sale of water prohibited



   52.022   Connection of property outside corporate limits



   52.023   Independent branches



   52.024   Turning on water supply



Inspection of Service Pipes and Connections



   52.030   Inspection of service pipes and connections



Water Meters



   52.040   Water supplied through meters



   52.041   Water during construction



   52.042   Meters furnished by village



   52.043   Repair or removal



   52.044   Maintenance



   52.045   Specifications



   52.046   Location and installation; remote readers and phone jacks



   52.047   Service by more than one meter



   52.048   Accuracy



   52.049   Charges for meters



   52.050   Maintenance of service pipes and fixtures



   52.051   Building and occupancy permits



   52.052   Bypassing of or tampering with meters prohibited



Water System Regulations



   52.060   Access by Director



   52.061   Supplying water between buildings



   52.062   Fraudulent representations



   52.063   Liability disclaimed



   52.064   Notices of violation



   52.065   Compliance by customers required



   52.066   Authority of village to shut off water



   52.067   Water use limited



   52.068   Users may not supply water to others



   52.069   Wells prohibited where water service available



   52.070   Public hydrants



Fees and Rates; Payment



   52.080   Connection fees



   52.081   Water service rates



   52.082   Non-resident/resident



   52.083   Time of payment



   52.084   Bulk water charges



   52.085   Fee for restoration of service



   52.086   Bills



   52.087   Nonpayment of bills; lien



   52.088   Termination of service



   52.089   Revenues



Cross-Connection Control



   52.100   Purpose



   52.101   Application of rules



   52.102   General



   52.103   Definitions



   52.104   Composition of water system



   52.105   Backflow prevention device; notice to install



   52.106   Cross-connection prohibited



   52.107   Survey and investigations



   52.108   Consumer responsible to prevent backflow



   52.109   Where protection is required



   52.110   Type of protection required



   52.111   Backflow prevention devices



   52.112   Inspection and maintenance



   52.113   Booster pumps



   52.114   Violations; discontinuance of service



   52.115   Notices of violation



Usage of Water Limited



   52.125   Reserved



   52.126   Notice



Schedule A



   52.140   Fees and charges



 



   52.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION



§ 52.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.   An owner of premises who has made written application
filed with the Village Clerk for permission to have a water service
connection or extension installed.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.   The President and Board of Trustees of the
village.



   DEPARTMENT.   The Department of Public Works of the village.



   DIRECTOR.   The Director of the Department of Public Works of the
village or his duly authorized representative.



   FINANCE DEPARTMENT. The Finance Department of the village.



   HOUSE SERVICE.   That part of the water service extending from the
curb valve and Buffalo box to the house or building to be served.



   PERSON .  Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.



   PLUMBER, LICENSED .  A plumber licensed and certified by the state to
do plumbing work.



   SYSTEM.   The waterworks system servicing the village.



   VILLAGE.   The village of Channahon.



   VILLAGE CLERK.   The Clerk of the village.



   VILLAGE FINANCE DIRECTOR.   The Finance Director of the village.



   VILLAGE PRESIDENT.   The President of the village.



   VILLAGE TREASURER.   The Treasurer of the village.



   WATER METER.   A device for measuring water flow, coupled with a meter
spread and sometimes read by the use of telephone lines as approved by the
Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.002  [RESERVED.]



§ 52.003  SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   The Director and such other agents and/or employees as
designated by the Corporate Authorities shall have the supervision,
management and control of the maintenance and operation of the system.



   (B)   The Director shall have supervision over all buildings and
equipment used and the furnishings of water service in the village, and shall
see that the system is operated properly, efficiently and economically.  In
this regard, it shall be the duty of the Director and all of the employees
and agents of such Department to enforce all of the provisions of this
chapter and to observe and obey and carry out the orders and directions of
the Corporate Authorities.  The Director shall prepare and keep in his
office a complete atlas of the waterworks system together with all valves,
hydrants, water service connections and other appurtenances distinctly
recorded therein.



   (C)   The Director shall monthly submit to the Corporate Authorities
a report in writing including the following data as of the last day of the
month last preceding:



      (1)   Billings for services rendered;



      (2)   Collections;



      (3)   Volume of water pumped, billed and unaccounted for;



      (4)   Number of customers connected to the system at the
beginning and the end of period;



      (5)   Details of any major repairs and extensions to the
system or other facts pertinent to his duties in the conduct of his office.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.004  ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The Village Financial Director shall establish a proper system
of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to
the water system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made
an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the water system.  He shall also keep such other books
as the Corporate Authorities may from time to time direct.  All such books
and records shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any
member of the Corporate Authorities.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
water system, including a replacement cost.  The financial information to be
shown in the audit report shall include the following:



      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons pumped for the current
fiscal year.



      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per
fiscal year.



      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.



      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.



      (5)   Number of non-metered users.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.005  READING METERS.



   The Director or his designee shall read water meters and report such
readings to the Finance Department which shall prepare and distribute all
bills for water service charges.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95)



§ 52.006  CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring to make any connection to the existing system shall
first make application to the village upon a blank form or forms furnished by
the village.  The application shall contain an agreement on the part of the
applicant that all the rules, regulations, conditions and provisions of any
ordinance relating to the system will be complied with; that all water rates,
assessments and rents and all fines and penalties assessed, charged or
imposed against the applicant will be paid.  When the applicant hereunder
has complied with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the village, a
permit shall then be issued by the village authorizing the connection to be
made.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.007  ACCESS TO PREMISES.



   The Corporate Authorities and every authorized employee or agent of the
village shall have ready access to the premises, place or buildings served by
the system, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with,
prevent or obstruct such authorized personnel in his work hereunder.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.008  WATER MAIN INSTALLATION OR REPAIR PERMIT.



   No person shall install or repair any water main or water service
without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the village.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.009  TAPPING TO BE DONE BY AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE.



   Whenever any permit for a connection to the system is issued hereunder,
only an authorized employee of the village, or a licensed contractor with
village authorization, shall make such connection or tap.  A request to make
such connection or tap or for authorization, therefore, must be made to the
Department at least one business day in advance.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



USE OF WATER MAINS



§ 52.020  CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is hereby found and determined that connection to the
system is presumed to be "feasible" whenever any village water main, line,
pipe, gate or valve supplying adequate capacity appropriate for connection to
the system is located within 250 feet of any dwelling, residence, structure,
place of business, public building or other premise to which the supply of
water would be necessary, convenient or desirable.



   (B)   Every new and existing dwelling, residence, structure, place
of business, public building or other premise to which the supply of water
would be necessary, convenient or desirable within the corporate limits of
the village to which the supply of public water is feasible as herein
declared, shall,  within 90 days after such water service is feasible, tie
into such public water supply and discontinue the use of any private well,
community well or other supply of water except as herein provided.  There
might be circumstances when specific geographic, topographic or other
conditions make it impracticable to connect to the public water supply
notwithstanding the fact that such water supply is within 250 feet, in such
case a petition may be filed requesting that the Corporate Authorities not
require such connection.  The Corporate Authorities may then require the
connection or may postpone such connection as it deems appropriate.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.021  SALE OF WATER PROHIBITED.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale water from the system.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.022  CONNECTION OF PROPERTY OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.



   (A)   Any area lying outside the corporate limits of the village
may, if approved by the Corporate Authorities, be connected to the system.



   (B)   The owner of any property lying outside the corporate limits
of the village may make application to connect his property to the system. 
The application must be made to the Director and must be accompanied by a
clear an exact description of the premises and the character and location of
the connection sought to be made.  No person shall cause any such connection
to be made without such a permit and without payment of the applicable
connections charge.



   (C)   The Corporate Authorities shall issue a permit for such
connection only where it can be made in accordance with applicable provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.023  INDEPENDENT BRANCHES.



   (A)   Whenever two or more distinct buildings, premises, business
units or residential units are to be supplied by means of branch or surface
pipes supplied by a single tap in the street main, each branch must be
equipped with an independent plumbing system arranged with shut off valves in
the manner prescribed by this chapter and separate meters must be installed
for each individual building premises, business unit or residential unit
served by means of the single tap.



   (B)   Water meters for branch systems shall be located in a meter
room and be accessible from a public area of the building or premises.  A
phone line shall be provided from the phone service interconnect to each
meter and be wired to the phone number of that unit .  Phone jacks and meter
spreads shall be tagged to each unit.  Meters may be placed in a room with a
fire sprinkler system or phone system as long as meters are readily
accessible.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.024  TURNING ON WATER SUPPLY.



   Water shall not be turned on into the supply pipe of any building in
which the plumbing and drainage systems have been altered until such plumbing
and drainage system conform in all respects to the ordinances of the village
including payment of all applicable charges.  However, water may be turned
on for periods of 24 hours to permit a licensed plumber to test all work if
it can be accomplished without risk to users of the system.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



INSPECTION OF SERVICE PIPES  AND CONNECTIONS



§ 52.030  INSPECTION OF SERVICE PIPES AND CONNECTIONS.



   All service pipes and connections shall be inspected and approved by
the Director or his designee and no such service pipe shall be covered until
they have been so inspected.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



WATER METERS



§ 52.040  WATER SUPPLIED THROUGH METERS.



   Except as herein provided, water supplied by the village shall be
supplied through water meters.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.041  WATER DURING CONSTRUCTION.



   Upon application to the Building Department, water may be used during
initial construction of a building or structure for which an occupancy permit
has not been issued subject to the payment of the fees set forth in Schedule
A.  This “construction water” may be used for such things as making
concrete, mortar, or drywall compound, cleaning or other related uses, but
shall not be used to irrigate grass or other vegetation, landscaping,
settling of driveways, sidewalks, foundations, garage floors or other similar
uses.  The village may immediately terminate the privilege of receiving
construction water upon the improper use of the same.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.042  METERS FURNISHED BY VILLAGE.



   All meters used in connection with the system shall be furnished by the
village.  Meters one inch size and under shall be installed by the
village.  Meters over one inch shall be installed by the building owner.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.043  REPAIR OR REMOVAL.



   After the meter is placed, only employees or agents of the Department
shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any manner interfere with the same.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.044  MAINTENANCE.



   The cost of ordinary meter maintenance shall be paid by the village. 
The person upon whose application any meter is installed or the then owner or
occupant of the premises served shall be jointly and severally liable for any
breakage or damage done to such meter, including damage by freezing or hot
water, and also for the theft thereof.  The cost of making good such loss or
damage shall be borne by the owner or the occupant of the premises in which
such meter was installed as soon as a bill for the same is presented, and if
not paid,  the amount therefor shall be a lien against the premises for
which the meter was installed to the extent and with the same effect as that
for water charges.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.045  SPECIFICATIONS.



   The Director, with the approval of the Corporate Authorities, shall in
all cases determine the type of water meters to be installed and no other
kind shall be installed at any time.  The size of the meter required for any
metered supply shall be governed by the size and character of the premises
served.  The size of the meter for large buildings shall be approved by the
Director at the time of application for the water supply.  The size of
meters so approved may be changed from time to time as conditions require.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.046  LOCATION AND INSTALLATION; REMOTE READERS AND PHONE JACKS.



   (A)   Water meters shall be located at such places within the
premises to be served, in the manner and in accord with such specifications
as the Director shall direct. Such meter locations shall be so situated as to
prevent freezing of water flowing through such meters.



   (B)   A full port ball valve shall be placed on each side of the
meter for two inch or smaller water service. A gate valve shall be placed on
each side of the meter for services larger than two inches.



   (C)   An RJ-11 telephone jack, furnished by the water user, shall be
installed within 18 inches of the water meter for the purpose of connecting
the meter to the water user's phone system. The water user shall be
responsible for operation and maintenance of the phone jack and line. The
phone line shall at all times be functioning. At such time, when the meter is
replaced with a radio read meter, the water user will no longer be required
to maintain the phone jack and line.  As of November 6, 2006, new
construction will no longer be required to furnish a phone jack or maintain
an active phone line.



   (D)   All persons shall be required to install the water meter or
meter spread in a location which is readily accessible to meter readers.



   (E)   The term READILY ACCESSIBLE as used in division (D) of this
section shall specifically exclude crawl spaces, underneath porches or stoops
and all other areas or locations requiring a meter reader to climb, crawl or
stoop, except by the traversing of steps in and out of full height basements.
Similarly, all such meters, whether located in full height basements or
otherwise, shall be placed a minimum of four feet off the floor and further
shall be so placed and unobstructed so that it will not be necessary for the
meter reader/service person to move boxes, cartons, cabinets, tables,
appliances, water softeners or other similar objects obstructing the reader's
accessible view of the face of the meter for reading and necessary repairs.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1442,
passed 11-6-06)



§ 52.047  SERVICE BY MORE THAN ONE METER.



   Where water is supplied through two or more meters to one customer, or
to two or more premises owned by any one person, in no instance will readings
be combined.  All readings and billings shall be on a per meter basis.  The
village will not recognize a secondary or subtraction meter, nor will it
render any bill or bills on the same.  Water will always be charged against
the property as registered by the primary water meter.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.048  ACCURACY.



   Water meters are determined by this chapter as inaccurate or in need of
repair when the variation of or departure from 100% accuracy shall be in
excess of 2%.  Whenever any meter shall prove to be inaccurate or in need of
repair, the Director will cause such meter to be removed, tested and
recalibrated and replaced.  The charges for these services as indicated will
be the responsibility of the village.  If, however, the consumer requests
that the meter be checked or replaced, and if it is proven that the meter is
not inaccurate, or in need of repair, the consumer will be responsible for
the cost and expense of the removal and calibration and testing of such meter.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.049  CHARGES FOR METERS.



   There shall be charges established for water meters, and the payment
thereof shall be made upon application for water service.  Such charges are
as set forth in Schedule A.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.050  MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES AND FIXTURES.



   All persons utilizing the system shall keep the service pipes and all
fixtures connected therewith in good repair and protected from frost, at
their own expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.051  BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.



   (A)   The builder or other such person to whom a building permit has
been issued shall be responsible for the payment of any and all water charges
up to and including the time that an occupancy permit is issued for the
premises.



   (B)   No occupancy permit shall be issued for any premises at which
there is an outstanding water charge balance.  The water meter at any
location for which an occupancy permit is requested shall be read on the day
for which issuance of occupancy permit is desired.  Any water charges then
due shall then be paid in full prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.052  BYPASSING OF OR TAMPERING WITH METERS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall bypass, alter, destroy or tamper with any
water meter.  For purposes of this section, if a water meter is found to
have been bypassed, altered, destroyed or tampered with, the person to whom
water charges are billed shall be presumed to have committed such offense.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have the installed meter removed or
repaired or cause the same to be removed or repaired, without obtaining
permission from the Director.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99) Penalty, see §
52.999



WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS



§ 52.060  ACCESS BY DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the
village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties where water meters
are located for the purpose of reading, testing the consumption, use and flow
of water, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent
or obstruct the Director or his designee in this undertaking.  Every
consumer of water shall take the same upon the conditions prescribed in this
chapter.  Access, however, shall be consistent with the convenience of the
consumer and the situation involved.



   (B)   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the
village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion
ofthe water works lying within said easement.  All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.



   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the Director or duly authorized employees
of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the owner of the premises.



   (D)   The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to
any books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable
to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with
the terms of the loan agreement and rules of any state loan.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.061  SUPPLYING WATER BETWEEN BUILDINGS.



   No person or persons, whether owners or occupants in possession or
control of any building, structure or premises into which water is supplied
through the system shall be allowed, without written permission from the
Director or his designee, to supply water from such building or premises to
another building, structure or premises.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.062  FRAUDULENT REPRESENTATIONS.



   If after the water service has been turned on to any building,
structure or premises it is found by any employee or agent of the village
that fraudulent representations have been made by the applicant for such
water service and that water is being used in or upon such building,
structure or premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for
such service, or that there is willful or unreasonable use or waste of water,
the Director shall have the authority to turn off and stop the supply of
water to such building, structure or premises forthwith, as herein provided,
and the supply shall not be turned on until such time as all regulations and
ordinance violations have been corrected.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.063  LIABILITY DISCLAIMED.



   All connections and water supplied hereunder and all water used
hereunder shall be upon the express condition that the village shall not be
liable nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by
reason of water quality, the breaking of any meter, main, branch service
pipes, apparatus or appurtenances connected with the system, or for any
interruption of supply by reason of the breakage of machinery or by reason of
stoppage, alteration, extensions or removals.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.064  NOTICES OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever and wherever it shall appear that any person is
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or other related ordinances,
laws or administrative regulations, other than failure to pay water charges,
the Director may (but is not required as a condition precedent to prosecution
for violation) cause to be served, personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, upon the alleged offender a notice in writing stating the
date, nature of the alleged offense and directing that the same cease and
desist immediately upon service of the notice, and that the act or omission
causing such violation be corrected within such reasonable time as the
circumstances may require.



   (B)   The failure, neglect and refusal of the person alleged to be
in such violation to cease and desist therefrom within the time stated in
such notice shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter and
punishable as provided in this chapter and/or termination of water service.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.065  COMPLIANCE BY CUSTOMERS REQUIRED.



   Every customer of the system is governed by and subject to the rules
and regulations of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance, law or
administrative regulation, and it is hereby made the duty of the Director to
enforce the same.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.066  AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE TO SHUT OFF WATER.



   The village reserves the right to shut off the water with or without
prior notice in order to make repairs and/or extensions to the system or when
emergency conditions exist.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.067  WATER USE LIMITED.



   (A)   For all users of the system, sprinkling of lawns is permitted
on even-numbered days for even street addresses, and on odd-numbered days for
odd street addresses, sprinkling of lawns except as herein permitted is
prohibited.



   (B)   The Village President may by proclamation further restrict or
ban the drawing of water from the public water supply for public or private
functions, yard sprinkling, and swimming pool filling, when such proclamation
is necessary and in the best interest of the system.  Upon issuance, the
President shall forward such proclamation to such media as he deems is
appropriate and such proclamation shall be posted at the Stephen M. Rittoff
Municipal Building .



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99) Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.068  USERS MAY NOT SUPPLY WATER TO OTHERS.



   No person using the system shall supply water to other premises,
persons or families or allow them to take water from his premises.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.069  WELLS PROHIBITED WHERE WATER SERVICE AVAILABLE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drill or otherwise construct or
install any new well or to redrill, reconstruct or reinstall any existing
well for the purpose of securing water for use at any premises within the
village where connection to the village system is feasible as declared herein
and/or the premises are actually connected to the system.  Where a private
well is allowed as described below, the well and appurtenances may be
maintained.



   (B)   In all instances where a building or structure is connected to
the public water supply it shall be unlawful to use any existing private
well, semi-private well or other supply of water at or upon any dwelling,
residence, structure, premise, building, place of business, or system for any
indoor plumbing purpose.  If all other ordinances of the village are
complied with, and the private well is functioning at the time of connection
to the public water supply, such well may be used for outdoor purposes such
as vegetation irrigation and washing vehicles.



   (C)   Cross connections between a private well and the public water
supply are prohibited.  In cases where a private well is permitted after
connection to the public water supply, an annual permit and an annual cross
connection inspection are required.  The annual permit fee of $100 shall be
paid to the village until such well is abandoned.  Reasonable inspections
may be made more frequently at the discretion of the Director of Public Works
to ensure compliance.  Each additional inspection shall result in a charge
of $65. The inspection of the plumbing system of the dwelling, residence,
structure, premise, building, or place of business shall be performed by
village staff or any other qualified cross connection control device
inspector as designated by the village.  The permit form shall be signed by
the cross connection control device inspector and the occupant of the
property.  Failure to allow reasonable inspections shall be considered cause
to revoke the well permit and require abandonment of the well.



   (D)   Whenever any private well becomes non-functioning due to
contamination or lowered groundwater elevation and it is feasible to connect
to the public water supply (including those structures which are already
connected to the public water supply), the non-functioning well shall be
abandoned in a manner as set forth by law, ordinance, or administrative
regulation.  At any time, should the plumbing system of the dwelling,
residence, structure, premise, building or place of business be altered to
allow the use of the private well for other than purposes expressed in
division (B) above, the private well shall be disconnected and abandoned
immediately.



   (E)   After the effective date of this section, in all cases where a
private well is permitted to exist after connection to the public water
supply, there must be a properly installed residential double check valve and
an expansion tank.  In cases where wells were previously lawfully allowed to
exist after connection to the public water supply, the customer shall cause
such residential double check valve and expansiontank to be installed on or
before April 1, 2002.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 915, passed 7-15-96; Am. Ord. 1059-W,
passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1167, passed 3-19-01; Am. Ord. 1845, passed 4-18-16)
Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.070  PUBLIC HYDRANTS.



   All hydrants constructed for the purpose of extinguishing fires which
are connected to the system are declared to be public hydrants.  No person
shall open any hydrant, draw or attempt to draw any water from the same, or
in any manner interfere with or damage any such hydrant, except that
authorized members of the Fire Protection District may open and draw water
from such hydrants as is required for training and fire fighting purposes. 
Provided further, that such other persons as are specifically authorized by
the Director may also open and draw water from such hydrants.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95)  Penalty, see § 52.999



FEES AND RATES; PAYMENT



§ 52.080  CONNECTION.



   (A)   A connection charge in the amount set forth in Schedule A (§
52.140) and established from time to time by the village, shall be paid to
the village prior to connection to the system.



   (B)   The village reserves the right to refuse connection to the
system if, in its sole determination, there is insufficient transmission
capacity in the system to properly meet the needs of the proposed use, or if
the proposed use is such that allowing the connection would impair the system
capacity to other users of the system.



   (C)   The services of the system are furnished to the respective
premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, the occupant therefor and the user of the service are jointly and
severally liable thereof to the village.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.081  WATER SERVICE RATES.



   (A)   The rates and charges set forth in Schedule A (§ 52.140) are
hereby established as the rules and charges for the use and service supplied
by the system.  It shall be the duty of the village to cause statements for
charges to be sent to each customer of the system on a monthly basis,
provided however that if conditions do not reasonably permit a monthly
billing,  that bills shall  be sent as  soon as practicable, and in no
event shall untimely billing be a defense to payments.



   (B)   A charge shall be made to the users of the system which shall
be reasonable for the use and service of such system, and such charges or
rates for that purpose shall be established and such rates shall be
sufficient to pay the cost of the operation and maintenance of the entire
system of the village, including an adequate depreciation fund therefor.



   (C)   No person owing waterworks charges and moving to other
premises where there are such connections or where connections shall
afterwards be made shall be served until all charges in arrears are paid in
full.



   (D)   Any person who shall vacate any premises, or any person who
shall enter upon and occupy any premises, shall immediately, before vacating
such premises or occupying such premises, notify the Department and secure a
reading of the meter.



   (E)   The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed,
not less often than annually, by Certified Public Accountants for the village
in their annual audit report.  The water service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or O, M & R costs.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.082  NON-RESIDENT/RESIDENT.



   For purposes of this chapter, NON-RESIDENT means that the property
being served by the system is not within the corporate limits of the
village.  RESIDENT means that the property being served by the system is
within the corporate limits of the village.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.083  TIME OF PAYMENT.



   The rates or charges for service as established above are payable not
later than 30 days following the billing date.  If payment is not received
by the village within the 30-day period then  a penalty shall be paid to the
village in the amount of 10% per month on the unpaid balance.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.084  BULK WATER CHARGES.



   (A)   Persons desiring to purchase bulk quantities of water shall
apply for purchase with the Director and shall pre-pay for such quantities
requested pursuant to the fees set forth in Schedule A (§ 52.140).



   (B)   No person shall turn on, open or tamper with any hydrants,
B-boxes, corporation stops, water valves, or the like, for any purpose
without the express written consent of the Director.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent, limit
or otherwise restrict the authorized personnel of the appropriate fire
protection district from utilizing the village's water distribution system
and related appurtenances in the official discharge of firefighting duties.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.085  FEE FOR RESTORATION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   No person other than a duly authorized agent of the village
shall turn on the supply of water to any premises from which the supply of
water has been turned off by the village.



   (B)   In the event that water service to any premises has been
turned off for any reason, other than for maintenance and repairs, then,
prior to such water service being again turned on, the person requesting
restoration of service shall pay to the village a turn-on fee in the amount
set forth in Schedule A.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.086  BILLS.



   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly.  The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and
the service shall be furnished to the premises by the village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services
are jointly and severally liable therefore to the village.



   (B)   Bills for service shall be sent out by the Village Finance
Director by the tenth day of the month succeeding the period for which the
service is billed.  All water bills are due and payable on the last day of
the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed.  A penalty
of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the last day of the month
succeeding the period for which the service is billed.



(Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1148, passed 11-6-00)



§ 52.087  NONPAYMENT OF BILLS; LIEN.



   (A)   The village shall have a continuing lien upon the premises and
real estate upon or for which water is used or supplied for all water rates
or benefits accruing by reason of the provisions of this chapter.  Every
such lien shall, upon compliance with the conditions set forth in this
chapter, become and be prior and superior to the rights and interest of
creditors, encumbrances, purchasers and other parties in interest in the
premises and real estate.  Liens shall be filed following three consecutive
months of nonpayment for water service charges to the village.  A release of
lien shall be provided to the customer upon payment of all charge and fees;
such release may be recorded by the customer.



   (B)   Whenever it is necessary to record a lien, in addition to all
other fees and charges, the utility customer and the owner of the property
shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of a lien fee in the amount
of $150.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1847,
passed 5-2-16)



§ 52.088  TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   If charges for sewer and/or water services are not paid in
full within 45 calendar days from the date of billing and/or if the utility
customer is in violation of any village ordinance, regulation or law, the
utility customer may be notified in writing of the village's intent to
terminate water or sewer service prior to any such termination.  In the
event charges for water/sewer services are not paid within 45 days after the
rendition of the bill for such services, such water/sewer services shall be
discontinued as hereinafter provided and shall not be reinstated until such
time as all violations are corrected and all outstanding utility bills are
paid in full in addition to the payment of the reinstatement fee set forth in
Schedule A  (§ 52.140).



   (B)   The pre-termination notice required herein shall contain the
following:



      (1)   The ordinance being violated and how such violation can
be corrected, if applicable;



      (2)   The number of days the account is in arrears;



      (3)   The balance due, including late charges as of the notice
date;



      (4)   That the utility customer may contact a representative
of the village and request an informal hearing to resolve disputes as to the
correctness of bills, arrearages and violations of ordinances prior to
termination of service;



      (5)   The name, business address and telephone number of the
village representative to contact to schedule such informal hearing;



      (6)   That unless the customer contacts the appropriate
village representative in writing within ten days of receipt of the
pre-termination notice requesting an informal hearing, the customer's sewer
or water service shall be terminated; and



      (7)   The date on or after which termination will be effected.



   (C)   That upon written request of the utility customer, an informal
hearing shall be held within ten days after the written request is made to
the Village President or his or her designee (sometimes herein collectively
referred to as village representative).  The purpose of the informal hearing
is to allow the utility customer an opportunity to present information
regarding the correctness of that customer’s utility bill and matters with
respect to other alleged violations.



   (D)   That if the village representative finds merit to the
customer's contentions regarding the correctness of the utility bills and/or
alleged violations, no action shall be taken to terminate service and the
customer's bill shall be adjusted accordingly by the village representative
with such adjusted bill to be paid by the utility customer within seven days
of receipt of the determination by the village representative.



   (E)   That if the village representative finds no merit to the
customer's contentions regarding the correctness of the utility bills or
violations, the decision shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the
utility customer within ten days after the informal hearing  together with
notice that termination of service will be effected without further notice
unless all utility bills are paid in full and violations corrected within
seven days after receipt of the determination without further notice.



   (F)   In the event a hearing is requested by a residential utility
customer wherein the customer establishes that he/she or a member of his or
her immediate family residing with the customer has a life threatening
medical condition certified by a doctor licensed by the state or the customer
establishes that he or she is financially unable to pay the utility charge in
full or part, the village representative may allow service continuance so
long as the utility customer makes satisfactory financial arrangements to pay
for past and future utility charges.



   (G)   That if service is terminated as herein provided no utility
service shall be reinstated until such time as all violations are corrected
and all outstanding utility bills are paid in full in addition to the payment
of a reinstatement fee in the amount set forth in Schedule A.



   (H)   All utility customers shall timely pay the undisputed portion
of the utility bill.



   (I)   For purposes of this section, any notice herein required shall
be given to the utility customer in the account name and address indicated in
the village utility customer records.  Any notices required by this section
may be given either by certified mail, return receipt requested, with
sufficient postage prepaid, by personally  delivering a copy to the utility
customer, by attaching a copy to the front door of the utility customer’s
service address, or by United States first class mail. If village utility
customer records indicate a billing address different than the service
address, then notification shall be made to both addresses.  For purposes of
this section, notices transmitted through the United States mail shall be
deemed received by the utility customer two days after mailing.



(Ord. 642, passed 4-1-91; Am. Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95)



   (J)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit immediate termination
in the event that the Director determines that such immediate termination is
in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the system users.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1752,
passed 10-21-13)



§ 52.089  REVENUES.



   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water system
shall be deposited in the utility account of the utility fund.  All such
revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village Finance Director separate
and apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the village, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever,
shall be delivered to the Village Finance Director not more than ten days
after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from
time to time be directed by the President and Board of Trustees.  The
Village Finance Director shall receive all such revenues from the water
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such
system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the “Utility Fund of the Village”. 
Said Finance Director shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by statute of the “Revised Cities and Villages Act,”
effective January, 1942.



(Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL



§ 52.100  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:



   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination
or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the
public water supply system.



   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing
cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's
potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.



   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of
the public and consumer's potable water systems.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.101  APPLICATION OF RULES.



   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the
public potable water supply system of the village.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.102  GENERAL.



   The owner, consumer or customer, or official custodian shall be
responsible for protection of the public water supply system from
contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants through the
customer's water service connection.  If, in the judgement of the Director
or his authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Director
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow
prevention device at each service connection to the premises.  The consumer
shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense;
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such
device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing
water service to the premises until such device or devices have been
installed.  The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing and repair as required in § 52.112(D)(4) for a period of at least
five years.  Any premises where water service has been discontinued, the
consumer shall pay the service reinstatement fee set forth in Schedule A (§
52.140).  A minimum monthly bill shall also be applied while service is
discontinued.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.103  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENCY.  The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   APPROVED.  Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the
Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of
Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water
Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the
National Sanitation Foundation.



   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM.  Any water source or system on or available to
the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system.  These auxiliary waters may include water from
another purveyor's public water supply system;  or  water  from a source
such as wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water.  These
waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water
source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.



   BACKFLOW.  The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  Any device, method, or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.  All
devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of
the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER.  The owner, official custodian or person in
control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.



   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM.  Any water system located on the customer's
premises.  A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.



   CONTAMINATION.  An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance
of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.



   CROSS-CONNECTION.  Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and
the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby
there may be a flow from one system into the other.



   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection formed when a water
system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY.  An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015 and any
amendments.  A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves
located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the
water-tightness of each check valve.



   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP.  The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of
the receptacle.



   HEALTH HAZARD.  Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and
well-being of consumers.  The word "severe" as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.



   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION.  A cross-connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into
a safe potable water system.



   INSPECTION.  A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically
all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.



   NONPOTABLE WATER.  Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary
use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.



   PLUMBING.  The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person.  Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all
purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the
source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the
street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble.  PLUMBING includes all
piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in
water supply systems.  PLUMBING includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage
and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building
drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet
beyond the foundation walls.



   POLLUTION.  The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.



   POTABLE WATER.  Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.



   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION.  A fixture or appurtenance with threaded
hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.



   PROCESS FLUID(S).  Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system.  This includes but is
not limited to:



      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;



      (2)   Process waters;



      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply
system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;



      (4)   Cooling waters;



      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from
wells, lakes, streams, or irrigational systems;



      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;



      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous
fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.  All mains, pipes and structures through which
water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for
drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service
connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days per
year.  A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a "community water supply" or a
"non-community water supply".



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.  A device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with
an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between
the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013 and any
amendments.  During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. 
In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between
the check valves at less than the supply pressure.  The unit must include
tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each
device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.



   SERVICE CONNECTION.  The opening, including all fittings and
appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.



   SURVEY.  The collection of information pertaining to a customer's
piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water
supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection
and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located
within that customer's piping system.  The survey must be in written form,
and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.



   SYSTEM HAZARD.  A condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system.



   USED WATER.  Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection
and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.



   WATER PURVEYOR.  The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.104  COMPOSITION OF WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two
parts:  the public water supply system and the consumer's water system.



   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those
facilities of the potable water system under the control of the Director up
to the point where the consumer's water system begins.



   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities
utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the
public water supply distribution system.



   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's
water system.



   (E)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water supply distribution system to points of use.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.105  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE; NOTICE TO INSTALL.



   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.  If in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Plumbing
Inspector, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety
of the public water supply system, the Plumbing Inspector will give notice to
the water customer to install such an approved device immediately.  The
water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at
a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and
all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made
of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois
Plumbing Code and local regulations.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.106  CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the village enters the supply or distribution system of the
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by
the Director and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   (B)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection
control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure
proper operation on a continuing basis.



   (C)   (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the
potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.



      (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an
unsafe substance may enter a supply.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.107  SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply might exist.  Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two
years, or as often as the Director shall deem necessary.  Records of such
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five years.



   (B)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times
to the approved cross-connection control  device inspector for the
inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the
consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection
control devices within the consumer's premises.



   (C)   On request by the Director, or his authorized representative,
the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems
or water use within the customer's premises.  The consumer's premises shall
be open at all reasonable times to the Director for the verification of
information submitted by the  consumer to the public water supply custodian
regarding cross-connection inspection results.



   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to
arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the
public potable water system.  All cross-connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320 § 3.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.108  CONSUMER RESPONSIBLE TO PREVENT BACKFLOW.



   (A)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.



   (B)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent
backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:



      (1)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved
cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and
back-siphonage.



      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.



      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at
the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the
Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI).  The
inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.



      (4)   Testing and records.



         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of
installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer.



         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water
supply shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5 § 4(e).



         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the
date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.



         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:



            1.   Date of each test;



            2.   Name and approval number of person performing
the test;



            3.   Test results;



            4.   Repairs or servicing required;



            5.   Repairs and date completed;



            6.   Servicing performed and date completed.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.109  WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.



   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680.  In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Director, actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply system exist.



   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the
following conditions exist:



      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such
auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the Director and the
source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. 
This shall include premises having sources or systems containing process
fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no
longer under the sanitary control of the Director.



      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the
judgement of the Director and the Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.



      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.



      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections
being established or re-established.



   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.  In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following types of facilities unless the Director determines
that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:



      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.



      (2)   Laboratories.



      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.



      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or
stormwater pumping stations.



      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants.



      (6)   Chemical plants.



      (7)   Metal plating industries.



      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants.



      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear
reactors.



      (10)   Car washes.



      (11)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and
trucks.



      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.110  TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The type of protection required under § 52.109 shall depend
on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:



      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with
substances that could cause a severe health hazard.



      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a
substance that could cause a system or health hazard.



      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.



   (B)   The type of protection required under § 52.109(B)(4) of these
regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.



   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is
used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public
water supply when:



      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire
retardant or other chemicals;



      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source;



      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source, or
water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;



      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be
connected to the fire safety system.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.111  BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.



   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these
rules and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American
Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or
American National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation
Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specification.



   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance
with 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802, and only as specified by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California or applicable industry specifications.  Maintenance as
recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed.  The
manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.112  INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to
have inspections, tests, maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in the manufacturer's instructions. At the request of the village,
a copy of the result of the inspection, test, maintenance or repair shall be
sent to the village.



      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to
document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge
point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the
time of installation and at least annually thereafter.



      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and
tested at times of installation and at least annually thereafter, and
required service performed within 15 days.



      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices
shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more
frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed
within five days. Where such device is used on a landscape irrigation system,
the annual test shall be completed and the result sent to the Director by
June 15 of each calendar year.



   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved
by the Agency as competent to service the device.  Proof of approval shall
be in writing.



   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of
repairs.



   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:



      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;



      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test
or visual inspection;



      (3)   Test results;



      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;



      (5)   Servicing performed and date completed.



   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these
regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at
the expense of the consumer without delay.



   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the Director.



   (G)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system for the purpose
of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and that the
Plumbing Inspector or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply or distribution system for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control
inspection.  On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the Director any information which he may request
regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property.  The
refusal to provide such information, when demanded, shall, within the
discretion of the Director, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper
connections as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1509-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1752,
passed 10-21-13)



§ 52.113  BOOSTER PUMPS.



   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to
or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure
cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the
service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 pounds per square
inch or less.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Director, at least once a year, that the device is operable.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.114  VIOLATIONS; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The Director is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures
as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply distribution mains.  Water service to such property
shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and until a reconnection
fee is paid to the village.  Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can
be effected when the Director is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists.  Such action shall
be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. 
Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to
prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water
supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Director or the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent
actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. 
Neither the Public Water Supply, the Director, or its agents or assigns shall
be liable to any customer for any injury, damage or lost revenues which may
result from termination of the customer's water supply in accordance with the
terms of this chapter, whether or not the termination was with or without
notice.



   (B)   The Director shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein
any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
Director, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been
removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.



   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in
conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Director,
and the required reconnection fee is paid.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Ord. 1059-W, passed 8-16-99)



§ 52.115  NOTICES OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever and wherever it shall appear that any person is
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or other related ordinances,
laws or administrative regulations, other than failure to pay water charges,
the Director may (but is not required as a condition precedent to prosecution
for violation) cause to be served, personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, upon the alleged offender a notice in writing stating the
date, nature of the alleged offense and directing that the same cease and
desist immediately upon service of the notice, and that the act or omission
causing such violation be corrected within such reasonable time as the
circumstances may require.



   (B)   The failure, neglect and refusal of the person alleged to be
in such violation to cease and desist therefrom within the time stated in
such notice shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter and
punishable as provided in this chapter and/or termination of water service.



(Ord. 1509-W, passed 8-16-99)



USAGE OF WATER LIMITED



§ 52.125  [RESERVED]



§ 52.126  NOTICE.



   Notice of such water use or restriction shall be disseminated through
reasonable communication media throughout the village, including but not
limited to posted notice of the same on the front door of the municipal
building.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95)



SCHEDULE A



§ 52.140  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Water service reinstatement fee:      $ 45



   (B)   Water service turn on fee:         $ 45



   (C)   Connection fee:



 

 

Resident

 

Non-resident



(1)   For each detached single family unit

   (1 inch tap size, 5/8 inch or 3/4 inch meter)
 

$ 3,000

 

$ 4,500



(2)   For separately metered units in a multiple dwelling
   unit per unit
 

$ 3,000

 

$ 4,500




 



      (3)   For all other buildings and uses or dwelling units not
meeting criteria (1) or (2) above, the connection  charge shall be based on
the tap size as described below:



 


Tap Size (Inches)

 

Meter Size

 

Amount Resident

 

Amount Non-resident





1
 
¾"
 
$3,000
 
$ 4,500


1
 
1"
 
5,000
 
7,500


1½
 
¾"
 
3,300
 
4,950


1½
 
1"
 
5,500
 
8,250


1½
 
1½"
 
11,000
 
16,500


2-4
 
1" or less
 
6,050
 
9,075


2-4
 
1½"
 
12,000
 
18,000


2-4
 
2"
 
19,300
 
28,950


2-4
 
3"
 
38,600
 
57,900


6
 
1" or less meter set
 
9,700
 
14,550


6
 
1½" meter set
 
19,300
 
28,950


6
 
2" meter set
 
31,000
 
46,500


6
 
3" meter set
 
62,000
 
93,000


6
 
4" meter set
 
96,800
 
145,200


8
 
1" or less
 
13,500
 
20,250


8
 
1½"
 
27,000
 
40,500


8
 
2"
 
43,000
 
64,500


8
 
3"
 
86,000
 
129,000


8
 
4"
 
134,000
 
201,000


For a building with a tap size over eight inches or required meter over four
inches, the connection charge shall be set by the Village Board on an
individual basis.




 



   (4)   Connection charges will be indexed by 3% annually beginning
May 1, 2007



 

 

Resident

 

Non-resident






(D)   Construction water per separate dwelling unit   

 

  $  35

 

$  35




(E)   Meter charges:

 


 






 

Resident
(Actual Cost
Plus 5%*)

 

Non-resident
(Actual Cost
Plus 5%*)




   System fee

 

$  25

 

$  25




   Installation fee

 

$  35

 

$  35




   Inspection fee

 

$  25

 

$  25




   * The meter charge may be adjusted by village staff to reflect any
increase or decrease in the actual cost of the meter.




(F)   Bulk water charges

 

$ 7/1,000 gal.

 

$ 10/1,000 gal.




   Minimum charge per load

 

$  25

 

$  25




(Note:  In determining whether residential or non-residential bulk water
rates should be charged, the delivery destination shall be controlling.)




(G)   Service charge (per month per meter):

 


 





   (1)   Account charge per account

 

$5.00

 





   (2)   For each 1,000 gallons of metered water

 

$4.76

 




   (3)   The rate per 1,000 gallons shown above shall be increased by
3% on May 1 of every year beginning in 2011.




 



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 921, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 1059-W,
passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1087, passed 3-6-00; Am. Ord. 1168, passed 4-2-01;
Am. Ord. 1253, passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord. 1422, passed 4-16-06; Am. Ord. 1615,
passed 4-19-10)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $25 and not more than $500 for each offense.  Each day that a
violation shall continue to exist shall be considered as a separate offense. 



   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (A), any
violation of the water use restrictions of §§ 52.126 shall be grounds for
termination of water service.



   (C)   Notwithstanding anything set forth in division (A) above, any
violation of the cross connection prohibitions set forth in § 52.106 shall
be punished by a fine of $1,000 for each offense.  Each day that a violation
occurs or continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 858, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 1509-W, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 1167,
passed 3-19-01)



CHAPTER 53:  STORMWATER DETENTION REGULATIONS



Section



   53.01   Developments prior to November 1, 1995



   53.02   Developments on or after November 1, 1995, but prior to
September 21, 2004



   53.03   Developments on or after September 21, 2004



   53.04   Definition of floodplain, special flood hazard area (SFHA)
and floodway



Cross-reference:



   For sewer regulations, see Ch. 51.



§ 53.01  DEVELOPMENTS PRIOR TO NOVEMBER 1, 1995.



   The following regulations shall apply to all developments for which a
preliminary plat has been applied for prior to November 1, 1995, or for which
a preliminary plat has been approved prior to November 1, 1995, and remains
valid.



   (A)   A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater
runoff shall be required for all nonresidential developments of two or more
acres in area, for all multiple-family developments of two or more acres in
area, and all single-family developments of five acres or more in area, where
the minimum lot for individual lots contained therein area is less than one
acre.



   (B)   The release rate of stormwater from all developments requiring
detention shall not exceed the stormwater runoff rate from the area in its
natural, undeveloped state.



      (1)   A release rate of not greater than that calculated from
a ten-year rainfall with a runoff rate coefficient of 0.15 will be accepted,
unless the applicant can show detailed calculations that are acceptable to
the Village Board after a recommendation by the Village Engineer and Plan
Commission.



      (2)   Applicants seeking a modification of the aforesaid
release rate must first appear before the Plan Commission, which shall
recommend to the Village Board whether or not a modification is appropriate.



      (3)   After review and recommendation by the Village Engineer
and upon competent proof that the discharge rate of the natural or manmade
outlet, channel or sewer serving the area is greater, the Village Board may
permit such greater release rate as may be reasonable.



   (C)   Storm sewer systems, streams and channels shall have an
adequate bypass capacity through the development for the flow from all
upstream areas for a storm design frequency of ten years, assuming that the
land is in a fully developed state under present zoning.



      (1)   The bypass flow rate shall be computed utilizing a
runoff coefficient of not less than 0.35, unless otherwise approved by the
Village Engineer.



      (2)   An allowance, equivalent to the reduction in flow rate
provided, will be made for upstream detention when such upstream detention
and release rate has previously been approved by the village and has been
constructed.



   (D)   (1)   The live detention storage to be provided shall be
calculated on the basis of the 100-year flood rainfall, as published by the
U.S. Weather Bureau for this area.



      (2)   The detention volume required shall be that necessary to
temporarily store the runoff of the 100-year rainfall from the fully
developed drainage area tributary to the reservoir, less the volume
discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate.



   (E)   In the event the downstream creeks or channels are inadequate
to receive the release rate herein above provided, then the allowable release
rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the receiving downstream
sewers, streams and channels; and additional detention, as determined by the
Village Engineer, shall be required to store that portion of the runoff
exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers, streams and channels.



   (F)   Plans, specifications, and calculations for stormwater
detention facilities, as required hereunder, shall be submitted to the
Village Engineer for approval prior to the commencement of construction.



   (G)   The formula to be used for calculating the volumes of water to
be stored and or released shall be the same as that used by the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, Drainage and Flood Control
Ordinance.



   (H)   The Village Board reserves the right to waive any or all
conditions of this chapter for parcels that will discharge directly into the
DuPage or Des Plaines River.



(Ord. 869, passed 11-20-95)



§ 53.02  DEVELOPMENTS ON OR AFTER NOVEMBER 1, 1995, BUT PRIOR TO SEPTEMBER
21, 2004.



   The following regulations shall apply to any development for which an
application for a preliminary plat was filed on or after November 1, 1995,
but prior to September 21, 2004.



   (A)   General regulations.  A combination of storage and controlled
release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all nonresidential
developments of two or more acres in area, for all multiple-family
developments of two or more acres in area, and all single-family developments
of five acres or more in area, where the minimum individual lot area is less
than one acre.



      (1)   The peak discharge rate from a storm detention facility
shall be controlled for the two-year, 24-hour storm event and the 100-year,
24-hour storm event to levels that will not cause an increase in flooding or
channel instability downstream, when considered in aggregate with other
developed properties and downstream drainage capacities.



         (a)   The peak discharge from events less than or equal
to the two-year event shall not be greater than 0.04 cfs per acre of property
drained.



         (b)   The peak 100-year discharge shall not be greater
then 0.15 cfs per acre of property drained.



      (2)   The rational method shall be used to determine the
volume of detention to be constructed.



      (3)   The volume of detention storage shall be determined for
the 100-year event of critical duration, which requires maximum storage.



      (4)   All design rainfall events shall be based on the
Illinois State Water Survey's Bulletin 70.



      (5)   The Village Administrator or designee shall be
authorized to require more stringent release rates where detailed regional
studies indicate that the receiving stream does not have capacity to accept
release at the rate allowed by § 53.02(A)(1).



   (B)   Hierarchy of site design features. The submittal of the
stormwater drainage system shall include an evaluation of site design
features that minimize the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the
site.  The submittal shall include evaluations of site design features that
consider the following hierarchy:



      (1)   Minimize impervious surfaces on the property consistent
with the needs of the project;



      (2)   Attenuate flows by use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions;



      (3)   Provide stormwater retention structures;



      (4)   Provide stormwater detention structures; and



      (5)   Construct storm sewers.



   (C)   Drainage system design features.



      (1)   The drainage system shall be designed to minimize
adverse water quality impacts downstream and on the property itself.



         (a)   Detention basins shall incorporate design features
to capture stormwater runoff pollutants.



         (b)   Retention of stormwater shall be promoted
throughout the property's drainage system to reduce the volume of stormwater
runoff and to reduce the quantity of runoff pollutants.



      (2)   The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses
where practicable.



         (a)   Uses considered compatible with stormwater
management include open spaces, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation,
wetlands and water quality mitigation.



         (b)   The applicant should attempt to avoid using
portions of the property exclusively for stormwater management.



   (D)   Wet detention design features.



      (1)   Wet detention basin design.  Wet detention basins shall
be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically
pleasing, and as much as feasible to be available for recreational use.



      (2)   Wet detention depths.



         (a)   Wet basins shall be at least three feet deep,
excluding near shore banks and safety ledges.



         (b)   If fish habitat is to be provided, they shall be
at least ten feet deep over 25% of the bottom area to prevent winter freeze
out.



      (3)   Inlet and outlet orientation.  To the extent feasible
the distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized.



   (E)   Dry detention design features.



      (1)   Dry detention basin design.  In addition to the other
requirements of this section, dry basins shall be designed to remove
stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and as much
as feasible to be available for multiple uses.



      (2)   Velocity dissipation.  Velocity dissipation measures
shall be incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets
and outlets, and to minimize the resuspension of pollutants.



      (3)   Inlet and outlet orientation.  To the extent feasible,
the distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized.



   (F)   Minimum detention outlet size.



      (1)   Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be
used to control the discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of four
inches.



      (2)   If this minimum orifice permits a release rate greater
than those specified in § 53.02(A) and regional detention is not a practical
alternative, alternative outlet designs shall be utilized that incorporate
perforated risers or other self-cleaning flow restrictors.



   (G)   Detention in floodplains. 



      (1)   The placement of detention basins within the floodplain
is strongly discouraged because of questions about their reliable operation
during flood events.



      (2)   However, the stormwater detention requirements of this
chapter may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood fringe
areas on the project site, provided the following provisions are met.



         (a)   Detention in flood fringe areas.



            1.   The placement of a detention basin in a flood
fringe area shall require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume below
the base flood elevation occupied by the detention basin, including any berms.



            2.   The release from the detention storage
provided shall still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this
section.



            3.   The applicant shall demonstrate its operation
for all streamflow and floodplain backwater conditions.



            4.   Excavations for compen-satory storage along
watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention.



            5.   All floodplain storage lost below the
ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the ten-year flood elevation.



            6.   All floodplain storage lost above the
existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed
ten-year flood elevation.



            7.   All compensatory storage excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.



         (b)   Detention in floodways.  Detention basins shall
be placed in the floodway only in accordance with § 53.02(G)(2)(c).



         (c)   On-stream detention.



            1.   On-stream detention basins are discouraged
but allowable, if they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the
other provisions of these regulations with respect to water quality and
control of the two-year and 100 year, 24-hour events from this property.



            2.   If on-stream detention is used for watersheds
larger than one square mile, it is recommended that the applicant use dynamic
modeling to demonstrate that the design will not increase stage for any
properties upstream or downstream of the property.



            3.   In addition, impoundment of the stream as
part of on-stream detention:



               a.   Shall not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species that require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;



               b.   Shall not cause or contribute to the
degradation of water quality or stream aquatic habitat;



               c.   Shall include a design calling for
gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a
pre-sedimentation basin; and



               d.   Shall require the implementation of an
effective non-point source management program throughout the upstream
watershed.



   (H)   Drainage into wetlands.



      (1)   Wetlands shall be protected from damaging modifications
and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity associated with land
developments.



      (2)   In addition to the other requirements of these
regulations, the following requirements shall be met for all developments
whose drainage flows into wetlands.



         (a)   Detention in wetlands.



            1.   Existing wetlands shall not be modified for
purposes of stormwater detention, unless it is demonstrated that the existing
wetland is low in quality and the proposed modifications will maintain or
improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial functions.



            2.   Existing depressional storage in wetlands
shall be maintained, and the volume of detention storage provided to meet the
requirements of these regulations shall be in addition to this existing
storage.



         (b)   Sediment control.  The existing wetland shall be
protected during construction by appropriate soil erosion and sediment
control measures.



         (c)   Alteration of drainage patterns.  Site drainage
patterns shall not be altered to decrease or increase the existing area
tributary to the wetland.



         (d)   Detention/sedimentation.



            1.   All runoff from the development tributary to
a wetland shall be routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin
designed to capture the two-year, 24-hour event and hold it for at least 24
hours, before being discharged to the wetland.



            2.   This basin shall be con-structed before
grading begins on the property.



         (e)   Vegetated buffer strip.  A buffer strip of at
least 25 feet in width, preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall
be maintained or restored around the periphery of the wetland.



   (I)   Streets and parking lots.



      (1)   Streets.  If streets are to be used as part of the
drainage system, ponding depths shall not exceed curb heights by more than
one inch.



      (2)   Parking lots: The maximum storm-water ponding depth in
any parking area shall not exceed six inches.



   (J)   Infiltration practices. The use of infiltration practices,
such as basins, drywells, trenches and porous pavement, shall not be allowed
as a primary source of stormwater management.



   (K)   Maintenance considerations. 



      (1)   The stormwater drainage system shall be designed to
minimize and facilitate maintenance.



      (2)   Turfed side slopes shall be designed with a maximum
slope of four horizontal to one vertical.



      (3)   Pre-sedimentation basins shall be provided with:



         (a)   Easy methods for removing sediment; and



         (b)   Access for heavy equipment.



   (L)   Accommodating flows from upstream tribu-tary areas.



      (1)   General principles.



         (a)   Stormwater runoff from area tributary to the
property shall be considered in the design of the property's drainage system.



         (b)   Whenever practicable, flows from upstream areas
that are not to be detained should be routed around the basin being provided
for the site being developed.



      (2)   Upstream areas not meeting current requirements.



         (a)   When there are areas not meeting the storage and
release rates of these regulations, tributary to the applicant's property,
the applicant shall explore regionalized detention on that property.



         (b)   The following steps shall be followed:



            1.   The applicant shall compute the storage
volume needed for his property using:



               a.   The release rates of § 53.02(A),
General regulations;



               b.   The applicant's property area; and



            c.   The procedures described in § 53.02(B),
Hierarchy of site design features.



            2.   Areas tributary to the appli-cant's property
that do not meet the storage and release rate requirements of these
regulations shall be identified.



            3.   Using the areas determined above in §
53.02(L)(2)(b)2, plus the applicant's property area, total storage needed for
the combined properties shall be computed.



            4.   Allowable release rates shall be computed
using the combined property areas.



               a.   Storage shall be computed as described
in § 53.02(A).



               b.    If tributary areas are not developed,
a reasonable fully developed land cover, based on local zoning, shall be
assumed for purposes of computing storage.



            5.   Once the necessary combined storage is
computed, the village may choose to require oversizing of the applicant's
detention basin to accommodate the regional flows.



               a.   If such an oversizing determination is
made:



                  (i)   The applicant shall
appropriately oversize the detention basin and associated facilities; and



                  (ii)   The village may enter into a
recapture agreement with the applicant to permit recovery of all oversizing
expense.



               b.   If regional storage is selected by the
village, then the design produced above in § 53.02(L)(2)(b)4. shall be
implemented.



            6.   If regional storage is rejected by the
village:



               a.   The applicant shall design the storage
and release rates for the applicant's property only; and



               b.   Existing upstream flows shall be routed
around the storage when practicable.



      (3)   Upstream areas meeting current requirements.



         (a)   When there are areas tributary to the applicant's
property that meet the storage and release rate requirements of this chapter,
the upstream flows shall be:



            1.   Bypassed around the applicant's detention
basin; or



            2.   Routed through the applicant's detention
basin, if this is the only practicable alternative.



         (b)   Storage needed for the applicant's property shall
still be computed as described in § 53.02(L)(2).



         (c)   However, if the village decides to route tributary
area flows through an applicant's basin, the final design stormwater releases
shall be based on the combined total of the applicant's property plus
tributary areas.



         (d)   It must be shown that at no time will the runoff
from the applicant's property exceed the allowable release rate for that
property alone.



   (M)   Use of detention, retention or depressional storage areas as
part of drainage system.



      (1)   Where detention, retention or depres-sional storage
areas are to be used as part of the drainage system for a property, they
shall be constructed as the first part of the initial earthwork program.



      (2)   Temporary detention facilities can be provided where the
schedule for the site does not include the permanent detention site as a part
of the initial development.



      (3)   Bonding for the completion of adequate permanent
facilities shall be provided with the first increment of the development
approved and/or recorded.



   (N)   Maintenance responsibility.



      (1)   The maintenance of stormwater detention facilities shall
be provided by the property owner(s) of the site.



      (2)    The owner(s) of the property shall grant an easement to
the village in the event that it needs to enter the property to correct
deficiencies in the maintenance provided by the owner(s), after acceptance of
the facilities and expiration of the maintenance period as provided by
ordinance.



      (3)   Pre-sedimentation facilities, inlet control structures
and outlet structures shall be maintained by the village to assure adequate
functioning of the facility.



(Ord. 869, passed 11-20-95; Am. Ord. 1358, passed 9-20-04)



§ 53.03  DEVELOPMENTS ON OR AFTER SEPTEMBER 21, 2004.



   (A)   Subject to the exemptions listed in division (B) of this
section, the regulations set forth in the Will County Stormwater Management
Ordinance (the WCSMO ) shall apply to any development for which an
application for a preliminary plat or other development activity which
initiates storm water management requirements is filed on or after September
21, 2004.  The WCSMO is hereby incorporated herein as if fully set forth.



   (B)   Pursuant to WCSMO § 802, the following developments shall be
exempt from division (A) above:



      (1)   Perinar subdivision at about Shepley Road and Birds
Bridge in Sec. 33, T35N, R9E.



      (2)   Serrano subdivision west of Quail Drive and Valley Drive
in Sec. 9, T34N, R9E.



      (3)   Barr/Vav subdivision east of Bell Road and north of
Route 6 in Sec. 18, T34N, R9E.



      (4)   Town Center development northwest of Bluff Road and
Route 6 in Sec. 8,T34N, R9E.



      (5)   Hunters Crossing units 11 and 12 west of McKinley Woods
Road and north of ComEd easement in Sec. 19, T34N, R9E.



      (6)   Riverside Industrial Park undeveloped lots.



      (7)   Channahon Industrial Park undeveloped lots.



      (8)   Corsetti property south of Roberts Avenue and northwest
of Route 6 in Sec. 9, T34N, R9E.



      (9)   Marketti property north of Bluff Road and southeast of
Route 6 in Sec. 8, T34N, R9E.



      (10)   Sunset Boulevard between Roberts Avenue and the south
line of Sec. 5, T34N, R9E.



      (11)   Navajo Drive extension through Town Center development
between Bluff Road and existing Navajo Drive.



      (12)   Channahon Middle School parking addition west of
Roberts Avenue.



      (13)   Water treatment site located at water tower on McKinley
Woods Road north of Old Kerry Grove Road in Sec. 19, T34N, R9E.



(Ord. 1358, passed 9-20-04)



§ 53.04  DEFINITION OF FLOODPLAIN, SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) AND
FLOODWAY.



   In addition to the definition in the WCSMO of the floodplain, SFHA and
floodway, these areas are generally identified as such on panels 255, 260 and
265 of the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will County dated September 6, 1995
and on panels 45, 55, 60, 65 and 70 of the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Grundy
County dated August 2, 2012.  All maps being prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 1701, passed 7-16-12)



CHAPTER 54:  CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   54.01   Purpose and scope



   54.02   Definitions



   54.03   Annual registration required



   54.04   Permit required; applications and fees



   54.05   Action on permit applications



   54.06   Effect of permit



   54.07   Revised permit drawings



   54.08   Insurance



   54.09   Indemnification



   54.10   Security



   54.11   Permit suspension and revocation



   54.12   Change of ownership



   54.13   General construction standards



   54.14   Traffic control



   54.15   Location of facilities



   54.16   Construction methods and materials



   54.17   Vegetation control



   54.18   Removal, relocation or modification of facilities



   54.19   Cleanup and restoration



   54.20   Maintenance; emergencies



   54.21   Variances



   54.22   Right to appeal



   54.23   Enforcement



 



   54.99   Penalty



§ 54.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish
policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within
the village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the
village rights-of-way and the village as a whole.



   (B)   Intent.  In enacting this chapter, the village intends to
exercise its authority over the rights-of-way within the village and, in
particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities by
establishing uniform standards and regulations to address issues presented by
utility facilities, including without limitation:



      (1)   Preventing interference with the use of streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Preventing the creation of visual and physical
obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Preventing interference with the facilities and
operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located
in rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protecting against environmental damage, including
without limitation damage to trees, from the installation of utility
facilities;



      (5)   Protecting against increased stormwater run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserving the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserving open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Preventing visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way;



      (9)   Assuring the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to utility facilities locations; and



      (10)   Minimizing impacts to existing infrastructure that
would create additional maintenance burdens or costs to the village.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the
public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this chapter.



   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. In the
event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement
between the village and any utility, the provisions of such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters.  This chapter supersedes all
chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with federal and state laws.  In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment.  The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions and requirements expressed in this chapter when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for fire protection or the
public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO.   American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI.   American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT.   A person applying for a permit under this chapter.



   ASTM.   American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL.   The methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING.   To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for
the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CARRIER PIPE.   The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING.   A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE.   The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of
the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.



   COATING.   Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe
for protection against external corrosion.



   CODE.   The Code of Ordinances for the Village of Channahon.



   CONDUCTOR.   Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT.   A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT.   The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER.   The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY.   A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.   The Village Director of Public Works or
his or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.   For the purposes of this chapter, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil but shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY.   Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for
the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT.   Provision of a protective casing.



   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION.   The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.



   FACILITY.   All structures, devices, objects and materials (including
track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video
cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way under this chapter, except those owned by the village.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY.   A facility that is not a crossing facility or
a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD.   Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.   Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is
determined by the Village Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable
and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including without limitation
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY CODE.   The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§
1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   HIGHWAY.   A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including without limitation rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY
includes without limitation all highway land and improvements, including
roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs,
guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient
for vehicle traffic.



   HOLDER.   A person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   IDOT.   Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ICC.   Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means, with or without boring.



   JETTING.   Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure
to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE .  The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by
two or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E.   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION.   The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY.   The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY.   Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT.   The removal of an area of pavement for access to a
facility or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE.   That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 54.04 and 54.05 of this chapter.



   PRACTICABLE.   That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE.   The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products, including without limitation gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PROMPT.   Done within a period of time specified by the village. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY.   A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION.   The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY.   Any street, alley, other land or
waterway dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including without limitation utility easements, in
which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or
permit the location of facilities other than those of the village.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal village
property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and
shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY.   That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL.   The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND.   That amount of security required pursuant to § 54.10.



   SHOULDER.   A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes without limitation messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide-area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. PRIVATE
LINE means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
521 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming
services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through
an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.   Any person that installs, owns,
operates or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed
to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER.   Includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH.   A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of
an underground facility.



   UTILITY.   The individual or entity owning or operating any facility
as defined in this chapter.



   VENT.   A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases
or vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE.   That term as defined in  § 21-201(v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Act of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-201(v).



   VILLAGE.   The Village of Channahon.



   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cuffing auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works,
providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on
behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's
facilities in the right-of-way, a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person and evidence of insurance as required in § 54.08 of this chapter, in
the form of a certificate of insurance.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required. 



      (1)   No person shall construct any facility on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within any village right-of-way which:



         (a)   Changes the location of the facility,



         (b)   Adds a new facility,



         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way; or



         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the
right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Village Director
of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be
no disruption of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility's name, address and telephone and fax
numbers;



      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the
utility, its telephone and fax numbers, e-mail address and its interest in
the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses, telephone and fax numbers and
e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work, the purposes
and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put.
The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature
and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those
matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
village:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including without limitation
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed;



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including without limitation the certification of an engineer that
such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules,
and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 54.08 of this
chapter;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 54.10 of this chapter;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter (see § 54.21); and



      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the
specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of new electric power, communications,
telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to
obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the ease of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, and any other local
or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire
permit application review period and the construction period authorized by
the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application
shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days
after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $100. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.05  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Village Director of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If
the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Village Director of
Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the Village Director of Public Works is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, he or she shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the
duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village
Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Additional village review of applications of
telecommunications retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than  ten days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Director
of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the Village Director  of Public Works
fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications
retailer within either:



         (a)   Ten days after service of notice to the village by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction; or



         (b)   Twenty-five days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 54.04 of this chapter, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject
to the requirements of  division (A) of this section.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.06  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest
created.  A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid
for a period longer than 180 days unless construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance at a
pre-construction meeting by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit. The
pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated
by the village, with such village representatives in attendance as the
village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing
the work under the permit and reviewing special considerations necessary in
the areas where work will occur, including without limitation the presence of
other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid
disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction and access and egress by adjacent property owners.



   (D)   Compliance with all laws required.  The issuance of a permit
by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.07  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate
from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit
also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with § 54.21 of this chapter. If the
village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either
remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.08  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured, and
naming the village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents
and employees as additional insureds, on the policies listed in divisions (a)
and (b) below:



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations
coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or
death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability;



         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;



         (c)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and



         (d)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to
protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies required.  The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the village within ten days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement:



      It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said
notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance.  A utility may self-insure all or a portion
of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of
this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of
such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under division (A), or the requirements of divisions (B),
(C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial
ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required
under division (A) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a
"private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act.



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's
liability.  The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person
for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the permittee in the State of
Illinois.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.09 INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from
or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license or similar agreement, provided, however, that the
utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the
village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.10  SECURITY.



   (A) Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form
and in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's
sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and



      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter,
including without limitation any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable
law.



   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the
village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash or an unconditional
letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any letter of credit
provided pursuant to this division shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior
notice to the village and the permittee;



      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and



      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and
within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount.  The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Director of
Public Works, and may also include reasonable directly related costs that the
village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform
such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the
permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations within the village,
with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a
related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not
be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Village Director of Public Works may in the exercise of
sound discretion allow the permittee to post a single amount of security
which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit.
The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this
division (C) for any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this division, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:



      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or



      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that
the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund.



   (E)   Replenishment.  Within 14 days after receipt of written
notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified
in division (C) of this section.



   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by
the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to thevillage, provided
that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum
balance required in division (C) of this section.



   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the Security Fund and any and all accrued interest
shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any
reasonable costs, losses or damages incurred by the village as a result of
said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, losses or
damages shall be refunded to the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited.  The rights reserved to the village with
respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund
shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.11  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Village right to revoke permit.  The village may revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;



      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public
rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health,
safety or welfare; or



      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter, stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. 



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:



         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that
no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
village, the deficiencies stated in the notice, providing written proof of
such correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the
notice; or



         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public rights-of-way
and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village, providing
written proof of such removal to the village within ten days after receipt of
the notice.



      (2)   The village may, in its discretion and for good cause
shown, extend the time periods provided in this division.



   (D)   Stop work order.  In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) of this section.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of  division (C) of this
section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the village:



      (1)   Correct the deficiencies;



      (2)   Upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee,
remove the subject facilities or equipment; or



      (3)   After not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of
failure to cure the non-compliance,deem them abandoned and property of the
village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all
costs of removal.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Notification of change.  A utility shall notify the village
no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in
the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted and agreed to be bound by the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
village's right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and letters of credit.  All required insurance
coverage or letters of credit must be changed to reflect the name of the new
owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.13  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles.  All construction in the
right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules and regulations and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control
and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where
applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT
publications:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill. Adm. Code 545);



      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this chapter, the Village Director of Public Works shall
determine, in the exercise of sound judgment, which principles apply. Such
decisions shall be final. If requested, the Village Director of Public Works
shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance or operation of a facility in the future.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.14  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers.  The utility
is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work, provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 54.20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice
as is practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.15  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this division.



      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility
facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Director of Public
Works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility
facilities.



      (2)   Minimum interference and impact.  The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin said right-of-way.



      (3)   No interference with travel.  No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of-way.



      (5)   Size of utility facilities.  The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb, with a minimum distance of two feet behind the
face of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote from
pavement edge as practicable, with minimum distance of four feet outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway, and are not within the clear zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet from the right-of-way line,
and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption.  The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage
facilities.



      (3)   90 degree crossing required.  Crossing facilities shall
cross at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.



      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility.  An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC's rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)   Markers.  The village may require the utility to
provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility,
other than a power or communication facility, crosses a highway. Each marker
shall identify the type of facility, the utility and an emergency phone
number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in 49 C.F.R. 192.707.



   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. 
The village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (F)   Above-ground facilities. Above-ground facilities may be
installed only if:



      (1)   The Village Director of Public Works has determined that
underground installation is not technically feasible; and



      (2)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include without limitation
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used whenever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include without limitation underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the
bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk, and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the faculty;



         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of
the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (H)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands
being traversed.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.16  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Village Director of Public Works from the edge of the
pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours
in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours
after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they
shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the
boring or jacking operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches.
Borings over six inches in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the anger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch.



         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. 
Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either
jacking, guided with auger or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Village Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard
Specifications for Road and BridgeConstruction. When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the Village Director of Public Works, the
utility at its expense shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the
top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
division (4) is permitted under § 54.21, the following requirements shall
apply:



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
as soon as practicable with flowable fill, as designated and specified by the
Village Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement in kind shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three  years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes
shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular
section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if:



            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes
future maintenance or repair; and



            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities.  Cover shall
be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 

Type of Facility
 
Minimum Cover


Electric lines
 
30 inches


Communication, cable or video service lines
 
18 - 24 inches (determined by village)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance.  Electric power or
communications facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed,
operated and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm.
Code 305 and the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities.



            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. If a
crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided
between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if:



               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of
"moles," "whip augers" or other approved method which compress the earth to
make the opening for cable installation; or



               b.   The installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. Cable shall be
grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops
placed between November 1 of a given year and March 15 of the following year,
also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of such following year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops,
within ten business days after placement.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines.  Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers" or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated
in a village approved manner and in conformance with 49 C.F.R. 192, IDOT's
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and all other
applicable laws, rules and regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer
lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines
and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois:



      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free
area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad or by heavy duty
plastic or similar material approved by the Village Director of Public Works.
With the approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for
ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with
the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards.  The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way.  No material shall be
stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village
Director of Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public, obstacles to right-of-way maintenance and damage to the
right-of-way and other property.



      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility
to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the
discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Village Director
of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services.



      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in  § 151.04 of this code.



   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities within the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and
ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed
facilities. The village will make its permit records available to a utility
for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an
excavation or when requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall
locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours,
excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground
Facilities Damage Prevention Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.17  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and
regulations.  An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations and with such local franchise or
other agreement with the village as permitted by law.



   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required.  Tree
trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the
right-of-way, and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws
and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal
maintenance operation, but shall require the application for and the issuance
of a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.



      (1) Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished
by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree
pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date
in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village
may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.



   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance.  The village
may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (D)   Chemical use.



      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no
utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees,
shrubs or vegetation in the village for any purpose, including without
limitation the control of growth, insects or disease.



      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Village Director of Public Works that such spraying is
the only practicable method of vegetation control.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.18  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities
within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any village
improvement, or the operations of the village, in or upon the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public
rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such
facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or



      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.  The village
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility
within the public rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the
village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
Village Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it,
the abandoning utility shall be deemed by giving notice of abandonment to the
village to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the
facility by another utility or person.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.19  CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.



   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf,
terrain and other property, all to the satisfaction of the village, within
ten days after any portion of the right-of-way is disturbed, damaged or
destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces
shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village Director of
Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project. Seed or sod shall be
watered within 24 hours after placement. Water shall be applied at a rate of
two gallons per square yard. Additional water shall be applied at the same
rateevery day for nine additional waterings. Watering shall be done before
10:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. The time periods provided in this section may
be adjusted by the Village Director of Public Works for good cause shown.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.20  MAINTENANCE; EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   General.  Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way, including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency
is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility are available.



      (2)   The utility shall notify the Village Director of Public
Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency as soon as
possible, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the Village Police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs.  The utility must file in writing with the
village of a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
48 hours after an emergency repair.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.21  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance.  A utility requesting a variance from
one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
Village Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance
is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances.  The Village Director of Public
Works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of
this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Director of
Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance.  As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Director of Public Works
may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards
and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter
but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.22  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or
determination, including without limitation the denial of any variance, made
by the Village Director of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter
shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or
commission as the Board may designate. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of
such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village Board shall
commence its consideration of theappeal at the Board's next regularly
scheduled meeting occurring not less than seven days after the filing of the
appeal. The Village Board shall decide the appeal in a timely manner.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.23  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the village's damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit-related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed
upon a utility which does not pay the costs apportioned to it.



(Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)



CHAPTER 55: ELECTRIC SERVICE



Section



   55.01   Electric aggregation plan; adoption



   55.02   Aggregation of electrical load



§ 55.01  ELECTRIC AGGREGATION PLAN; ADOPTION.



   The Electric Power Aggregation Plan of Operation and Governance,
adopted by the village on May 7, 2012 and attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance
1693, is incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.



(Ord. 1693, passed 5-7-12)



§ 55.02  AGGREGATION OF ELECTRICAL LOAD.



   (A)   The corporate authorities of the village find and determine
that it is in the best interests of the village to operate the electric
aggregation program under the Illinois Power Agency Act (the Act) as an
opt-out program.



   (B)   (1)   The corporate authorities of the village hereby are
authorized to aggregate in accordance with the terms of the Act, residential
and small commercial retail electrical loads located within the corporate
limits of the village, and for that purpose may solicit bids and enter into
service agreements to facilitate for those loads the sale and purchase of
electricity and related services and equipment.



      (2)   The corporate authorities of the village are granted the
authority to exercise such authority jointly with any other municipality or
county and in combination with two or more municipalities or counties, may
initiate a process jointly to authorize aggregation by majority vote of each
particular municipality or county as required by the Act.



      (3)   The aggregation program for the village shall operate as
an opt-out program for residential and small commercial retail customers.



      (4)   The aggregation program is hereby approved by the
village.



      (5)   The corporate authorities of the village with the
assistance of the Illinois Power Agency have developed a plan of operation
and governance for the aggregation program and have conducted such public
hearings and provided such public notice as required under the Act. The load
aggregation plan provides for universal access to all applicable residential
customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential customers,
describes demand management and energy efficiency services to be provided to
each class of customers and meets any requirements established by law
concerning aggregated service offered pursuant to the Act.



      (6)   As an opt-out program, the residential and small
commercial retail customers shall be fully informed in advance that they have
the right to opt-out of the aggregation program. The disclosure and
information provided to the customers shall comply with the requirements of
the Act.



      (7)   The electrical aggregation shall occur automatically for
each person owning, occupying, controlling or using an electrical load center
proposed to be aggregated in the corporate limits of the village, subject to
a right to opt-out of the program as described under this section and Act.



      (8)   Because of the way the bidding process works, the
Village Administrator or his designee will need to have the authority to sign
a contract with the lowest cost electricity provider on the same day that
bids are received. The Village Administrator or his designee has the
authority to execute a contract with the lowest cost electricity supplier
upon receipt and review of the bids.



(Ord. 1694, passed 5-7-12)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



         72.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Illinois vehicle code adopted by reference



   70.02   Driving on roads marked "Construction Traffic Only"



   70.03   Compression/release engine brake prohibited



   70.04   Village Attorney to conduct statutory summary suspension
hearings



Parking of Trailers



   70.11   Trailer parking prohibited



   70.12   Trailer parking permits



   70.13   Applications for trailer parking permits



   70.14   Fees for trailer parking permits



Operation of Golf Carts



   70.20   Definitions



   70.21   Operating requirements



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this code of
ordinances.



(Ord. 1004, passed 11-2-98)



§ 70.02  DRIVING ON ROADS MARKED "CONSTRUCTION TRAFFIC ONLY."



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor
vehicle on a road, whether publicly or privately owned, marked "Construction
Traffic Only," unless said vehicle is delivering equipment, material or
personnel to a construction site.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a motor vehicle upon
any dirt road, path or trail without the consent of the property owner.



(Ord. 1360, passed 10-4-04)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  COMPRESSION/RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, a COMPRESSION/RELEASE ENGINE
BRAKE is defined as any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the
braking or deceleration of any vehicle by converting engine power to
compressed air, which results in additional, excessive, loud or explosive
noise from such vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated at or upon any
public highway within the village any compression/release engine brake on any
vehicle for any reason.



(Ord. 1316, passed 11-17-03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.04  VILLAGE ATTORNEY TO CONDUCT STATUTORY SUMMARY SUSPENSION HEARINGS.



   The Village Attorney shall represent the interests of the village and
conduct all statutory summary suspension hearings pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 2-118.1,when the underlying complaint or citation giving rise to
the statutory summary suspension is charged as a local ordinance violation.



(Ord. 1586, passed 7-6-09)



PARKING OF TRAILERS



§ 70.11  TRAILER PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)    Prohibition.  It shall be unlawful to park a trailer on any
street or highway within the village for more than 48 hours within any period
of 30 consecutive days.



   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, a TRAILER is any
vehicle without motor power designed for carrying persons or property, and
for being drawn by a motor vehicle.



   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to:



      (1)   Trailers owned by a public utility or a licensed
contractor while actually in use during the construction, installation, or
repair of any public utility;



      (2)   Trailers actually in use for the pick-up or delivery of
goods, wares, or merchandise; delivery of commercial services or for
delivering materials for repairing, altering, remodeling, or constructing the
adjacent building; and



      (3)   Persons holding a valid trailer parking permit.



(Ord. 1189, passed 9-4-01)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.12  TRAILER PARKING PERMITS.



   (A)    The purpose of issuance of trailer parking permits is to
allow an out-of-town visitor to park on a street near the residence that he
or she is visiting.



   (B)   Persons holding a valid permit issued pursuant to this section
may park a trailer on a street in a residential area.



   (C)   The Chief of Police, or designee, is authorized to issue
trailer parking permits.



(Ord. 1189, passed 9-4-01)



§ 70.13  APPLICATIONS FOR TRAILER PARKING PERMITS.



   Every person desiring a trailer parking permit shall file an
application with the Chief of Police, or designee, containing the following:



   (A)   The name, address and phone number of the registered owner and
applicant of the trailer.



   (B)    The license number, make and model of trailer.



   (C)   The dates for which the permit is requested.



   (D)   The location where the trailer will be parked.



   (E)   The dates and duration of any and all trailer parking permits
issued to the applicant within the immediately preceding 90-day period.



   (F)   Additional information the Chief of Police, or designee, may
reasonably require.



(Ord. 1189, passed 9-4-01)



§ 70.14  FEES FOR TRAILER PARKING PERMITS.



   (A)   Applicants for permits issued pursuant to this subchapter will
pay to the village a fee equal to the sum of money sufficient to reimburse it
for all expenses incurred in connection with processing permit applications.



   (B)   The amount of such fees will be established periodically by
the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 1189, passed 9-4-01)



OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS



§ 70.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COUNTY ROADS. Any road under the jurisdiction of Will County or Grundy
Highway Departments.



   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the
purposes of transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or
maintenance equipment while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the
playing of golf or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or
private golf course and having a maximum speed of 20 miles per hour.



   STATE ROADS. Any road under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Department
of Transportation. STATE ROADS include U.S. Route 6, Interstate 55 and
frontage roads.



   TOWNSHIP ROADS. Any road under the jurisdiction of a township road
district.



   VILLAGE STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the
Village of Channahon except for state and county roads.



(Ord. 1745, passed 5-6-13)



§ 70.21  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.



   Golf carts may be operated on village streets subject to the following:



   (A)   The driver is subject to the mandatory vehicle liability
insurance requirements of Illinois and must carry proof of such insurance,
specifically listing the golf cart.



   (B)   The driver must have a valid driver’s license.



   (C)   When operated on a roadway, a golf cart shall have its
headlights and tail lamps illuminated during the period from sunrise to
sunset, at times when rain, snow, fog or other atmospheric conditions require
the use of windshield wipers and at any other time when, due to insufficient
light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the
street, road or highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 1,000
feet.



   (D)   The golf cart shall be equipped with brakes, a steering wheel
apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red reflective warning devices in front
and rear, an approved slow moving vehicle emblem on the rear of the golf
cart, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front, a tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least
100 feet from the rear, brake lights and turn signals.



   (E)   The golf cart driver must obey all traffic laws of the State
of Illinois and the Village of Channahon with regard to the movement and
operation of vehicles on the streets and roadways.



   (F)   Golf carts may only be operated on village streets with posted
speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less. This division (F) does not
prohibit a golf cart from crossing a village street at an intersection where
the village street has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour.



   (G)   A person driving a golf cart may make a direct crossing upon
or across a state road if the state road has a speed limit of 35 miles per
hour or less and the crossing is made at an intersection controlled by a
traffic light or a four-way stop sign.



   (H)   The driver must not exceed any posted speed limit.



   (I)   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of the
golf cart on a roadway while under the influence is subject to ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, §§ 11-500 through 11-502, and applicable local ordinances.



   (J)   Golf carts may not be operated on sidewalks or other public
property not accessible to or authorized for vehicular traffic.



   (K)   No “non-highway” vehicle as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-1426.1 is permitted on village streets, roads or highways except
golf carts.



   (L)   All crossings of streets, roads and highways which are
permitted by this subchapter must be direct crossings made at an intersection.



(Ord. 1745, passed 5-6-13)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of § 70.03 shall be
subject to fine of not less than $75, and not to exceed $750.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 70.11
through 70.14 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
and on which a violation occurs or continues.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 70.20 or 70.21
shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $500.



(Ord. 1189, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 1316, passed 11-17-04; Am. Ord. 1745,
passed 5-6-13)



CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



   II.   Stop intersections



   III.   Yield intersections



   IV.   Semi trucks prohibited on certain residential streets



SCHEDULE I: SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated in excess of the following
maximum speed limits on the following indicated streets during school days
when children are present.



 


Street

 

Speed limit (m.p.h.)

 

Ord. No.

 

Date





Bluff St.
 
20 (in school zone)
 
861
 
9-5-95


Fryer St.
 
25
 
1161
 
1-15-01


Junior Ave.
 
20 (in school zone)
 
168
 
10-17-77


Roberts Ave.
 
20 (in school zone)
 
168
 
10-17-77


Sage St.
 
20 (in school zone)
 
861
 
9-5-95


Sunset Ave.
 
20 (in school zone)
 
168
 
10-17-77


Thomas Dillon  Drive
 
35
 
610
 
9-10-90




 



   (B)   No vehicle shall be operated in excess of the following
maximum speed limit on the following indicated street:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Speed Limit (m.p.h.)

 

Ord. No.

 

Date





Amoco Road
 
 
 
45
 
1829
 
1-18-16


Bell Road
 
South of U.S. Route 6
 
25
 
1262
 
2-16-02


Bell Road
 
North of U.S. Route 6
 
35
 
1592
 
9-21-09


Brisbin Road
 
 
 
45
 
1542
 
7-21–08


Bungalow Road
 
 
 
45
 
1542
 
7-21-08


Canal Road
 
 
 
35
 
1829
 
1-18-16


Cemetery Road
 
 
 
50
 
1829
 
1-18-16


Dellos Road
 
 
 
30
 
1829
 
1-18-16


Gun Club Road
 
 
 
45
 
1542
 
7-21-08


Hansel Road
 
Bell Road to McLindon Road
 
25
 
1492
 
6-18-07


Hansel Road
 
Ridge Road east to the west line of Deer Ridge Subdivision
 
35
 
1829
 
1-18-16


McClindon Road
 
 
 
50
 
1829
 
1-18-16


McClintock Road
 
 
 
30
 
1829
 
1-18-16


McKinley Woods Road
 
 
 
35
 
1829
 
1-18-16


Municipal Drive
 
 
 
30
 
1829
 
1-18-16


Northern Illinois Drive
 
 
 
30
 
1829
 
1-18-16


Ridge Road
 
South of U.S. Route 6
 
35
 
1440
 
9-18-06


South Tabler Road
 
 
 
45
 
1829
 
1-18-16




 



   (C)   The following locations are declared to be school speed zones:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date




Sioux Drive

 

Between Navajo Drive and Green Heron Drive

 

1311

 

8-4-03




Sunset Boulevard

 

Between Roberts Avenue and Sioux Drive

 

1311

 

8-4-03




 



   (D)   The absolute maximum speed limit on streets and highways under
the village’s control and jurisdiction shall be 25 miles per hour unless
otherwise altered by ordinance.



(Am. Ord. 1829, passed 1-18-16)



SCHEDULE II: STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   Traffic shall stop at the following streets where indicated by stop
signs:



 


Street

 

Stops at

 

Ord. No.

 

Date






Aaron Court (westbound)

 

McKinley Woods Road

 

764

 

7-6-93




Access Drive
(eastbound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive
(Southern Crossings)

 

1444

 

11-20-06




Access Drive
(westbound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive
(Southern Crossings)

 

1444

 

11-20-06




Access Drive
(westbound)

 

Ridge Road
(Southern Crossings Unit 2)

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Allison Drive (westbound)

 

Jacob Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Andrew Avenue (westbound)

 

Carrie Avenue

 

820

 

10-3-94




Anna Drive (westbound)

 

Michael Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Arbor Lane (westbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Ascot Court (facing south)

 

Fox Trail

 

999

 

10-19-98




Basswood Drive (northbound/south bound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Bell Road (facing north)

 

Hansel Road

 

956

 

10-20-97




Bell Road (facing south)

 

Route 6

 

956

 

10-20-97




Birch Street (westbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Blackberry Street (northbound)

 

Bridge Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Blackhawk Drive (facing south)

 

Mohawk Lane

 

857

 

8-7-95




Blue Ridge Court (eastbound/westb ound)

 

Rock Ridge Court

 

481

 

9-14-88




Blue Ridge Court (eastbound /westbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

481

 

9-14-88




Bluebird Court (southbound)

 

South Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Bluebird Drive (facing south)

 

Meadowlark Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Bluegrass Drive (westbound)

 

Ridge Road

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Bluff Ridge Court (southbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Bluff Road (westbound)

 

Canal Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Bluff Road (westbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Bluff Street (eastbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Bluff Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Fryer Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Bluff Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Boardwalk Place (northbound)

 

Jonathon Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Boardwalk Place (eastbound)

 

Park Place Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Bridge Street (westbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Brookfield Lane (facing west)

 

Woodrush Way

 

956

 

10-20-97




Buell Street (eastbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Buell Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Fryer Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Buell Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Burr Road (eastbound)

 

Edwin Drive North

 

481

 

9-14-88




Burr Road (eastbound)

 

Edwin Drive South

 

481

 

9-14-88




Canal Road (eastbound and westbound)

 

Carrie Avenue

 

481

 

9-14-88




Canal Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Bridge Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Canal Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Front Street

 

515

 

6-5-89




Canal Street (northbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Canal Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Story Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Cardinal Drive (southbound)

 

South Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Carrie Avenue (northbound and southbound)

 

Andrew Avenue

 

820

 

10-3-94




Carrie Avenue (northbound and southbound)

 

Canal Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Carrie Avenue (northbound and southbound)

 

McClintock Road

 

732

 

10-5-92




Carrie Avenue

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Center Street (northbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Central Park (exit)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Channon Drive (southbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Channon Drive (westbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Channon Drive (eastbound and westbound)

 

Willard Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Cherokee Trail

 

Ford Road

 

700

 

3-2-92




Cherokee Trail (eastbound)

 

Potawatomie Trail

 

732

 

10-5-92




Cherokee Trail (eastbound)

 

River Trail

 

764

 

7-6-93




Cherry Street (southbound)

 

Bridge Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Chipwood Drive

 

Ford Road

 

700

 

3-2-92




Cobblestone Lane (eastbound and westbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Copper Leaf Drive
(northbound)

 

U.S. Route 6

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Cree Drive (northbound)

 

Iroquois Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Cree Drive (southbound)

 

Liberty Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Cree Drive (southbound)

 

Sioux Drive

 

764

 

7-6-93




Cree Drive (northbound and southbound)

 

Tow Path Lane

 

732

 

10-5-92




Cricket Court (facing east)

 

Fieldstone Path

 

956

 

10-20-97




Crowfoot Lane (westbound)

 

Ford Road

 

820

 

10-3-94




Cypress Road (northbound)

 

Locust Road

 

1400

 

9-19-05




Deal (northbound and southbound)

 

Canal Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Deer Path (facing west and east)

 

Steeple Run

 

999

 

10-19-98




Devon Drive

 

Patricia Lane

 

654

 

6-3-91




Donna (northbound)

 

Canal Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Dove Drive (facing east)

 

Green Heron

 

1273

 

1-20-03




Dove Drive (facing west)

 

Green Heron

 

1273

 

1-20-03




Drake Drive (westbound)

 

Plainview Drive

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Drake Drive (eastbound)

 

Ridge Road

 

1139

 

7-17-00




DuPage Drive (northbound)

 

Blackhawk Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Eastwood Court (facing south)

 

Lauren Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Eastwood Drive (northbound)

 

Highland Drive

 

764

 

7-6-93




Eastwood Drive (facing south)

 

Lauren Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Edwin Drive

 

Bluff Road

 

700

 

3-2-92




Edwin Drive (northbound and southbound)

 

Burr Road South

 

481

 

9-14-88




Edwin Drive (northbound and southbound)

 

Hummingbird Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Egret Drive (eastbound)

 

Edwin Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Egret Drive (southbound)

 

Hummingbird Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Elm Street (westbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Elsie Street (northbound)

 

Knapp Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Erin Isle (facing west)

 

Evergreen Lane

 

999

 

10-19-98




Evergreen Lane (facing north)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

999

 

10-19-98




Evergreen Lane (eastbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Essex Drive (eastbound)

 

Kent Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Fieldstone Court (facing north)

 

Tallgrass Trail

 

956

 

10-20-97




Fieldstone Path (facing north)

 

Brookfield Lane

 

956

 

10-20-97




Fieldstone Path (facing south)

 

Tallgrass Trail

 

956

 

10-20-97




Fox Creek Drive (westbound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive (north and south  junction)

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Fox Trail  (facing west)

 

Bell Road

 

999

 

10-19-98




Frances Court

 

Francis Way

 

481

 

9-14-88




Francis Way (facing north)

 

Patricia Lane

 

935

 

1-20-97




Front Street (eastbound and southbound)

 

Canal Street

 

515

 

6-5-89




Front Street (westbound)

 

Fryer Street

 

558

 

11-6-89




Frontage Road (westsouthbound and  westnorthbound)

 

Bluff Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Frontage Road (eastnorthbound and westnorthbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Frontage Road (eastsouthbound and westsouthbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Fryer Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Bridge Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Fryer Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Bluff Street

 

654

 

6-3-91




Fryer Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Front Street

 

515

 

6-5-89




Fryer Street (northbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Golden Fox Trail (westbound)

 

Hansel Road

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Goldfinch Court

 


 

481

 

9-14-88




Green Heron (northbound and southbound)

 

South Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Hansel Road (eastbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Harriet Drive

 

Patricia Lane

 

481

 

9-14-88




Hemlock Drive (eastbound and westbound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Highland Drive (facing south)

 

Kimberly Lane

 

1302

 

6-2-03




Highland Drive (westbound)

 

McKinley Woods Road

 

764

 

7-6-93




Howard Court (southbound)

 

River Trail

 

764

 

7-6-93




Hummingbird Drive (eastbound)

 

Edwin Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Hummingbird Drive (westbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

600

 

7-2-90




Illinois Drive (westbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Iroquois Drive (southbound)

 

Liberty Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Iroquois Drive (northbound and southbound)

 

Tow Path Lane

 

732

 

10-5-92




Iroquois Drive (facing south)

 

Sioux Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Ivy Lane (southbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Jacob Drive (facing north)

 

Kimberly Lane

 

1302

 

6-2-03




Jacob Drive (northbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Jessup Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Canal Street

 

481; 732

 

9-14-88




Jessup Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Fryer Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Jessup Street (eastbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Joliet Street (eastbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Joliet Street (westbound)

 

Center Street

 

732

 

10-5-92




Joliet Street (westbound)

 

Sage Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Joliet Street (eastbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Jonathon Drive (northbound)

 

McClintock Road

 

732

 

10-5-92




Jonathon Drive (southbound)

 

Route 6

 

732

 

10-5-92




Joseph Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Canal Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Junior Avenue (eastbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Justin Drive
(southbound)

 

Kimberly Lane

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Justin Drive
(northbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Justin Drive
(southbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Kathey Drive (northbound)

 

Michael Drive (south junction)

 

732

 

10-5-92




Keating Boulevard
(northbound)

 

U.S. Route 6

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Keating Boulevard (northbound and southbound)

 

Red Wing Lane

 

1596

 

11-16-09




Kent Road (northbound)

 

McClintock Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Killian Drive
(eastbound)

 

Ridge Road

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Kimberly Lane (eastbound and westbound)

 

Highland Drive

 

999

 

10-19-98




Kimberly Lane (northbound)

 

Jacob Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Knapp (eastbound and westbound)

 


 

481

 

9-14-88




Lauren Drive (facing east)

 

Kimberly Lane

 

999

 

10-19-98




Lauren Drive (facing west)

 

McKinley Woods Road

 

857

 

8-7-95




Lauren Drive (facing east and west)

 

Overland Drive

 

956

 

10-20-97




Leslie Drive (westbound)

 

Eastwood Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Leslie Drive (eastbound)

 

Highland Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Liberty Drive (facing west)

 

Navajo Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Locust Road (eastbound/westb ound)

 

Cypress Road

 

1400

 

9-19-05




Locust Drive (westbound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Lone Tree Court (westbound)

 

Mallard Drive

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Lyndsay Drive (northbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Lyndsay Drive (westbound)

 

Jacob Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Mallard Drive (eastbound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Manor Lane (northbound)

 

Route 6

 

732

 

10-5-92




Maple Street (westbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Marble Road (southbound)

 

Liberty Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




May Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Parkside Drive

 

481

 

9-14-88




McClintock (eastbound and westbound)

 

Michael Drive

 

764

 

7-6-93




McClintock (westbound)

 

Thomas Dillon Drive

 

481

 

9-14-88




McCowan (eastbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




McDonald Drive (southbound)

 

Penn Lane

 

1139

 

7-17-00




McKinley Woods Road (southbound)

 

Route 6

 

1350

 

6-7-04




McMillin Drive (eastbound)

 

Canal Road

 

820

 

10-3-94




McMillin Drive (westbound)

 

Navajo Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Meadowlark Drive (eastbound and westbound)

 

Navajo Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Meadowlark Drive (northbound)

 

Pawnee Lane

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Melissa Drive (northbound)

 

Highland Drive (south junction)

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Melissa Drive (eastbound)

 

Highland Drive (north junction)

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Michael

 

Francis Way

 

481

 

9-14-88





 


 


 





Michael Drive (southbound)

 

Francis Way

 

732

 

10-5-92




Michael Drive (southbound)

 

McClintock Road

 

732

 

10-5-92




Michael

 

Patricia Lane

 

481

 

9-14-88




Misty Meadow Drive (facing west)

 

Bell Road

 

956

 

10-20-97




Mohawk Lane (facing west)

 

Meadowlark Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Navajo Drive (facing south)

 

Sioux Drive

 

1302

 

6-2-03




Navajo Drive (facing south)

 

Sioux Drive

 

1302

 

6-2-03




Navajo Drive (facing south)

 

Towpath Lane

 

1275

 

2-17-03




Navajo Drive (facing north)

 

Towpath Lane

 

1275

 

2-17-03




North Street (eastbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




North Street (westbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Northcrest Drive

 

Ford Road

 

732

 

10-5-92




Oakridge Court (westbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Old Kerry Grove (facing west)

 

McKinley Woods Road

 

999

 

10-19-98




Old Kerry Grove
(eastbound)

 

Jacob Drive

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Old Kerry Grove
(westbound)

 

Jacob Drive

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Old Kerry Grove
(eastbound)

 

Justin Drive

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Old Kerry Grove
(westbound)

 

Justin Drive

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Old Stage Lane

 

Hansel Road

 

1497

 

8-6-07




Orchid Lane
(westbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Overland Drive (facing north and south)

 

Lauren Drive

 

956

 

10-20-97




Overland Drive (facing south)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

999

 

10-19-98




Park Place Drive

 

Jonathon Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




(eastbound and south)

 


 

857

 

8-7-95




Parkside Drive (northbound)

 

Bridge Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Patricia Lane (northbound)

 

McClintock Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Patricia Lane (northbound)

 

McClintock Road

 

732

 

10-5-92




Patricia Lane

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Pawnee Lane

 

Bluff Street

 

1142

 

8-21-00




Pawnee Lane (westbound)

 

Navajo Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Pawnee Lane (eastbound and westbound)

 

Seneca Lane

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Pheasant Lane
(northbound)

 

U.S. Route 6

 

1444

 

11-20-06




Pheasant Lane (southbound)

 

Route 6

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Plainview Drive (eastbound)

 

Bluegrass Drive

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Potawatomie Trail (northeastbound)

 

Ford Road

 

732

 

10-5-92




Peak Drive

 

Edwin Drive

 

481

 

9-14-88




Peak Drive (eastbound)

 

West Frontage Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Pine Street (westbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Pueblo Drive (southbound)

 

Liberty Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Pueblo Drive (northbound and southbound)

 

Tow Path Lane

 

732

 

10-5-92




Quail Drive (northbound)

 

Hummingbird Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Quail Drive

 

Valley Drive

 

600

 

7-2-90




Quail Drive (eastbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

1362

 

8-1-05




Rachael Drive (northbound)

 

Hansel Road

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Ravine Woods Drive (westbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Red Stable Lane (facing east)

 

Bridal Path

 

999

 

10-19-98




Red Stable Lane (facing south)

 


 

999

 

10-19-98




Red Wing Lane (eastbound)

 

Ridge Road

 

1596

 

11-16-09




Red Wing Lane (westbound)

 

Keating Boulevard

 

1596

 

11-16-09




Reed Street (facing west and east)

 

Willard Street

 

890

 

2-5-96




River Bluff Drive (northbound)

 

Highland Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




River Trail (westbound)

 

Ford Road

 

764

 

7-6-93




Riverbend Road (eastbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Rivers Plaza Drive
(northbound)

 

U.S. Route 6

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Rivers Plaza Drive
(northbound)

 

Three Gables Drive

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Riverside Drive

 

Northwest

 

956

 

10-20-97




Roberts Avenue (eastbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Robin Court (northbound and southbound)

 

Turnstone Boulevard

 

481

 

9-14-88




Rock Ridge Court (northbound and southbound)

 

Blue Ridge Court

 

481

 

9-14-88




Rock Ridge Court (northbound and southbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

481; 732

 

9-14-88




Sage Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Bluff Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Sage Street (southbound)

 

Buell Street

 

732

 

10-5-92




Sage Street (northbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




St. Elizabeth Drive

 

Tryon Street

 

1497

 

8-6-07




St. Paul Avenue

 

Channon Drive

 

1497

 

8-6-07




Sandpiper Drive (northbound)

 

South Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Sandpiper Drive (southbound)

 

Turnstone Boulevard

 

481

 

9-14-88




Saxony Drive (westbound)

 

Ridge Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Senaca Lane (northbound)

 

McMillin Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Senaca Lane (southbound)

 

Meadowlark Drive

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Senaca Lane (northbound and southbound)

 

Pawnee Lane

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Settler's Drive
(southbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Settler's Court
(northbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Shady Glen Drive (southbound)

 

U.S. Route 6

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Short Street (southeastbound)

 

Frontage Road

 

732

 

10-5-92




Sioux Drive (west and east)

 

Navajo Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




South Street (eastbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Spruce Street (westbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Spur Court (facing east)

 

Red Stable

 

999

 

10-19-98




Steve Rittof (southeastbound)

 

Moorman Avenue

 

732

 

10-5-92




Steve Rittof

 

Route 6

 

700

 

3-2-92




Story Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Canal Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Story Street (eastbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Story Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Fryer Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Story Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Tryon Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Summit Road (westbound)

 

Edwin Drive North

 

481

 

9-14-88




Summit Road (eastbound)

 

W. Frontage Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Sunset Drive  (southbound)

 

Roberts Avenue

 

481

 

9-14-88




Sussex Drive  (eastbound)

 

Kent Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Sycamore Drive (northbound)

 

Yellow Pine Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Tallgrass Court (facing south)

 

Tallgrass Trail

 

956

 

10-20-97




Tallgrass Trail (facing east)

 

Bell Road

 

956

 

10-20-97




Tallgrass Trail (facing east)

 

Woodrush Way

 

956

 

10-20-97




Teal Drive  (southbound)

 

Quail Drive

 

764

 

7-6-93




Three Gables Drive
(westbound)

 

Keating Boulevard

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Three Gables Drive
(westbound)

 

Rivers Plaza Drive

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Three Gables Drive
(eastbound)

 

Rivers Plaza Drive
(westernmost intersection)

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Three Gables Drive
(eastbound)

 

Ridge Road

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Three Gables Drive
(eastbound)

 

Rivers Plaza Drive
(easternmost intersection)

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Tonka Avenue

 

Steve Rittof  Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Tow Path Lane (eastbound)

 

Navajo Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Tree Ridge Court

 


 

481

 

9-14-88




Tree Ridge Court (southbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

764

 

7-6-93




Tryon Street (northbound)

 

Jessup

 

764

 

7-6-93




Tryon Street (southbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Tryon Street (southbound)

 

Knapp Street turn

 

481

 

9-14-88




Tryon Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Tryon Street (northbound and southbound)

 

Story Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Turnstone Boulevard (eastbound and westbound)

 

Robin Court

 

481

 

9-14-88




Turnstone Boulevard (eastbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Valley Drive  (northbound/south bound)

 

Blue Ridge Court

 

481

 

9-14-88




Valley Drive (southbound)

 

Bluff Road

 

481

 

9-14-88




Valley Drive

 

Edwin

 

481

 

9-14-88




Valley Drive (northbound/south bound)

 

Quail Drive

 

1400

 

9-19-05




Valley Drive (northbound/south bound)

 

Rock Ridge Court

 

481

 

9-14-88




Waterford Trail (northbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Wedgewood Lane (westbound)

 

Old Kerry Grove

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Westwood Court (facing north)

 

Lauren Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Westwood Drive (facing south)

 

Lauren Drive

 

857

 

8-7-95




Willard Street (southbound)

 

Center Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Willard Street (northbound)

 

Channon Drive

 

481

 

9-14-88




Willard Street

 

Joliet

 

633

 

1-7-91




Willard Street (southbound)

 

North Street

 

481

 

9-14-88




Willard Street (northbound)

 

Route 6

 

481

 

9-14-88




Winchester Drive (facing east)

 

Thomas Dillon Drive

 

1206

 

11-19-01




Winding Oak Court (westbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Winding Oak Trail (eastbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1359

 

9-20-04




Woodbriar Lane (facing south)

 

Deer Path

 

956

 

10-20-97




Woodbriar Lane (facing north)

 

Deer Path

 

956

 

10-20-97




Woodbrush Way (facing north)

 

Hansel Road

 

956

 

10-20-97




Woodbrush Way (facing south)

 

Tallgrass Trail

 

956

 

10-20-97




Woodrush Way (westbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Woodland Court (westbound)

 

McKinley Woods Road

 

764

 

7-6-93




Yellow Pine Drive (northbound)

 

Route 6

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Yellow Pine Drive (westbound)

 

Ridge Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Yellow Pine Drive
(southbound)

 

Saxony Drive

 

1444

 

11-20-06




Yellow Pine Drive (eastbound/westb ound)

 

Sycamore Road

 

1400

 

9-19-05





 



SCHEDULE III.  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



    Traffic shall yield at the following streets where indicated by yield
signs:



 


Street

 

Yields at

 

Ord. No.

 

Date






Allison Drive (eastbound)

 

Lyndsay Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Andrew Avenue (eastbound)

 

Carrie Avenue

 

732

 

10-5-92




Bayberry Court (westbound)

 

Bayberry Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Bayberry Drive (southbound)

 

Evergreen Lane

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Bayberry Drive (northbound)

 

Winding Oak Trail

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Blue Ash Court
(eastbound)

 

Justin Drive

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Bluebell Court
(westbound)

 

Justin Drive

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Bluff Street (eastbound)

 

Fryer Street

 

732

 

10-5-92




Brookside Court (northbound)

 

Mallard Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Cache Isle Circle
(eastbound)

 

Justin Drive
(northerly intersection)

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Cache Isle Circle
(eastbound)

 

Justin Drive
(southerly intersection)

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Cherokee Trail (westbound)

 

River Trail

 

732

 

10-5-92




Cobblestone Lane (eastbound)

 

Woodrush Way

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Colleen Court (westbound)

 

River Trail

 

732

 

10-5-92




Crowfoot Lane (eastbound)

 

Blackhawk Drive

 

820

 

10-3-94




Cypress Drive (northbound)

 

Locust Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Deer Creek Court (southbound)

 

Sylvan Meadow Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Dorothy Court (westbound)

 

Rachel Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Edinburg Court (northbound)

 

Wedgewood Lane

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Elsie Street (southbound and northbound)

 

McCowan Street

 

732

 

10-5-92




Fawn Lake Court (eastbound)

 

Mallard Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Forest Edge Drive (westbound)

 

Shady Glen Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Forest Edge Drive (northbound)

 

Timber Ridge Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Francis Way (southbound)

 

Patricia Lane

 

732

 

10-5-92




Golden Fox Trail  (eastbound)

 

Indian Creek Trail

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Goldfinch Court (northbound)

 

Quail Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Great Oaks Drive  (westbound)

 

Overland Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Green Heron Drive (northbound and southbound)

 

Turnstone Boulevard

 

732

 

10-5-92




Hansel Road (westbound)

 

Bell Road

 

1142

 

8-21-00




High Ridge Drive (northbound)

 

Red Wing Lane

 

1596

 

11-16-09




Highland Court (southbound)

 

Highland Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Ian Court (eastbound)

 

Lyndsay Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Joliet Street (eastbound and westbound)

 

Willard Street

 

732

 

10-5-92




Justin Drive
(northbound)

 

Orchid Lane

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Karl Avenue (eastbound and westbound)

 

Joseph Avenue

 

732

 

10-5-92




Kathey Drive (westbound)

 

Michael Drive (north junction)

 

732

 

10-5-92




Keating Boulevard (southbound)

 

Deer Hollow Lane

 

1596

 

11-16-09




Lily Lake Lane (southbound)

 

Overland Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Locust Drive (eastbound)

 

Red Oak Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Lone Tree Court (eastbound)

 

Mallard Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Lookout Point Court (westbound)

 

Arbor Lane

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Macura Street
(westbound)

 

Keating Boulevard

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Macura Street
(eastbound)

 

Rivers Plaza Drive

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Macura Street
(westbound)

 

Rivers Plaza Drive

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Magnolia Lane (facing north)

 

Erin Isle

 

999

 

10-19-98




Majestic Drive (southbound)

 

Chipwood Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Majestic Drive (northbound)

 

Northcrest Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




McKinley Woods Road (northbound)

 

Timber Ridge Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Megan Drive (eastbound)

 

Rachel Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Misty Meadow Drive (facing east)

 

Deer Path

 

956

 

10-20-97




Municipal Drive (eastbound)

 

North Illinois

 

732

 

10-5-92




Navajo Drive (northbound)

 

Iroquois Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Navajo Drive (northbound)

 

Liberty Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Old Farm Court (southbound)

 

Old Farm Trail

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Old Farm Trail (eastbound)

 

White Oak Trail

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Old Farm Trail (westbound)

 

Indian Creek Trail

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Overland Court (westbound)

 

Overland Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Park Place Drive (northbound)

 

Jonathon Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Penn Lane (eastbound)

 

Kathy Drive

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Penn Lane (westbound)

 

Park Place Drive

 

1139

 

7-17-00




Pheasant Lane
(northbound)

 

Saxony Drive

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Porto Lane
(westbound)

 

Keating Boulevard

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Porto Lane
(eastbound)

 

Rivers Plaza Drive

 

1438

 

8-21-06




Prairie Court (eastbound)

 

Westwood Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Pueblo Drive (eastbound)

 

Navajo Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Quail Drive (northbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Raintree Court (westbound)

 

Winding Oak Trail

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Red Wing Lane (eastbound and westbound)

 

Rivers Plaza Drive

 

1606

 

12-21-09




River Trail  (northbound)

 

Potawatomie Trail

 

732

 

10-5-92




Riverbend Road (westbound)

 

Cobblestone Lane

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Rivers Plaza Drive (southbound)

 

Deer Hollow Lane

 

1596

 

11-16-09




S. Willard Street
(northbound)

 

W. St. Elizabeth Drive

 

1674

 

11-21-11




S. Willard Street
(southbound)

 

W. St. Elizabeth Drive

 

1674

 

11-21-11




Samantha Court (southbound)

 

Kimberly Lane

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Sandy Knoll Drive (westbound)

 

McKinley Woods Road

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Sandy Knoll Drive (eastbound)

 

Shady Glen Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Shady Glen Drive  (northbound)

 

Timber Ridge Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Silver Stream Drive (southbound)

 

Ravine Woods Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Silver Stream Drive (eastbound)

 

Sylvan Meadow Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Squire Lane (northbound)

 

Cobblestone Lane

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Squire Lane (eastbound)

 

Woodrush Way

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Stonechase Court
(eastbound)

 

Copper Leaf Drive

 

1435

 

8-7-06




Stoney Brook Court (southbound)

 

Ravine Woods Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Sylvan Meadow Drive (southbound)

 

Ravine Woods Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Tall Tree Court (northbound)

 

Ravine Woods Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Teal Drive (eastbound)

 

Edwin Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Teal Drive

 

Quail Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




Tree Ridge Court  (northbound)

 

Valley Drive

 

732

 

10-5-92




W. St. Peters Drive
(southbound)

 

W. St. Elizabeth Drive

 

1674

 

11-21-11




W. Town Center Circle

 

S. Willard Street

 

1674

 

11-21-11




Wedgewood Lane (eastbound)

 

Waterford Trail

 

1391

 

8-1-05




White Oak Trail (southbound)

 

Wild Rose Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Wild Rose Drive (eastbound)

 

Bayberry Drive

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Wilderness Court  (southbound)

 

Arbor Lane

 

1350

 

6-7-04




Winding Oak Trail (eastbound/west bound)

 

White Oak Trail

 

1391

 

8-1-05




Winding Oak Trail (westbound)

 

Wild Rose Drive

 

1391

 

8-1-05





 



SCHEDULE IV.  SEMI TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL STREETS.



    Except for the purpose of making pick ups and deliveries, semi trucks
are prohibited on the following residential streets.



 

Street
 
Ordinance No.
 
Date


Carrie Avenue
 
1572
 
2-2-09


McDonald Drive
 
1572
 
2-2-09


Patricia Lane
 
1572
 
2-2-09


 
 



 



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking prohibited



SCHEDULE I: PARKING PROHIBITED.



   Parking shall be prohibited at all times on the following described
streets and portions of streets:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Side

 

Ord. No.

 

Date






Bluff Road

 

Adjacent to Channahon Corporate Center

 

Both

 

1886

 

3-6-17




Bluff Street

 

For a distance of 50 feet east of the intersection of Bluff and Sage Streets

 

North and South

 

901

 

6-3-96




Bluff Street

 

From the intersection of Bluff and Tryon to the intersection of Bluff and
Sage Streets

 

North and South

 

901

 

6-3-96




Bridge and Center Street (Old Route 6)

 

From the end of the DuPage River Bridge easterly and northerly to Eames
Street (New Route 6)

 

North and South

 

111

 

1-8-73




Channon Drive

 

In front of the Three Rivers Library between the appropriate signs

 

South

 

303

 

12-6-82




Channon Drive

 

From Three Rivers Library to U.S. Route 6

 

West

 

1449

 

12-4-06




Channon Drive

 

From 25154 Channon Drive to U.S. Route 6

 

East

 

1449

 

12-4-06




Eames Street  (New Route 6)

 

Between the easterly and westerly village limits

 

North and South

 

111

 

1-8-73




Evergreen Lane

 

Within the Commonwealth Edison Easement

 

East and West

 

1445

 

11-20-06




Exchange Boulevard

 

Throughout Channahon Corporate Center

 

Both

 

1886

 

3-6-17




N. Illinois Drive

 


 

Both

 

1733

 

1-21-13




McClintock Road

 

The north section west of the railroad tracks in the 4000 block

 

North

 

521

 

6-19-89




McClintock Road

 

From existing no parking zone created by Ord. 521 to the east lot line of Lot
10 in McDonald Manor Estates subdivision

 

North (westbound)

 

1649

 

5-16-11




Minooka High School

 

Hunters Crossing Subdivision as designated on Exhibit A to Ord. 1628, between
7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. when school in session, except vehicles registered
to an address on streets where parking prohibited

 


 

1628

 

9-20-10




Municipal Drive

 


 

Both

 

1733

 

1-21-13




Riverside Drive

 


 

Both

 

1733

 

1-21-13




S. St. Peters Drive

 

From W. St. Elizabeth Drive to the north line of Lot 11 in Channahon Town
Center Unit 2A

 

West

 

1673

 

11-21-11




S. Willard Street

 

From W. Channon Drive to W. St. Elizabeth Drive

 

West

 

1673

 

11-21-11




S. Willard Street

 

From W. Channon Drive to the extension on the north line of Lot 39 in
Channahon Town Center Unit 2A

 

East

 

1673

 

11-21-11




Sage Street

 

For a distance of 100 feet from the intersection of Bluff and Sage Streets

 

West

 

425

 

5-4-87




Sage Street

 

Commencing at a distance of 150 feet south of the intersection with Eames
Street to the intersection of Bluff Street

 

East

 

901

 

6-3-96




Sage Street

 

From U.S. Route 6, south to the Pioneer Path School circle drive entrance,
Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. until 3:30 p.m.

 

West

 

1590

 

8-3-09




Shady Glen Drive

 

From a point perpendicular to the southwest corner of Lot 153 in Ravine Woods
Unit 2 to U.S. Route 6

 

East  and West

 

1714

 

11-5-12




Sioux Drive

 

Commencing 160 feet east of the sidewalk at Navajo Drive, Monday through
Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

 

South

 

1558

 

11-17-08




Southwest Frontage
Access Drive

 


 

East and West

 

1525

 

2-4-08




Sunset Boulevard

 

From Roberts Avenue to Sioux Drive

 

West

 

1341

 

4-19-04




Tryon Street

 

From the intersection of Eames (U.S. Route 6) and Tryon Street to the inter
section of Tryon and Bluff Streets.

 

West

 

1011

 

12-21-98




Tryon Street

 

For a distance of 150 feet from the intersection of Tryon and Eames (U.S
Route 6) Streets.

 

East

 

1011

 

12-21-98




Tryon Street

 

For a distance of 35 feet north of the intersection of Bluff and Tryon
Streets.

 

North

 

1011

 

12-21-98




W. St. Elizabeth Drive

 

From S. Tryon Street to the east line of Lot B19 in Channahon Town Center
Unit 2A

 

South

 

1673

 

11-21-11




W. St. Elizabeth Drive

 

From S. Tryon Street to S. Willard Street

 

North

 

1673

 

11-21-11




W. Town Center Circle

 

From S. Willard Street to S. St. James Street

 

North
South

 

1673

 

11-21-11




Winchester Drive

 


 

South

 

1866

 

8-1-16




Winchester Drive

 

Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., and not to exceed four hours in
duration at other times

 

North

 

1866

 

8-1-16





 


 


 


 






 



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



         90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



         91.   ANIMALS



         92.   EMERGENCY SERVICE AND DISASTER AGENCY



         93.   HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION



         94.   RECYCLING CENTER AND PROGRAM



         95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



         96.   OVERWEIGHT AND OVER DIMENSION VEHICLE LIMITS




         97.   IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES USED IN CONNECTION WITH
DUI OFFENSES





         98.   ALARM SYSTEMS





         99.   BACKYARD CHICKEN LICENSING




CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Removal of vehicle; post-tow hearing



   90.03   Removal of vehicle; pre-tow hearing



   90.04   Conduct of hearings



   90.05   Decisions of hearing officer



   90.06   Notice of hearings



   90.07   Contents of notice



   90.08   Records search for owner



   90.09   Reports on towed vehicles



   90.10   Reclaimed vehicles; disposal of unclaimed



   90.11   Storage of motor vehicles on property



   90.12   Public nuisances



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle located on public or
private property that has not been moved or used for at least seven days, or
any motor vehicle left at any place for such a time and under such
circumstances as to cause the motor vehicle to reasonably appear to have been
abandoned.  Any unregistered motor vehicle shall be presumed to be
abandoned.  However, any unregistered motor vehicle that is operational,
used exclusively on private property, and used on a regular basis shall not
be presumed abandoned for the purposes of this chapter.



   ALLEY.  A public way within a block generally giving access to the
rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.



   HIGHWAY or STREET.  The entire width of public right-of-way of every
way publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for vehicular
traffic.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle that for a period of
seven days or more is in a state of disassembly or disrepair that renders it
incapable of being driven under its own power.  Any motor vehicle that is
unregistered shall also be presumed to be inoperable.  However, any
unregistered motor vehicle that is operational, used exclusively on private
property, and used on a regular basis shall not be presumed inoperable for
the purposes of this chapter.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  A machine propelled by power other than human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or
slides and to transport persons or property or to pull machinery, and shall
include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, buses,
recreational vehicles, tractors, motorcycles, snowmobiles, buggies, and
wagons.



   MOTOR VEHICLE OWNER.  A person who holds legal title to a motor
vehicle or a person who has registered a motor vehicle in his name with the
state.



   PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY.  Any village-owned and/or controlled property
which is used as a parking lot or facility.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  A highway, street, alley, public parking facility or
other real property owned by the village or some other governmental agency.



   UNREGISTERED.  Not currently licensed by the state; any motor vehicle
which does not display a valid Illinois license plate shall be presumed to be
unregistered.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91; Am. Ord. 1215, passed 2-18-02)



§ 90.02  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE; POST-TOW HEARING.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of division (B), a police officer is
authorized to immediately tow and impound, or have towed by a commercial
towing service to a place of safe storage:



      (1)   Any motor vehicle known to be stolen; or



      (2)   Any illegally parked, abandoned, inoperable or otherwise
unattended motor vehicle which, by its position in relation to any highway,
street, alley or public parking facility or by its physical appearance,
creates or constitutes a traffic hazard which impedes the efficient movement
of traffic, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, blocks the use of a private
driveway, obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle, is
parked in a posted tow away zone or otherwise endangers the public safety.



   (B)   The owner of any motor vehicle towed pursuant to division
(A)(2) of this section has a right to a post-tow administrative hearing as
provided herein to determine whether there was probable cause to tow and
impound the motor vehicle.  The owner must file a written demand with the
police department within five business days after the owner has been notified
that the motor vehicle was towed and impounded.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.03  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE; PRE-TOW HEARING.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, a police officer is
authorized to tow and impound, or have towed by a commercial towing service,
to a place of safe storage any illegally parked, abandoned, or inoperable
motor vehicle located on either public or private property which is not
subject to the provisions of § 90.02.



   (B)   A police officer finding an illegally parked, abandoned or
inoperable motor vehicle located on public property and not subject to §
90.02 shall affix to such motor vehicle an adhesive sticker in a conspicuous
location informing the owner that if the motor vehicle is not removed within
72 hours, it will be towed and impounded.  The contents of the notice shall
be as set forth herein in § 90.07.



   (C)   A police officer finding an illegally parked, abandoned or
inoperable motor vehicle on private property shall, upon consent of the owner
of the private property, enter the property to affix to such motor vehicle an
adhesive sticker in a conspicuous location informing the motor vehicle owner
that if the motor vehicle is not removed within seven days, it will be towed
and impounded.  The contents of such notice shall be as set forth herein in
§ 90.07.  If the owner of the private property fails or refuses to consent
to the entry onto the property for the purpose of affixing notice to the
motor vehicle, notice shall be sent to the motor vehicle owner and/or the
property owner by first class mail.  Notice sent to the person last paying
property taxes on such property shall be deemed sufficient as notice to the
property owner.



   (D)   The notice required by this section shall inform the motor
vehicle owner and property owner that they have a right to a pre-tow
administrative hearing before the Village President or the Village
President's designated hearing officer (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "hearing officer") to determine whether there is probable cause to tow and
impound the motor vehicle.  In order to secure such hearing, a written
demand, on forms so provided for such a hearing, must be filed with the
police department within 72 hours after the person has been sent notice of
the impending towing and impoundment of the motor vehicle.



   (E)   When the identity of the owner of any abandoned or inoperable
motor vehicle cannot be reasonably determined by any means provided for
herein, or when the owner of such a motor vehicle has been sent notice of the
impending towing and impoundment of the motor vehicle but has failed to file
a timely written demand for a pre-tow administrative hearing, a police
officer may impound and tow such a motor vehicle in accordance with §
90.02(A) upon the expiration of the required notice.



   (F)   Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation upon the
authority of any law enforcement officer to issue a traffic or parking
citation or for the village to pursue any other legal remedies for the
removal of any such motor vehicle.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.04  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   A pre-tow hearing or a post-tow hearing required by this
chapter shall be conducted before a hearing officer within 24 hours of
receipt of a written demand from the person seeking the hearing, unless such
person waives the right to a speedy hearing.  Saturdays, Sundays, and
village holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the 24-hour
period.



   (B)   The hearing officer shall be someone other than the person who
directed the towing and impoundment of the motor vehicle.



   (C)   The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether
there is or was probable cause to tow and impound the motor vehicle in
question.  PROBABLE CAUSE to tow and impound shall mean such a state of
facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that
there is or was a sufficient breach of local, state or federal law to grant
legal authority for the impoundment and towing of the motor vehicle or in the
case of abandoned motor vehicles located upon private property that the motor
vehicle constitutes a public nuisance under the terms of this chapter.



   (D)   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence.  The person
demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that he has the
right to possession of the motor vehicle.  The police department shall carry
the burden of establishing that there is or was probable cause to tow and
impound the motor vehicle in question.  At the conclusion of the hearing,
the hearing officer shall prepare a written decision.  A copy of such
decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and to the
registered owner of the motor vehicle (if not the person requesting the
hearing).  The decision of the hearing officer is final.  Failure of the
registered owner or person who has legal entitlement to possession of the
motor vehicle to request or attend a scheduled pre-tow or post-tow
administrative hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.05  DECISIONS OF HEARING OFFICER.



   (A)   In a pre-tow hearing required by this chapter, the hearing
officer shall only determine as to the motor vehicle in question either that
there is such probable cause to tow and impound the motor vehicle or, that
there is no such probable cause.  In the event that the hearing officer
determines that there is probable cause to tow and impound the motor vehicle,
the hearing officer shall prepare and date a Certificate of Probable Cause
which will authorize the police department to tow and impound the motor
vehicle.  In the event that the hearing officer determines that there is no
probable cause to tow and impound the motor vehicle, the hearing officer
shall prepare and date a Certificate of No Probable Cause which will prohibit
the police department from impounding and towing the motor vehicle.  Copies
of the Certificate of Probable Cause or the Certificate of No Probable Cause,
whichever is appropriate, shall be given to the police department, the motor
vehicle owner and the property owner.  The decision of the hearing officer
is final.



   (B)   In a post-tow hearing required by this chapter, the hearing
officer shall only determine as to the motor vehicle in question either that
there was probable cause to impound and tow the motor vehicle or, that there
was no such probable cause.  In the event that the hearing officer
determines that there was probable cause to impound and tow the motor
vehicle, the hearing officer shall prepare and date a Certificate of Probable
Cause, copies of which shall be given to the police department, the
commercial towing service having possession of the motor vehicle, and the
owner of the motor vehicle.  In the event that the hearing officer
determines that there is no probable cause to tow and impound the motor
vehicle, the hearing officer shall prepare and issue a Certificate of No
Probable Cause, copies of which shall be given to the above-named parties. 
Upon presentment of the Certificate of No Probable Cause to the commercial
towing service having possession of the motor vehicle by the motor vehicle
owner, the towing service shall release the motor vehicle, and the village
shall pay the towing and storage fees.  If the owner of the motor vehicle
fails to present the Certificate of No Probable Cause to the commercial
towing service having possession of the motor vehicle within 24 hours of its
receipt (excluding such days when the commercial towing service is not open
for business), the owner of the motor vehicle shall assume liability for all
subsequent storage charges.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.06  NOTICE OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   When the identity of the owner of the motor vehicle is
ascertainable by the means provided for herein, notice of the right to an
administrative hearing shall be given in the following manner:



      (1)   By leaving a copy of the notice with the owner of the
motor vehicle personally; and/or



      (2)   By sending a copy of the notice to the last known
address of the owner of the motor vehicle.



   (B)   When the identity of the owner of the motor vehicle cannot be
determined by any means provided for herein, notice of the right to a pre-tow
administrative hearing shall be given by affixing same to such motor vehicle
in the form of a conspicuously located adhesive sticker.



   (C)   It shall be presumed for purposes of this chapter that notice
sent to the last known registered owner at his or her last known address (or
any other person entitled to notice under this chapter) will be deemed
delivered within 72 hours of the sending of the notice via regular mail or
any other private delivery service.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.07  CONTENTS OF NOTICE.



   (A)   The notice of a hearing required to be given under this
chapter shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Name of the owner of the motor vehicle, if such is
available;



      (2)   Description of the motor vehicle;



      (3)   Location of the motor vehicle (before and after tow in
the case of a post-tow hearing);



      (4)   Nature of violation of law;



      (5)   Right to a pre-tow or post-tow hearing, whichever is
applicable;



      (6)   Manner in which to request a pre-tow or post-tow hearing;



      (7)   That the owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible
for the expenses of towing and storage if it is determined that there is or
was probable cause for the tow.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.08  RECORDS SEARCH FOR OWNER.



   (A)   When the identity of the owner of a motor vehicle is not known
by the police officer authorizing the towing and impoundment of the motor
vehicle, the police department will cause:



      (1)   The motor vehicle registration records of the state to
be searched by the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information; and



      (2)   The stolen motor vehicle files of the State Police and
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files to be searched by a
directed communication to the State Police for stolen or wanted information
on the motor vehicle.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.09  REPORTS ON TOWED VEHICLES.



   When a vehicle is towed and impounded under this chapter, the police
department shall maintain a record of the motor vehicle towed and
impounded.  The record shall list the color, year of manufacture,
manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body-style, motor
vehicle identification number, license plate year and number, registration
sticker year and number displayed on the motor vehicle, the date and hour of
the towing, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing, and
the name of the police officer authorizing the tow.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.10  RECLAIMED VEHICLES; DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED.



   Any time before a vehicle is sold or disposed of as provided for by
law, the owner of the motor vehicle may reclaim the motor vehicle by
presenting to the police department and the commercial towing service having
custody of the motor vehicle proof of ownership or proof of right to
possession of the motor vehicle.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



§ 90.11  STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PROPERTY.



   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle that is
unregistered shall be presumed to be abandoned.



   (B)   However, for the purposes of this chapter,  any unregistered
vehicle that is operational, used exclusively on private property, and used
on a regular basis shall not be considered abandoned.



(Ord. 1215, passed 2-18-02)



§ 90.12  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   Abandoned and inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private
property, are hereby declared to be nuisances and shall be subject to removal
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
laws or ordinances.  No person shall permit any abandoned or inoperable
vehicle to be kept or stored on the penalty of that person or any other
property.  Any abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles located on the
premises of a business lawfully engaged in the wrecking or junking of  motor
  vehicles  shall  not  be deemed  to be  a nuisance so long as the
business operation is conducted in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances.



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter for
which another penalty is not already herein provided, shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $500. 



(Ord. 654, passed 6-17-91)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Appointment of Animal Control Warden; duties



   91.03   Liability disclaimed



Licensing



   91.10   License required



   91.11   Registration fees



   91.12   Record of licenses



   91.13   Issuance of tags



   91.14   Collar or harness required; removal of tags



Control and Treatment of Animals



   91.20   Running at large; impoundment



   91.21   Notice of impoundment



   91.22   Unredeemed animals



   91.23   Animals exhibiting signs of rabies



   91.24   Report of animal bite



   91.25   Refusal to report bite



   91.26   Prevention of spread of rabies



   91.27   Guide, sentry or guard dogs



   91.28   Leash requirements



   91.29   Relinquishment



   91.30   Humane treatment



   91.31   Public nuisance



Vicious Dogs



   91.40   Definitions



   91.41   Exception



   91.42   Keeping of vicious dogs prohibited



   91.43   Sale or transfer prohibited



   91.44   Offspring of vicious dogs



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any animal, other than man, which may be affected by rabies,
including but not limited to horses, asses, mules, cattle, swine, sheep,
goats, geese, dogs and cats.



   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN.  Any person appointed by the President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees to perform such duties as
required by this chapter.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



   CONFINED.  Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his
agent, to an escape-proof building or other enclosure away from other animals
and the public. 



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



   DANGEROUS DOG.  Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled,
unleashed, or unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in
a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent
attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.



   DOG.  All members of the family Canidae. 



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



   ENCLOSURE.  A fence or structure of a least six feet in height,
forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other
measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a
vicious dog within the enclosure.  Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed
and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be
designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure.



   FOUND TO BE A VICIOUS DOG.  A dog is found to be vicious where:



      (1)   The Village Administrator, an Animal Control Officer, or
a law enforcement officer has conducted an investigation and made a finding
in writing that the dog is a vicious dog as defined above and, based on that
finding, the Village Administrator, an Animal Control Officer, or the Chief
of Police has declared in writing that the dog is a vicious dog, or



      (2)   The circuit court has found the dog to be a vicious dog
as defined above and has entered an order based on that finding.



   HAS BEEN BITTEN.  Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the
person or animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and
further includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.



   IMPOUNDED.  Taken into the custody of the public pound in the city,
town or village where the vicious dog is found.



   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.  The injection of an antirabies vaccine
approved by the Department of Agriculture of the state.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



   LICENSED VETERINARIAN.  A veterinarian licensed by the State of
Illinois engaging in the practice of veterinary medicine.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



   OWNER.  A person having a right of property in a dog or other animal,
or who keeps or harbors a dog or other animal, or who has it in his care, or
acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other domestic
animal to remain on or about any premise occupied by him.



   POUND.  Any facility approved by the Corporate Authorities for the
purpose of enforcing this chapter and used as a shelter for seized, stray,
homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs or other animals.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



   VICIOUS DOG  is defined to mean:



      (1)   Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites
or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property.



      (2)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals.



      (3)   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic
and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked
attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular
manner or with special equipment.



      (4)   Any individual dog which attacks a human being or
domestic animal without provocation.



      (5)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a
DANGEROUS DOG upon three separate occasions.



(Ord. 850, passed 6-5-95)



§ 91.02  APPOINTMENT OF ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN; DUTIES.



   The President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees
shall appoint the Animal Control Warden and any Deputy Wardens.  The
compensation for the Animal Control Warden shall be fixed by the Corporate
Authorities.  It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Warden, through
education, stray control, impoundment, quarantine and any other means deemed
necessary to control and prevent stray animals in the village.  The Animal
Control Warden and any deputies are, for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter, clothed with power of a police officer in the village and within
such village is a peace officer in the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter only, including issuance and service of citations and orders, and, as
such peace officer, has the power to make arrests on view or warrants for
violation of this chapter only and to execute and serve all warrants and
processes issued by any circuit court.  For the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter and making inspections hereunder, the Animal
Control Warden, or his duly authorized representative, or any officer of the
law may enter upon private premises to apprehend a stray dog or other animal,
a dangerous dog or other animal, a dog or other animal thought to be infected
with rabies, or to enforce any provision of this chapter, only with the
consent of the owner, lessee or agent of the premises, unless such consent
cannot be immediately secured and a clear and present danger will result to
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village if such animal
is not immediately apprehended.  If, after request therefor, the owner of
such dog or other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog or other animal to
the officer, the owner shall be in violation of this chapter.  However, such
Animal Control Warden is prohibited from carrying concealed weapons.  The
village police officers shall cooperate with the Animal Control Warden in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.03  LIABILITY DISCLAIMED.



   Any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall
not be held responsible for any accident or property damages which may occur
while in the process of enforcing any provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



LICENSING



§ 91.10  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Every person who is an owner of any dog or cat in the village shall
register the dog or cat annually with the village on an application provided
by the Village Clerk for that purpose.  All licenses shall expire on January
31 in each year following the issuance of the license.  Such application
shall contain a statement of the name, breed, color and sex of each dog and
cat, the address at which such dog or cat  shall be kept and a certification
of the applicant that the dog or cat has been inoculated for rabies
prevention within the past 12 months, setting forth the name of the licensed
veterinarian who administered the inoculation and the date of the
inoculation.  All licenses shall be nontransferable.



(Ord. 849, passed 6-5-95)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.11  REGISTRATION FEES.



   (A)   There will not be any annual license fee for each dog and/or
cat registered prior to January 31st of each year.  If the animal is not
registered prior to January 31st, the annual fee shall be $7.  Licenses
issued for dogs/cats, which are acquired or moved into the village after
January 31st of each year will be no charge provided that the owner has
registered the animal within 30 days of occupancy.  If the animal is not
registered within the 30 days of occupancy, the animal fee will be $7.



   (B)   Provided, however, that all fees set forth in this paragraph
shall be reduced by 50% for dogs and cats whose owner is aged 65 or more and
for dogs which are specifically trained and function to assist handicapped
individuals, including but not limited to "seeing eye dogs."



(Ord. 849, passed 6-5-95; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 12-4-00)



§ 91.12  RECORD OF LICENSES.



   The Village Clerk shall keep a complete list of all licenses issued to
the owners of dogs and cats in the village.  The list shall include the name
and address of the owner, the name, breed, color and sex of the dog or cat
and the number of the license tag.



(Ord. 849, passed 6-5-95)



§ 91.13  ISSUANCE OF TAGS.



   The Village Clerk shall furnish to any person in compliance with §
91.10 a metal license tag with the year for which the registration is
effected.



(Ord. 849, passed 6-5-95; Am. Ord. 1159, passed 12-4-00)



§ 91.14  COLLAR OR HARNESS REQUIRED; REMOVAL OF TAGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor any dog or cat
which is not within a completely enclosed structure or fenced yard in the
village unless the dog or cat has a collar or harness upon which a current
license tag is firmly affixed.  This provision shall not apply during the
first 30 days in the village after a dog or cat initially comes into
ownership or possession.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an owner of a
dog or cat, Animal Control Warden or a licensed veterinarian to remove a
license tag from the collar or harness of a dog or cat.



(Ord. 849, passed 6-5-95)  Penalty, see § 91.99



CONTROL AND TREATMENT OF ANIMALS



§ 91.20  RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any animal or dog found running at large contrary to provisions of this
chapter shall be apprehended and impounded.  For this purpose, the Animal
Control Warden shall utilize any existing or available public or private
pound.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.21  NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   When animals or dogs are apprehended and impounded by the
Animal Control Warden, he shall give notice within 48 hours of apprehension
and impoundment to the owner, if known.  Such notice shall either be mailed
to the last known address of the owner, posted at the address of the owner
listed on the license application, delivered personally or given
telephonically.  An affidavit or the testimony of the Animal Control Warden,
or his duly authorized agent, who mails, posts, delivers or gives such notice
shall be prima facie evidence of the receipt of such notice by the owner of
such animal or dog.  In case the owner of any impounded animal or dog
desires to make redemption thereof, he must satisfy the following conditions
in order for his animal or dog to be returned:



      (1)   He must present proof of current rabies inoculation and
registration, if applicable; or



      (2)   He must pay for the rabies inoculation of the animal or
dog, and registration, if applicable; and



      (3)   He must present current proof of a village license; and



      (4)   He must pay the pound for the board of the animal or dog
for the period it was impounded; and



      (5)   He must pay to the village $10 as an apprehension charge.



   (B)   These payments shall be in addition to any other penalties
which may be invoked under this chapter.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.22  UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.



   When not redeemed by the owner within five days following the giving of
the 48-hour notice required by § 91.21 herein, an animal or dog which has
been impounded for failure to be inoculated and licensed, if applicable, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, may be humanely dispatched,
offered for adoption or otherwise disposed of by the pound as a stray animal
or dog in accordance with law that exists or may hereafter exist.  This
chapter shall not prevent humane societies from engaging in activities set
forth by their charters provided, however, they are not inconsistent with
provisions of this chapter and other existing laws.  Any person purchasing
or adopting such animal or dog, with or without charge or donation, must pay
for the rabies inoculation of such animal or dog and license fee, if
applicable.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.23  ANIMALS EXHIBITING SIGNS OF RABIES.



   The owner of any dog or other animal which exhibits clinical signs of
rabies, whether or not such dog or other animal has been inoculated against
rabies, shall immediately notify the Animal Control Warden and shall promptly
confine such dog or other animal, or have it confined, under suitable
observation, for a period of at least ten days, unless officially authorized
by the Animal Control Warden, in writing, to release it sooner.  Any dog or
other animal in direct contact with such dog or other animal, whether or not
the exposed dog or other animal has been inoculated against rabies, may also
be confined as recommended by the Animal Control Warden.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.24  REPORT OF ANIMAL BITE.



   When the Animal Control Warden receives information that any person has
been bitten by a dog or other animal, the Animal Control Warden, or his duly
authorized representative, shall have such dog or other animal confined under
the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days.  Such
veterinarian shall report the clinical condition of the dog or other animal
immediately, with confirmation in writing to the Animal Control Warden,
within 24 hours after the dog or other animal is presented for examination. 
The veterinarian shall give the owner's name, address, the date of
confinement, the breed, description, age and sex of such dog or other animal
on appropriate forms approved by the village.  The Animal Control Warden
shall notify the attending physician or responsible health agency.  At the
end of the confinement period, the veterinarian shall submit a written report
to the Animal Control Warden advising him of the final disposition of such
dog or other animal on appropriate forms approved by the village.  When
evidence is presented that such dog or other animal was inoculated against
rabies within the time prescribed by law, it may be confined in the house of
its owner, or in a manner which will prohibit it from biting any person, for
a period of ten days, if the Animal Control Warden, or other licensed
veterinarian, adjudges such confinement necessary.  The Animal Control
Warden may, by regulation, permit such confinement to be reduced to a period
of less than ten days.  At the end of the confinement period, such dog or
other animal shall be examined by the Animal Control Warden or another
licensed veterinarian.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.25  REFUSAL TO REPORT BITE.



   It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been
bitten by a dog or other animal to refuse to notify the Animal Control Warden
promptly.  It is unlawful for the owner of such dog or other animal to
euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of any such dog or other
animal known to have bitten a person, until it is released by the Animal
Control Warden, or his authorized representative.  It is unlawful for the
owner of such dog or other animal to refuse or fail to comply with the
written or printed instructions made by the Animal Control Warden, or his
authorized representative.  If such instructions cannot be delivered in
person, they shall be mailed to the owner of such dog or other animal by
regular mail, postage prepaid.  The affidavit or testimony of the Animal
Control Warden, or his authorized representative, delivering or mailing such
instructions is prima facie evidence that the owner of such dog or such other
animal was notified of his responsibilities.  Any expense incurred in the
handling of any dog or other animal under this chapter shall be borne by the
owner.  For the purpose herein, IMMEDIATELY means by telephone, in person,
or by other than use of the mail.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.26  PREVENTION OF SPREAD OF RABIES.



   (A)   Whenever a case of rabies has occurred in the village, or when
the proper officials of the village are apprehensive of the spread of rabies,
the Animal Control Warden shall act to prevent its spread among dogs and
other animals.  The Animal Control Warden may order:



      (1)   That all dogs or other animals in the village be:



         (a)   Kept confined within an enclosure, or



         (b)   Kept muzzled and restrained by leash.



      (2)   That all owners or keepers of dogs or other animals take
prophylactic measures as they deem necessary to prevent the spread of rabies.



      (3)   Other measures as may be necessary to control the spread
of rabies.



   (B)   The Animal Control Warden may determine the area of the
village in which, and the period of time during which, such orders shall be
effective.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.27  GUIDE, SENTRY OR GUARD DOGS.



   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped and sentry, guard or police-owned dogs are exempt from
this chapter; provided, no attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog
is performing duties as expected.  To qualify for exemption under this
chapter, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in
accordance with this chapter.  It shall be the duty of the owner of such
exempted dog to notify the Animal Control Warden of change of addresses.  In
the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the Animal Control
Warden advised of the location where such dog will be stationed.  The Animal
Control Warden shall provide the Police and Fire Departments with a
categorized list of such exempted dogs and shall promptly notify such
Departments of any address changes reported to him.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.28  LEASH REQUIREMENTS.



   The owner of any dog or other animal is deemed to have violated this
chapter whenever any such dog or other animal is outside the premises of its
owner and not under control by a leash or other similar instrumentality.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85; Am. Ord. 613, passed 10-24-90)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.29  RELINQUISHMENT.



   In the event an owner desires to relinquish or dispose of a dog or
other animal, the Animal Control Warden may do so upon receipt of a signed
authorization and release form and a donation of $10.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



§ 91.30  HUMANE TREATMENT.



   (A)   Each owner shall provide for each of his dogs and animals:



      (1)   Sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food and
water;



      (2)   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather and
unsanitary conditions;



      (3)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and



      (4)   Humane care and treatment.



   (B)   Any dog or animal that appears to be showing signs of neglect
in treatment shall be promptly examined by a licensed veterinarian and a
report made within 24 hours to the Animal Control Warden of the condition of
such dog or animal and any corrective measures to be taken.



   (C)   No person may own, capture, breed, trade or lease any dog or
animal or conduct in any manner or assist or patronize in any activity
involving a fight between two or more dogs or animals or the intentional
killing of any dog or animal for the purpose of wagering or entertainment.



   (D)   No person may knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any dog
or any other animal.



   (E)   No person or owner may beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse any dog or animal.  No owner may abandon any dog
or animal where it may become a public charge or where the dog or animal may
suffer injury, hunger or exposure.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.31  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any dog or animal
to be a public nuisance defined as allowing said dogs or animals to:



      (1)   Defecate in any public or private place or on the lawn
of any person without immediately removing such matter;



      (2)   Disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day
or night;



      (3)   Enter any public or private place of business during
business hours;



      (4)   Threaten to attack without probable cause;



      (5)   Destroy any property without making restitution; or



      (6)   Interfere with, or be detrimental to, the general
welfare of the public or property rights of other persons.



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)  Penalty, see § 91.99



VICIOUS DOGS



§ 91.40  DEFINITION.



   (A)   A vicious dog is defined as follows:



      (1)   Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites
or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property.



      (2)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals.



      (3)   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic
and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked
attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular
manner or with special equipment.



      (4)   Any individual dog which attacks a human being or
domestic animal without provocation.



      (5)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a
DANGEROUS DOG upon three separate occasions.



   (B)   Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is
specific as to breed.



   (C)   If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be
subject to enclosure.



(Ord. 850, passed 6-5-95)



Cross-reference:



   For more definitions, see § 91.01



§ 91.41  EXCEPTION.



   No dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement
or guard duties. 



(Ord. 850, passed 6-5-95)



§ 91.42  KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any
dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times
kept in an enclosure.  The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out
of the enclosure are:



      (1)   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care for the dog, or



      (2)   To comply with the order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a
chain having a tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in
length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or
keeper of the dog.



   (B)   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is
not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded and shall be turned over to a
licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection.  The owner of
such vicious dog, if ascertainable, shall be notified by first class mail of
such impoundment.



   (C)   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order
to the circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within
seven working days of the date of mailing such notice, the dog may be
humanely dispatched.  A dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be released
to the owner until the Animal Control Officer approves the enclosure as
defined in this chapter.



   (D)   In addition to any fines and/or penalties imposed  under this
chapter, the owner of any vicious dog subject to impoundment and destruction
may be responsible for all costs associated with the impoundment and
destruction of the dog as set out herein.



      (1)   If the owner does not appeal the impoundment order or
the impoundment is upheld by the circuit court following an appeal, the owner
shall be responsible for all costs as defined in division (D)(3).



      (2)   If the owner appeals the impoundment order and the
impoundment is vacated by the circuit court, the owner shall not be liable
for said costs.



      (3)   For the purposes of this section, COSTS shall include,
but are not limited to, reasonable boarding fees, food costs, necessary
veterinary care during the term of impoundment and destruction of the vicious
dog.



(Ord. 850, passed 6-5-95; Am. Ord. 1349, passed 6-8-04)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.43  SALE OR TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog.



(Ord. 850, passed 6-5-95)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.44  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by
permitting any dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises of its
owner when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.



   (B)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for
persons with disabilities, and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are exempt
from this chapter; provided, an attack or injury to person occurs while the
dog is performing duties as expected.  To qualify for exemption under this
chapter, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies.  It
shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the village of
changes of address.  In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner of such
exempted dog shall keep the village advised of the location where such dog
will be stationed.  The village shall provide police and fire departments
with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify such
departments of any address changes reported to him.



(Ord. 850, passed 6-5-95)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person violating any provisions of §§ 91.01
through 91.31 shall be punished by a fine as follows for each violation:



      First violation     $25



      Second violation    $30



      Third violation    $60



      Fourth violation    $250



      (2)   Each day such violation exists shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. 



(Ord. 399, passed 9-9-85)



   (B)   Any person found to have violated § 91.40 through 91.44 shall
be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for every offense; any day upon
which an offense occurs shall be considered a separate violation.



(Ord. 850, passed 6-5-95)



CHAPTER 92:  EMERGENCY SERVICE AND DISASTER AGENCY



Section



   92.01   Establishment



   92.02   Coordinator



   92.03   Functions



   92.04   Service as a mobile support team



   92.05   Mutual aid agreements



   92.06   Emergency action



   92.07   Compensation



   92.08   Reimbursement by state



   92.09   Purchase and expenditures



   92.10   Oath



   92.11   Office space



   92.12   Fund created; commingling prohibited



   92.13   Local emergency plan



   92.14   Liability disclaimed



§ 92.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Channahon Emergency Service and
Disaster Agency (ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other
hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in accordance with "The
Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975."



   (B)   This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional
members as may be selected by the coordinator.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.02  COORDINATOR.



   (A)   The coordinator of the Channahon ESDA shall be appointed
annually by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to
the direction and control of the Village President and the Board of Trustees
as provided by statute.



   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve as the coordinator, the Village President or any person designated
by him shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.03  FUNCTIONS.



   (A)   The Channahon ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within
the village as shall be prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program
prepared by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties
outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid
agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or
quasi-municipality entered into as provided by "The State Emergency Services
and Disaster Agency Act of 1975".



   (B)   The Channahon ESDA shall also, when called upon by the Village
President, take whatever steps that can be taken to prevent, minimize, repair
and alleviate injury or damage resulting from any explosion, accident or
other event of a disastrous extent in the municipality in addition to
rendering such service in the event of disaster due to natural causes,
hostile action or explosion of bombs or missiles.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.04  SERVICE AS A MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.



   (A)   All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the
State ESDA as provided by law.



   (B)   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by
the coordinator of the Channahon ESDA organization.



   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee
or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State
Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights
and immunities incident to such employment or office.  Any such member who
is not a paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall
receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.05  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The coordinator of the Channahon ESDA may negotiate mutual aid
agreements with other villages or political subdivisions of the state, but no
such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village
President and the Board of Trustees and by the State Director of ESDA.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.06  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
Channahon ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor
in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.07  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Channahon ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the
village, if called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive
for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to
the position held; members who are not such village employees or officers
shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established
by the Village President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.08  REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.



   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund
any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to
training members of the Channahon ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of
ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support
team while serving outside the village in response to a call by the Governor
or State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement
made by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.09  PURCHASE AND EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   The Village President and the Board of Trustees may, on
recommendation of the village coordinator of the Channahon ESDA, authorize
any purchase of contracts necessary to place the village in a position to
combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear
or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the village
coordinator of the Channahon ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the village to
procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary
for such purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory
procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village
contracts or obligations, as authorized by "The State Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency Act of 1975", provided that if the Village President and
Board of Trustees meet at such time he shall act subject to the directions
and restrictions imposed by that body.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.10  OATH.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator:



   “I,                                   , do solemnly
swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of
the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities
thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose
of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon
which I am about to enter.  And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I
am affiliated with the Channahon ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence."



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.11  OFFICE SPACE.



   The Village President and Board of Trustees are authorized to designate
space in a village building, or elsewhere, as may be provided, for the office
of the Channahon ESDA.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.12  FUND CREATED; COMMINGLING PROHIBITED.



   All sums of money appropriated or designated for use by the Channahon
ESDA shall be deposited in an account held separate and solely for ESDA and
the account shall be so designated.  No other money held by the village
shall be hereafter commingled with the ESDA funds.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.13  LOCAL EMERGENCY PLAN.



   The village shall prepare and keep current a local disaster emergency
plan for the area.  The Channahon ESDA director shall prepare and distribute
to all appropriate officials in written form a clear and complete statement
of the emergency responsibilities of all local departments and officials and
of the disaster chain of command.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



§ 92.14  LIABILITY DISCLAIMED.



   Neither the state, any municipal corporation of the state, including
the village, any political subdivision of the state, nor, except in cases of
negligence or willful misconduct, the Governor, the Director, other agencies,
or the agents, employees or representatives of any of them, engaged in any
emergency services and disaster operations or disaster activities, while
complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter is liable for the death of or
any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of such activity. 
This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to receive
benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this chapter under the
Worker's Compensation Act or the Worker's Occupation Diseases Act, or under
any pension law, and this section does not affect the right of any such
person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



(Ord. 229, passed 9-24-79)



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION



Section



General Safety and Sanitation Regulations



   93.01   Outdoor burning prohibited; exceptions



   93.02   Dumping of refuse prohibited



   93.03   Removal of unused gasoline storage tanks



Nuisances



   93.10   Conditions declared to be a nuisance



   93.11   Abatement



Weeds



   93.20   Definitions



   93.21   Weeds and grasses to be removed



   93.22   Notice of removal



   93.23   Removal by village



   93.24   Lien



   93.25   Foreclosure of lien



   93.26   Payment and release of lien



   93.27   Other remedies



 



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-Reference:



   Lawn grass, see §§ 151.02(D), 152.03(C)



GENERAL SAFETY AND SANITATION REGULATIONS



§ 93.01  OUTDOOR BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person may burn any material whatever outdoors, except as
stated in division (B).



   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit
the burning of usual fuels in any furnace, fireplace or other heating unit or
plant situated within  any  building for the purpose of supplying  heat
for such building, nor shall anything herein contained be deemed to prohibit
the burning of leaves and limbs, outdoor cooking, food preparation and
controlled recreational bonfires.



(Ord. 243, passed 10-13-80)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  DUMPING OF REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this section to dump any type of refuse
along any public highway, street, alleyway, village right-of-way or any
public property.



(Ord. 243, passed 10-13-80)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  REMOVAL OF UNUSED GASOLINE STORAGE TANKS.



   The rules and regulations adopted by the Office of the State Fire
Marshal regarding the removal of underground and aboveground storage tanks,
as stated in 41 Illinois Administrative Code Ch. 1, be and the same are
hereby adopted by reference and are incorporated herein as if fully set forth
in this section.



(Ord. 660, passed 7-1-91)



NUISANCES



§ 93.10  CONDITIONS DECLARED TO BE A NUISANCE.



   (A)   Prohibitions.  It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any
person within the boundaries of the village or within any other area
designated herein to engage in the conduct set forth in this section or
permit any of the conditions hereinafter described to exist.



   (B)   Maintaining unwholesome business.  To establish, maintain and
carry on any offensive or unwholesome business within the limits of the
village and within one mile of the limits thereof.



   (C)   Packing houses and similar establishments.  To locate and
carry on any packing house, rendering establishment, tallow candlery, glue
and bone factory, soap factory and tannery within the limits of the village
and within one mile of the limits thereof.



   (D)   Air pollution.  To allow or permit any dense smoke, flue ash
or soot to come or be emitted from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or
other agency within the limits of the village and within one mile of the
limits thereof.



   (E)   Offensive odors.  To erect, continue or use any business,
building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or
manufacture which, by occasion of noxious exhalations, offensive smells or
otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or the
public.



   (F)   Noisy businesses.  To use any building or permit the use of
the building or rent the building to be used for any business or employment,
or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, from its
noise or boisterous nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood
in which such building or premises is situated or be dangerous or detrimental
to health.



   (G)   Watercourse obstruction.  To obstruct or pollute any
watercourse, ravine or gutter so as to cause water to stagnate therein, or to
permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any premises.



   (H)   Throwing offal in watercourse.  To throw or deposit or cause
to be thrown or deposited, any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any animal, in any watercourse, pond, spring or well, within the
limits of the village.  For purposes of this section the term "pond" shall
be considered to mean any exposed surface of water not less than 100 square
feet in area which has accumulated either by natural or artificial means, in
any depression or connected series of depressions of excavation, whether
existing naturally or created artificially.



   (I)   Slaughterhouse.  To slaughter or kill any cattle, hogs or
sheep or keep, maintain, or use in the village any house or place in which
the business of slaughtering any of said animals may be carried on.



   (J)   Offensive animal pens.  To own, use or keep any yard, pen,
place, railroad car or premises, in or upon  which cattle or other animals
shall  be  confined or kept, so as to be offensive to those residing in the
vicinity.



   (K)   Collection and deposit of offensive matter.  To cause or
suffer the carcass of any animal or vegetable matter, slops, refuse, swill,
suds, garbage, filth, stable drippings or offal, or noisome substance of any
kind, to be collected or deposited or to remain in any place in the
village.  Such refuse must be buried at least two feet below the surface of
the ground or burned in properly constructed incinerators or otherwise
properly eliminated.



   (L)   Maintaining unsightly yard.  To permit or maintain an
unsightly yard or premise where there is an accumulation or deposit of any
vehicle, equipment, material of any nature, waste or earth.



   (M)   Buildings dangerous to health.  To permit any building
structure or place to remain in such condition as to be dangerous to the
public health in any way.



   (N)   Keeping premises in filthy condition.  To keep or suffer to
be kept in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy condition, any chicken coop,
cow house, stable, cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any
premises belonging to or occupied by the owner, or any railroad car,
building, yard, grounds and premises belonging to or occupied by him.



   (O)   Brewery.  To locate, erect or maintain any brewery or
distillery.



   (P)   Peddlers and hawkers.  To enter into or go upon any private
residence in the village for the purpose of peddling or selling without
having first been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners or
occupant or occupants of the private residence.



   (Q)   Corrupting drinking water.  To corrupt or render unwholesome
or injure the water of any drinking hydrant, spring, stream, pond or lake.



   (R)   Combustible matter.  To cause or suffer grass, leaves,
underbrush or other combustible matter to be collected, deposited or to
remain on his premises in such quantities and condition so as to materially
increase the danger to property of others from fires.



   (S)   Obstructing highways.  To obstruct or encroach upon public
highways, private ways, streets, alleys and commons.



   (T)   Acts which endanger public health.  To commit  or  do  any
act  which  endangers  the  public health or results in annoyance or
discomfort to the public, whether such act is permitted or maintained on
private or public property.



   (U)   Common law and statutory nuisances.  To commit any offense
which is a nuisance according to the common law or made such by the statutes
of the state and not specifically enumerated by this section.



   (V)   Nuisance weeds.  The planting, or lack of maintaining, of any
weeds defined by this Code of Ordinances is strictly prohibited due to
pollution and a menace to health, as is any other weed or noxious weed as
defined by the Illinois Administrative Code.



(Ord. 214, passed 5-7-79; Am. Ord. 1650, passed 5-16-11)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.11  ABATEMENT.



   Whenever any nuisance exists or shall be found on any premises within
the village, whether such nuisance is one specifically recognized by
ordinance or not, the President is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to
cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as he may direct and at
the expense of the party permitting or maintaining said nuisance.



(Ord. 214, passed 5-7-79)



WEEDS



§ 93.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER.  The legal owner, his agent, tenant, lessee, trustee, deed
purchaser under contract, land trust beneficiary or mortgagee in possession,
whether a natural person, the beneficiary of an equitable owner, corporation,
firm, company, association or partnership.



   PURPOSEFUL GARDEN or PLANTING BED. An area distinguished from common
lawn grasses by a maintained, delineating border.



   WEEDS.  To include, but not limited to, common burdock, giant ragweed,
common ragweed, thistles, common dandelion, perennial sow thistles, Canada
thistles and all its varieties, European bentwood, leafy spurge, Russian
knapwood, Johnson grass, yellow, foxtail, giant foxtail, ragweed, garlic
mustard, reed canarygrass, purple strife, common reed, buckthorn,
cockleburrs, jimson, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter,
wild lettuce, poison oak, poison sumac, bindweed, leafy spurge, knapweed,
hoary cress, any other wild, uncultivated or uncontrolled growth of
vegetation and any weeds determined to be noxious weeds by the Director of
the Department of Agriculture of the State of Illinois or defined by the
Illinois Administrative Code.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 900, passed 5-20-96; Am. Ord. 1650,
passed 5-16-11)



§ 93.21  WEEDS AND GRASSES TO BE REMOVED.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner of real
property within the village to permit any weeds, grass or plants to grow to a
height exceeding eight inches on improved property and 12 inches in height on
unimproved property. Soil stockpiles are determined to be unimproved property
for the purpose of this section. Any such plants or weeds exceeding such
height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. Landscaping including trees,
shrubs, ornamental vegetation (such as annual/perennial flowers and perennial
grasses) grown for aesthetic qualities in a purposeful garden or planting bed
can exceed the above requirements. In addition, vegetation height limitations
will not be applied to natural areas including all wetlands, native prairie
remnants, restoration areas, wetland mitigation areas, forest preserved
areas, preservation areas, and the like.



   (B)   No person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot
of real estate within the village shall permit the growth of noxious weeds
thereon, as defined by this Code of Ordinances, the Illinois Administrative
Code and the Department of Agriculture of the State of Illinois. All weeds
shall be pulled or otherwise destroyed by the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant
or person in control of real estate in the village. Failure to destroy such
weeds within the designated period shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 900, passed 5-20-96; Am. Ord. 1650,
passed 5-16-11; Am. Ord. 1868, passed 9-6-16)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.22  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of  Development to serve
or cause to be served annually a notice upon the owner of any vacant premises
that if weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions
of § 93.21, the Director of Development may cause the weeds or plants to be
cut without further notice.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Development to serve
or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any improved
premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the
provisions of § 93.21 and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten
days.  If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten days,
the Director of Development may cause the weeds or plants to be cut without
further notice.



   (C)   All notices provided for by this section shall be in writing
and delivered either by personal delivery  or by the mailing of the notice
in the United States mail with adequate prepaid postage thereunto affixed,
via registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to either the
last known address of the person or persons entitled thereto or to the
address of said owner or assessee as listed by the County Tax Assessor.  The
notice shall be deemed to be received either on the date of the actual
personal delivery to the person entitled thereto or on the date of its
mailing, if mailed in accordance herewith.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 900, passed 5-20-96)



§ 93.23  REMOVAL BY VILLAGE.



   If the owner or occupant of improved premises does not cut and remove
the weeds or plants within the ten-day period, the Director of Development
may proceed to have the weeds cut and removed at the expense of the village
with the cutting and removal charges and expenses charged to and paid by the
owner.  The Director of Development may have weeds cut and removed on
unimproved premises at any time when a violation exists at the expense of the
village with the cutting and removal charges and expenses charged to and paid
by the owner.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 900, passed 5-20-96)



§ 93.24  LIEN.



   Charges for weed cutting shall be a lien upon the real property. 
Whenever a bill for weed cutting remains unpaid, the Village Clerk, or the
person performing the service by authority of the village, shall file with
the County Recorder of Deeds within 60 days after the expense is incurred a
notice of lien in the name of the village or in the name of the person
performing the service.  The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting forth the legal description of the real property and a
common address sufficient for identification thereof; the amount of the cost
and expense incurred or payable for the removal of the weeds; and the date or
dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village.  The failure
of the Village Clerk to mail the lien notice or record the notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien, as provided for in the following section.  Expenses
shall include but not be limited to the expenses of the cutting and removal,
service and filing expenses and reasonable attorney's fees.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83)



§ 93.25  FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.



   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be
sold for nonpayment of said charges and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens.  Such foreclosure shall be by a bill in
equity in the name of the village within two  years of the date of the
cutting and removal of the weeds.  The Village Attorney shall hereby be
authorized and directed, following approval of the Corporate Authorities, to
institute such proceedings in the name of the village against any owner for
which a bill for weed cutting has remained unpaid for a period of 60 days
after the expense has been incurred in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters.  The owner shall also be required to pay any and all costs and
expenses of the village for the foreclosure of the lien including, but not
limited to, reasonable attorney's fees.  In addition to foreclosure of the
lien, the village may institute any necessary proceedings in any court of law
to recover from the owner the costs and expenses of the village in cutting
and removing the weeds, including but not limited to reasonable attorney's
fees.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83)



§ 93.26  PAYMENT AND RELEASE OF LIEN.



   Upon payment of all of the expenses of the village, the lien shall be
released by the village in the same manner as the filing of the lien.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83)



§ 93.27  OTHER REMEDIES.



   The provisions of this subchapter are not exclusive and the village
expressly reserves all other remedies, whether by ordinance, statute or
common law, which may be used to effect the intent of this subchapter.



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   All persons acting in violation of the provisions of §§
93.01 or 93.02 shall be fined not less than $25 for each violation.  A
separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which
a violation occurs or continues. 



(Ord. 243, passed 10-13-80)



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of § 93.10 shall
be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which a violation
occurs or continues. 



(Ord. 214, passed 5-7-79)



   (C)   Any owner violating any provision of §§ 93.20 through 93.27
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
such offense continues unabated after ten days from the service of the
notice. 



(Ord. 330, passed 11-7-83)



CHAPTER 94:  RECYCLING PROGRAM



Section



   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Recycling program established



   94.03   Disposal of municipal waste prohibited



   94.04   Recycling containers



   94.05   Separation of recyclables and placement for recyclables
removal



   94.06   Mandatory recycling



   94.07   Collection by unauthorized persons



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MUNICIPAL WASTE.  Garbage, general household and commercial waste,
landscape waste and construction or demolition debris. 



(Ord. 661, passed 7-1-91)



   RECYCLABLES.  Material having an economic value in the secondary
materials market, acceptable for collection by the village's recycling
contractor, which currently include glass containers (three color), aluminum
and bimetal beverages cans, steel and tin food cans, HDPE #2 plastic milk and
water jugs, HDPE #2 colored laundry bottles, PET #1 beverage bottles, and all
newspapers.  Additional items shall be added to the program in the future
which are mutually agreed upon between the village and Banner Western
Disposal Service. 



(Ord. 715, passed 6-15-92)



§ 94.02  RECYCLING PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a recycling program for the mandatory
separating of recyclables from garbage and rubbish for residents in the
village.



(Ord. 715, passed 6-15-92)



§ 94.03  DISPOSAL OF MUNICIPAL WASTE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this section to abandon, dump or deposit any
type of municipal waste at the Channahon Township recycling center.



(Ord. 661, passed 7-1-91)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  RECYCLING CONTAINERS.



   All residents shall use village approved and issued recycling
containers in conjunction with the village's recycling program.  After
initial distribution of containers to village residents, replacement
containers will be available for rental by residents from the village upon
such terms and conditions as are from time to time established by the Village
Administrator.



(Ord. 715, passed 6-15-92)



§ 94.05  SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES AND PLACEMENT FOR RECYCLABLES REMOVAL.



   All products the village designates as recyclable shall be prepared and
separated from all other refuse by residents and placed in village approved
and issued containers, as required and shall be collected by the village
curbside recycling contractor.  Recyclables shall be placed in recycling
containers at curbside to be collected at times designated by the village.



(Ord. 715, passed 6-15-92)



§ 94.06  MANDATORY RECYCLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, for collection, removal
or disposal, any residential, household or solid waste, refuse or garbage
which also contains recyclable materials.



(Ord. 715, passed 6-15-92)



§ 94.07  COLLECTION BY AUTHORIZED PERSONS.



   From time of placement of acceptable recyclables at the curb from
collection in accordance with the terms hereof, the acceptable recyclables,
as defined in § 94.01, shall be and become the property of the village's
curbside recycling contractor.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any person authorized by the village to collect or pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any such items.  Any and each such collection in
violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as set forth in § 94.99.



(Ord. 715, passed 6-15-92)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   All persons found to have violated any provision of § 94.03
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each violation.  A
separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which
a violation occurs or continues. 



(Ord. 661, passed 7-1-91)



   (B)   Any person(s) who violates §§ 94.04 through 94.07 is subject
to the penalties set out as follows:



      (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$500.



      (2)   The penalties prescribed in this section are in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other rights, remedies and penalties which the
village may otherwise seek to impose and may be available at law or in
equity. 



(Ord. 715, passed 6-15-92)



CHAPTER 95:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Drainage Culverts



   95.01   Obstruction of drainage ditches



   95.02   Drainage culvert permit required



   95.03   Permit fee



   95.04   Application for permit



   95.05   Inspection of culverts



Excavation



   95.10   Permit required



   95.11   Application; fee



   95.12   Review by Village Engineer



   95.13   Approval or rejection of application; issuance of permit



   95.14   Excavation requirements



   95.15   Restoration; inspection



House Number System



   95.20   Definition



   95.21   Numbering of houses



   95.22   Annexed territory to conform



   95.23   Removing or defacing numbers



Deposition of Snow or Slush



   95.35   Deposition of snow or slush upon public streets prohibited



Mailboxes and Other Structures



   95.45   Installation



   95.46   Mounting posts



   95.47   Damage to mailbox through direct contact with village
vehicles



   95.48   Damage to mailbox by snow discharge



   95.49   Structures other than mailboxes




Honorary Street Name Program




   95.60   Policy



   95.61   Purpose of program



   95.62   List of criteria



   95.63   Application review process



   95.64   Application for honorary street name designation



 



   95.99   Penalty



DRAINAGE CULVERTS



§ 95.01  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES.



   No person shall in any manner obstruct or alter the flow of surface
drainage water upon the streets or within the drainage ditches or storm
sewers upon the public rights-of-way within the confines of the corporate
limits of the village; and all persons, before constructing or making any
crossing of any such surface drainage ditch with a private driveway, sidewalk
or other similar crossing which might or could obstruct the flow of water
within any such drainage ditch, shall install at such crossing a surface
drainage culvert or culverts of sufficient size to carry the water within the
drainage ditch with the approval of the Village Engineer or Director of
Public Works. The construction of all driveways shall be in accordance with
§ 154.52, Driveways.



(Ord. 76, passed 5-18-69; Am. Ord. 1531, passed 4-7-08)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.02  DRAINAGE CULVERT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall commence with the installation, enlargement,
alteration, construction, repair, or removal of any surface drainage culvert
or similar structure, or any part or parts thereof, in or upon the streets or
public rights-of-way in the village unless and until a permit for such
installation, enlargement, alteration, construction, repair or removal shall
first be obtained by the person or persons desiring to do the same, or their
agents, from the Village Clerk; and it shall be unlawful to proceed with such
installation, enlargement, alteration, construction, repair or removal unless
such permit shall first have been obtained and if after such permit shall
have been granted, the operations called for by said permit shall not be
commenced within 90 days after the date thereof, or if such operations are
not completed within a reasonable time, then such permit shall be void and no
operations thereunder shall be commenced or completed until a new permit
shall be issued and fees as herein fixed for the original permit shall be
paid for such new permit.



(Ord. 76, passed 5-18-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for the issuance of each such permit as herein provided for
shall be the sum of $5.



(Ord. 76, passed 5-18-69)



§ 95.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Application for such permits shall be made by the persons desiring the
same, or their agents, to the Village Clerk.  When application is made,
plans and specifications shall be submitted for examination and approval by
the Director of Roads and Drainage, or his authorized representative.  Plans
and specifications shall comply with all applicable village ordinances and
regulations.  Upon approval, the Village Clerk shall issue or cause to be
issued a permit and shall maintain a copy thereof, together with the
application on file.



(Ord. 76, passed 5-18-69)



§ 95.05  INSPECTION OF CULVERTS.



   The Director of Roads and Drainage, or his representative, shall make
an inspection of the site of the culvert to be installed, enlarged,
constructed, altered, repaired or removed prior to the issuance of the permit
herein provided for, and shall make such additional inspections as may be
necessary and reasonable during the operations for which the permit is issued
and shall make a final inspection of the same after the installation,
enlargement, alteration, construction, repair or removal provided for in the
permit shall be completed.  In the event that such installation,
enlargement, alteration, construction, repair or removal of any culvert is
not done in reasonable compliance with the application in a good and
workmanlike manner so that the same shall operate properly, the person to
whom such permit is issued shall make such alterations as may be required to
cause conformance with the application so that the same exists in good
operating condition.



(Ord. 76, passed 5-18-69)



EXCAVATION



§ 95.10  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall make or cause any cutting, excavation  or 
damage  to  any public  street, alley, or highway within the village under
the jurisdiction and control of the village without first obtaining apermit
to do so from the Village Director of Public Works.  Streets shall be
defined to include any hard-surfaced slab, shoulders and drainage ditches.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to construction
of facilities in public rights-of-way, which is governed by Chapter 54 of
this code.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 1508, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.11  APPLICATION; FEE.



   Each person desiring to cut or excavate within the right-of-way of any
such public street, alley or highway shall file an application for a permit
to do so with the Village Clerk.  The application shall be accompanied with
engineering plans and specifications for such cutting or excavation
sufficiently detailed to enable the Village Engineer to evaluate such request
and the possible effect or damage to such right-of-way and the public
improvements therein.  The application shall be accompanied with a
nonrefundable fee in the sum of $100.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-7-83)



§ 95.12  REVIEW BY VILLAGE ENGINEER.



   Upon the receipt of each application for such cutting or excavation,
the Village Clerk shall send a copy of the application and the plans and
specifications submitted therewith to the Village Engineer for his review and
recommendation.  He shall inform the village of the maximum possible damage
which may result to the street, alley or highway and the improvements
necessary to repair said street, alley or highway.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-7-83)



§ 95.13  APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The application and the report of the Village Engineer shall
be submitted to the Director of the Department of Roads and Drainage for
approval or rejection.  The applicant shall also furnish the village with a
bond or letter of credit in a form approved by the Village Attorney with good
and sufficient corporate surety so as to reimburse the village for the cost
of any and all repairs and related expenses such as reasonable engineering
and attorney's fees incurred by the village for the maintenance and repair of
the street, alley or highway as a result of said cutting or excavation within
a period of two years of the completion  of such cutting  or excavation 
and  written approval of the Village Engineer.  Any bond or letter of
credit shall be in a sum equal to one and one-half times the amount of the
estimate of the Village Engineer of the maximum possible damage as
aforesaid.  The applicant shall also indemnify and hold harmless the
village, its officers, elected and appointed officials and agents of and from
any and all claims, causes of action, judgments, damages and the like which
arise out of or from the cutting or excavation of any street, alley or
highway in the village.



   (B)   A permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon the
direction of the Director of the Department of Roads and Drainage when such
cutting or excavation is reasonably necessary and all other provisions of
this subchapter have been satisfied.  The permit will terminate and will not
be valid if the cutting or excavation has not commenced prior to the
expiration of six months from the date of issuance.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-7-83)



§ 95.14  EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS.



   All cutting and excavation across or along a street, alley or highway
shall be made in a manner so as to allow at least one single lane of vehicle
traffic at all times along the site of the cutting or excavation.  All
cuttings or excavations shall at all times be properly fenced, barricaded or
guarded and at night shall be lighted to prevent injury to any persons and
damage to any vehicles or other personal property.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-7-83)



§ 95.15  RESTORATION; INSPECTION.



   The applicant shall notify the Village Engineer upon the completion of
any such cutting or excavation.  Within 30 days from the date of such
cutting or excavation, the applicant shall expeditiously restore the street,
alley or highway disturbed by such cutting or excavation to substantially the
condition that existed prior to such cutting or excavation.  The Village
Engineer shall then personally inspect the restoration and in writing inform
the village of the acceptance of the restoration.



(Ord. 331, passed 11-7-83)



§ 95.20  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOUSE.  All buildings used for dwellings and business purposes.



§ 95.21  NUMBER OF HOUSES.



   (A)   All houses in the village shall be numbered, and it is made
the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of every house in the
village to number or cause the same to be numbered in the manner as is
provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   One number on each side of each thorough-fare shall be
allotted to each 20 feet of frontage.  The numbering shall begin at State
Street and Madison Street in the city of Chicago extending outwardly.  The
number system shall increase southerly beginning with the present corporate
limits on the north of Troy Township with number 18300.  The number system
shall increase westerly beginning with the present corporate limits on the
east of Troy and Channahon Township with number 21600.



   (C)   Each block break will be every 660 feet.  If a street
intersects within three property numbers of a hundred number break, the break
will be shifted to the centerline of intersecting streets.



   (D)   Each block will be divided into 66 numbers - 33 odd and 33
even.



   (E)   On north-south streets, even numbers will be on the west side
and odd numbers on the east sides.



   (F)   On east-west streets, even numbers will be on the north sides
while odd numbers will be on the south sides.



   (G)   Crescents will be numbered consecutively from their
intersection of beginning to their intersection of ending.  Corner lots can
have two addresses. Which one is applicable depends on which street the front
of the house faces.



   (H)   Streets will be considered as trending in the direction in
which they cover the greatest distance.  Streets that cover roughly equal
distances both north-south and east-west will be considered as north-south
trending when they follow a southwest-northwest bearing and east-west
trending when they follow a southeast-northwest bearing.



   (I)   Only one property number per street frontage will be assigned
for single-family and industrial parcels.  A lot that is on a corner may use
only one address that corresponds to the front entrance of the use. 
Multiple-family and commercial lots will be assigned one property number per
major entrance per street frontage.



   (J)   Each of the figures of numbers so to be placed on houses shall
not be less than four inches in height and shall be so marked as to be
distinctly and easily read and shall be of design to be approved by the
village.  Such numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or near the
front of the house so that the same are plainly visible and readable by a
person with normal vision from the street or highway on which the parcel or
lot adjoins.  It shall be the obligation of the owner or occupant of the
house to place the house numbers within six months of the date of this
subchapter.



   (K)   Whenever any house or building shall have been numbered or
renumbered in accordance with this subchapter, such number shall not be
changed or altered unless upon application to the Village Clerk and upon new
number being assigned therefore in accordance with this subchapter.



   (L)   In all cases where numbers have been assigned on any street,
in pursuance hereof or of any subchapter hereafter passed, it shall be the
duty of the Village Clerk to adjust and reassign numbers as may be required
from time to time, and in all cases where there is a mistake or conflict in
numbers, the Clerk shall direct and make proper adjustment of the same.



(Ord. 612, passed 10-24-90)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.22  ANNEXED TERRITORY TO CONFORM.



   All territory hereinafter to be annexed to the village shall conform to
the system of numbering provided in this subchapter.  Maps shall be prepared
of all streets required to be numbered, drawn to an accurate  scale showing
all intersection streets and the location of the front of all houses and each
front entrance of the same.  The whole length of streets shall be divided
into spaces or lots of 20 feet frontage as herein provided.  A number shall
be given for each space, and the number coinciding most nearly with the
location of any front entrance shall be the number of the same.  Consecutive
numbers shall be placed directly opposite on lines at right angles to the
street.  All numbers placed on houses under this subchapter shall be
indicated on such maps.  The maps shall be kept on file in the office of the
Village Clerk.



(Ord. 612, passed 10-24-90)



§ 95.23  REMOVING OR DEFACING NUMBERS.



   No person shall remove or deface any house number placed upon any house
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.  No person shall
retain any number of his house other than that provided by the provisions of
this subchapter.  No owner, agent or person in possession of any house shall
refuse or neglect to number such house or cause the same to be numbered in
conformity with this subchapter.



(Ord. 612, passed 10-24-90)  Penalty, see § 95.99



DEPOSITION OF SNOW AND SLUSH



§ 95.35  DEPOSITION OF SNOW AND SLUSH UPON PUBLIC STREETS PROHIBITED.



   No snow or slush removed from private property by way of shoveling,
plowing or blowing shall be deposited upon the paved section of any public
road, street or highway within the village.



(Ord. 576, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 95.99



MAILBOXES AND OTHER STRUCTURES



§ 95.45  INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Mailboxes and their installation shall conform to the
specifications of the United States Postmaster General.  The mailbox shall
be mounted such that the door is six inches behind the back of the curb or 24
inches from the edge of pavement on rural roads, 42 inches high and located
on the side of the street as specified by the local post office. No part of
the box or structure shall be closer than six inches or 24 inches as
indicated above.



   (B)   Mailboxes shall not be installed within the radius of a
cul-de-sac. Mailboxes serving lots fronting on the radius of a cul-de-sac
shall be placed at the entrance to the cul-de-sac, the location to be
approved by the Post Master and Village Building and Zoning Officer.



(Ord. 813, passed 8-1-94; Am. Ord. 951, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 1504, passed
9-17-07)



§ 95.46  MOUNTING POSTS.



   The objective of this section is to provide guidance to the homeowner
as to what types of posts are desirable.  Posts smaller or less substantial
(decorative posts) are subject to damage as discussed in § 95.48.  Posts
more extensive than mentioned, such as masonry, steel beams, or poured
concrete, are dangerous to snow removal equipment and other vehicles due to
their excessive resistance to knockdown and are, therefore, prohibited within
the public right-of-way.  The following specifications are advisory;
however, residents are encouraged to adhere to these guidelines in mounting
roadside mailboxes.  Mailboxes damaged by snow discharge, per § 95.48, that
are not installed in conformance with these specifications will not be
repaired by the village.



 

Post Type Fittings
 
Dimension (Inches)
 
Anchored In
 
Mounting


Treated wood only
 
4 x 4 or 5 x 5
 
Concrete
 
Angle iron & bolts (4-1/8" bolts min)


Cast iron pipe
 
2 OD to 5 OD
 
Concrete
 
Threaded pipe flange & bolts (4-1/8" bolts min)


Galvanized Steel pipe
 
 
Same as cast iron
 
steel


Steel pipe (Painted only)
 
 
Same as cast iron
 



 



(Ord. 813, passed 8-1-94)



§ 95.47  DAMAGE TO MAILBOX THROUGH DIRECT CONTACT WITH VILLAGE VEHICLES.



   (A)   If any mailbox is damaged or knocked down during snow removal
operations by direct contact with any public works vehicle, the damage will
be repaired, if practical, by the village upon establishment by the Utilities
and Street Superintendent or his or her representative that direct contact
with mailbox did occur.



   (B)   Any mailbox damaged by direct contact with a public works
vehicle that is deemed impractical to repair will be reimbursed by $50 by the
village.  Any difference in cost, value or aesthetics between the damaged
mailbox and the $50 reimbursement will be uncollectible by the owner.



(Ord. 813, passed 8-1-94; Am. Ord. 1504, passed 9-17-07)



§ 95.48  DAMAGE TO MAILBOX BY SNOW DISCHARGE.



   If any mailbox is damaged or knocked down by snow discharge from a
Public Works vehicle as determined by the Utilities and Streets
Superintendent or his or her representative, the following shall apply:



   (A)   If the original mailbox was installed and properly maintained
in accordance with the requirements contained in §§ 95.45 and 95.46, and is
deemed impractical to repair, it will be reimbursed by $50 by the village. 
Any difference in cost, value or aesthetics between the damaged mailbox and
the $50 reimbursement will be uncollectible by the owner.



   (B)   If the original mailbox was not installed and properly
maintained in accordance with the requirements contained in §§ 95.45 and
95.46, the damage will be considered an event that no experience, foresight
or reasonable care by Public Works Department personnel might have guarded
against; such damage shall be considered an inevitable occurrence and as
such, reimbursement for such will be uncollectible.



(Ord. 813, passed 8-1-94; Am. Ord. 1504, passed 9-17-07)



§ 95.49  STRUCTURES OTHER THAN MAILBOXES.



   No structure of any type other than mailboxes, as specified in §§
95.45 and 95.46, shall be erected or placed within the public right-of-way
without the approval of the corporate authority of the village.



(Ord. 813, passed 8-1-94)



HONORARY STREET NAME PROGRAM



§ 95.60  POLICY.



   The Village of Channahon hereby establishes a policy with a review
process and set of criteria for the designation of honorary street names in
the village. Listed below are the purpose of the program; review criteria;
detailed provisions of the program and the application form. The program is
managed by the Department of Community Development. All supporting
documentation is required at time of application submittal. The application
will be reviewed by village staff who will make a recommendation to the
Channahon Village Board for final review.



(Ord. 1871, passed 10-3-16)



§ 95.61  PURPOSE OF PROGRAM.



   The Village of Channahon honorary street naming program is a means for
honoring Channahon residents who have become well known for their civic,
charitable, educational, or business contributions to the Channahon
community. Additionally, the honorary street name program provides an
opportunity to provide honorary street names for streets close to significant
or historic sites or events. The honorary street name supplements the
permanent street name and does not change the permanent street name
designation nor does it require residents and businesses fronting the street
to change their address.



(Ord. 1871, passed 10-3-16)



§ 95.62  LIST OF CRITERIA.



   The following list of criteria is used in determining eligibility for
an honorary street name designation:



   (A)   Whether a site, event, or individual is of known historic or
cultural importance to the village;



   (B)   Whether a person is responsible for an accomplishment of
local, regional, national or international significance;



   (C)   Did the person work tirelessly for the benefit of the less
fortunate of the community;



   (D)   Did the person display exceptional involvement in church,
school, service club or other organization which made Channahon a better
place;



   (E)   Is the person an individual with a distinguished career
brought to the city or notable humanitarian achievement made while a resident
of the village;



   (F)   Is the site of national, regional, or local geographical
interest;



   (G)   Is there a clear geographical relationship of the street to
the area of interest of the nominee;



   (H)   Is there a clearly defined record of local community or public
service made by the nominee.



(Ord. 1871, passed 10-3-16)



§ 95.63  APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS.



   The following list describes the application process for an honorary
street name designation:



   (A)   The applicant must fill out an application requesting the
designation;



   (B)   Nominations solely based on commercial or corporate-related
identification shall not qualify for the program;



   (C)   There shall be only one honorary street designation per
section of street;



   (D)   The honorary street designation shall not conflict with any
other official street name.



   (E)   The applicant shall pay a filing fee of $100 to cover
administration costs plus the cost of the production of the sign.



   (F)   The application shall be reviewed and recommended by Village
staff with final determination and approval by the Channahon Village Board;



   (G)   A designation for an individual may only be granted
posthumously;



   (H)   Once installed, the designated street sign shall be maintained
by the village for no more than 20 years, after which the sign will be
provided to the applicant or his/her designee.



(Ord. 1871, passed 10-3-16)



§ 95.64  APPLICATION FOR HONORARY STREET NAME DESIGNATION.



Name of Honoree (as it would appear on street sign):



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



Permanent Street Name:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



Intersecting streets at each end of the street segment to be designated:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



Please check all that apply, and give a brief explanation of the applicable
criteria. A street can be named for an individual, place of event.



        Individual



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Place



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Event



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Cultural Impact to the Village:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Historical Impact to the City:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Humanitarian efforts:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Close association with Channahon:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Geographical relationship of the street to the area of
interest-of the nominee:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Responsible for an accomplishment of local, regional, national or
international significance:



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



        Other information (please attach additional sheets if necessary):



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



I,                                                  
  , depose and say that the above statements are true and correct to the
best of my knowledge and belief.
I agree to be present in person or by representation when this application is
considered by the Village Board of the Village of Channahon.



Signature of Applicant:                                    
                                Date:                
                         



Applicant address:
_______________________________________________________________________________
________________________



Applicant Phone:
_______________________________________________________________________________
_________________________



Applicant Email:
_______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



Submit all information to:
_______________________________________________________________________________
____________________



Village of Channahon
Attn: Michael Petrick
Department of Community Development
24555 Navajo Dr.
Channahon, IL 60410
Phone: 815-467-6644
Fax: 815-467-9774
mpetrick@channahon.org



(Ord. 1871, passed 10-3-16)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already herein provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, neglects or
refuses to comply with or who resists or opposes the enforcement of any of
the provisions of §§ 95.01 through 95.05 shall be fined not less than $10
nor more than $100 for each offense, and every person, firm or corporation
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day on which such
violation, neglect or refusal shall continue. 



(Ord. 76, passed 5-18-69)



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 95.10
through 95.15 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each
offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. 



(Ord. 331, passed 11-7-83)



   (D)   Any person convicted of violating § 95.35 shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $500. 



(Ord. 576, passed 4-2-90)



CHAPTER 96:  OVERWEIGHT AND OVER DIMENSION VEHICLE PERMITS



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Permits



   96.03   Application for permit



   96.04   Police escorts



   96.05   Suspension and reinstatement



   96.06   Permit fee schedules



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANNUAL PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power
unit, or piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves
for a period not to exceed 365 days from the date of issuance.



   NON-DIVISIBLE. A vehicle and load will be considered non-divisible when
it meets the definitions found in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.8.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Village of Channahon Police Department.



   QUARTERLY PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor
power unit or piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited
moves for a period not to exceed 90 days from the date of issuance.



   ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT. Two trips over the same route in opposite
directions. ROUND TRIP PERMITS are valid for ten consecutive days from the
date of issuance.



   SINGLE TRIP PERMIT. One move from the point of origin to the point of
destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point
of destination are expressly prohibited. SINGLE TRIP PERMITS are valid for
five consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by
the village.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Channahon.



(Ord. 1893, passed 5-15-17)



§ 96.02  PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   A permit shall be required for the movement of any
vehicle or combinations of vehicles, which is non-divisible or is carrying a
load which is non-divisible, while operating on highways and bridges under
the jurisdiction of the village while exceeding the maximum size and weight
limits described in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-102 (width), 15-103
(height), 15-107 (length) and 15-111 (weight).



      (2)   Exempt from permits are the following:



         (a)   Fire Department vehicles;



         (b)   Those vehicles operating under an emergency
declaration;



         (c)   Village owned vehicles engaged in emergency
utility repair;



         (d)   Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned or
operated by any governmental body;



         (e)   Any overweight vehicle possessing a preapproved
letter of authorization from the village.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm,
business or corporation who owns and operates the transporting vehicle or
operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement.



   (C)   Permits for vehicles which are oversize are valid only a
half-hour before sunrise until a half-hour after sunset, on any day which a
permit issued by the Illinois Department of Transportation is valid.



   (D)   Permits are non-transferable and apply only to the permittee
and vehicle to which it was issued.



   (E)   The village, in its discretion, may issue revisions to permits
for a fee of $20 (or 50% of the original permit fee if the original permit
fee was $30 or less):



      (1)   To correct an error attributed to the village (no
revision fee);



      (2)   To correct an error attributed to the applicant,
discovered before the move;



      (3)   To adjust weights, dimensions or routes as issued on the
permit, before the move is made.



   (F)   The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the
permittee and the village that the move described in the application will
take place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report
to the Police Department any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the
village or the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is
prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms.



   (G)   The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole
extent of the authority granted by the permit for the use of highways within
the jurisdiction of the village, and any vehicle and/or load found to be off
route will be considered operating without a permit. Permits shall be in the
driver’s possession in either paper or electronic form unless otherwise
directed by the village and presented upon demand to any police officer for
inspection.



   (H)   Any vehicle(s) and/or load found to be divisible will render
the permit null and void, and the entire gross weight and axles weights of
the vehicle(s) with the load are subject to legal size and weights. It is the
duty of the applicant to verify the non-divisibility of the vehicle(s) before
making application for the permit. The permit application itself is prima
facie evidence that the applicant confirmed the vehicle(s) and/or loads were
non-divisible.



   (I)   If required, arrangements shall be made by the permittee to
have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridge or highway
analysis performed and completed in advance of any permit movement.



   (J)   All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.



   (K)   The village shall maintain a list of reasonable provisions to
accompany every permit. A village designee may amend this document from time
to time at their discretion. The provisions shall not be more restrictive
than those listed in the OPER 993 form issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, or the most current phase of interstate harmonization
policies issued by the American Association of State and Highway
Transportation Officials, except in extreme cases. Permit provisions shall
accompany every permit issued.



   (L)   Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of
deception. The permits issued under this chapter constitute a grant of a
privilege by the village and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as
the village may deem rationally related to its governmental interests
including, but not limited to:



      (1)   A permittee fraudulently provides incorrect information
in an application for a permit;



      (2)   A permittee, its agents, or employees operating on a
permit which has been altered for purposes of deception;



      (3)   Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees
with federal, state, or local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods
or operation of a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods;



      (4)   Moving on village highways without a valid permit as
required under this section.



   (M)   All single trip or round trip permits are limited to movements
on assigned routes only.



   (N)   All quarterly or annual overweight permits are restricted to
the following maximum limitations and routing:



      (1)   Twelve feet, zero inches in width.



      (2)   Thirteen feet, six inches in height.



      (3)   One hundred fifteen feet in length.



      (4)   May not use any village highway to avoid using a state,
county or township highway.



   (O)   These permits are subject to all standards of application set
forth in § 96.03(B) except that the load may be interchanged provided none
of the listed maximum weights and dimensions are exceeded. Quarterly and
annual permits shall list the registration number and state (if applicable)
for the power unit, and vehicle identification number (VIN). The serial
number of the power unit, and/or owner applied number shall also be listed,
if applicable.



(Ord. 1893, passed 5-15-17)



§ 96.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   All applications for permits shall be given full
consideration. Permits for proposed moves may be issued:



      (1)   When the village highways and bridges will not be unduly
damaged; and



      (2)   When the safety of the traveling public will be
adequately protected.



   (B)   Applications for a permit to move an oversized and/or
overweight vehicle, and/or load, must be made to the village. The following
information shall be included on the permit application in addition to any
other information deemed necessary:



      (1)   Company name.



      (2)   Company address, city, state and zip code.



      (3)   Company email, fax and telephone numbers.



      (4)   Vehicle make of the hauling vehicle or power unit.



      (5)   Description of load to be moved.



      (6)   Maximum weights and dimensions of the vehicle(s)
including load.



      (7)   Highways under the jurisdiction of the village to be
traveled.



(Ord. 1893, passed 5-15-17)



§ 96.04  POLICE ESCORTS.



   Civilian or police escorts shall be required at the discretion of the
village. The total number of police officers necessary to provide for a safe
move shall be determined by the Police Department. Fees for police escorts
shall be in addition to the permit fees set forth herein and included in the
billing, invoicing and collection of permit fees. Police escort fees shall
provide for a minimum of two hours of service calculated by the most current
overtime rate established by the Police Department.



(Ord. 1893, passed 5-15-17)



§ 96.05  SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time
determined appropriate by the village; however, reinstatement may be made
upon conditions determined by the village and payment of all outstanding
settlements or judgments. Permits may be suspended when the permittee does
not comply with the terms of the permit or traffic or road conditions warrant
suspension of the permit.



   (B)   The village designee shall administer and enforce this section
and shall have the authority to grant, deny, suspend or reinstate permits.
Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who has had a permit suspended,
upon request, shall be given a hearing before the village designee first,
then the Village Administrator if the permittee is still unsatisfied.



   (C)   No permits shall be issued to an applicant or company who has
outstanding fees or payments due to the village.



   (D)   The village designee shall establish a process for the
issuance, suspension and revocation of permits.



(Ord. 1893, passed 5-15-17)



§ 96.06  PERMIT FEE SCHEDULES.



   (A)   The village shall collect a fee for the issuance of an
oversize or overweight permit. Any weight or dimension greater than the
maximums set forth in this chapter are subject to special assessment and
investigation to determine appropriate fees.



   (B)   The village is responsible for the collection of permit fees
and may make rules and regulations as to acceptable methods of payment and
due dates. Any unpaid permit fees will be turned over to a collection agency
under contract of the village.



   (C)   Fee schedules.



      (1)   The fee schedule for overweight (including any
overdimension) vehicles shall be as follows.



 


CATEGORY

 

MINIMUM NUMBER OF AXLES

 

GROSS

 

SINGLE TRIP

 

ROUND TRIP

 

QUARTERLY

 

ANNUAL






A1

 

2

 
54,000
 
$20
 
$35
 
$100
 
$400



A2

 

2

 
> 54,000
 
$40
 
$75
 
$150
 
$500



A3

 

3

 
68,000
 
$30
 
$55
 
$130
 
$520



A4

 

3

 
80,000
 
$70
 
$135
 
$285
 
$1,140



A5

 

3

 
>80,000
 
$100
 
$195
 
$400
 
$1,500



A6

 

4

 
72,000
 
$35
 
$65
 
$145
 
$580



A7

 

4

 
80,000
 
$80
 
$150
 
$225
 
$900



A8

 

4

 
> 80,000
 
$100
 
$190
 
$350
 
$1,200



A9

 

5

 
100,000
 
$50
 
$95
 
$250
 
$1,000



A10

 

5

 
> 100,000
 
$85
 
$160
 
$320
 
$1,280



A11

 

6

 
120,000
 
$50
 
$95
 
$250
 
$1,000



A12

 

6

 
143,000
 
$60
 
$115
 
$325
 
$1,300



A13

 

6

 
> 143,000
 
$100
 
$200
 
$390
 
$1,560



A14

 

7

 
162,000
 
$70
 
$135
 
$300
 
$1,200



A15

 

7

 
> 162,000
 
$110
 
$220
 
$440
 
$1,760



A16

 

8

 
187,000
 
$80
 
$155
 
$310
 
$1,240



A17

 

8

 
> 187,000
 
$160
 
$300
 
$600
 
$2,400



A18

 

9+

 
225,000
 
$125
 
$240
 
$800
 
$3,200



A19

 

9+

 
> 225,000
 
$150
 
$300
 
$1,000
 
$4,000




 



      (2)   The fee schedule for oversize only (legal weight)
vehicles shall be as follows.



 


CATEGORY

 

WIDTH

 

HEIGHT

 

LENGTH

 

SINGLE TRIP

 

ROUND TRIP

 

QUARTERLY

 

ANNUAL




B1

 

14'

 

14'

 

115'

 
$30
 
$55
 
$165
 
$660



B2

 

18'

 

16'

 

135'

 
$50
 
$95
 
$250
 
$1,000



B3

 

>18'

 

> 16'

 

>135'

 
$100
 
$195
 
$350
 
$1,200



 



(Ord. 1893, passed 5-15-17)



CHAPTER 97:  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES USED IN CONNECTION WITH DUI OFFENSES



Section



   97.01   Impoundment of vehicles



   97.02   Stolen vehicle exception



   97.03   Towing of vehicle/notice to owner



   97.04   Vehicle impoundment hearing



   97.05   Administrative fee/disposition of vehicle



   97.06   Owner of record



§ 97.01  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.



   Any motor vehicle which is used in connection with the violation of
divisions (A) through (J) below, or any motor vehicle in violation of a
similar local ordinance shall be subject to seizure and impoundment and the
owner of record of such impounded vehicle shall be liable to the village for
an administrative fee in connection with such impounding not to exceed $500
plus all applicable towing and storage fees as hereinafter provide.



   (A)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized
and forfeited pursuant to ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1; or



   (B)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs,
an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in
violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501 or



   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control
Act; or



   (D)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in an attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act; or



   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§§ 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3; or



   (F)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 6-303; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving)
or due to failure to comply with emission testing; or



   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting,
possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance, as defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act; or



   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year; or



   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been
issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
6-101, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit due to a person's age; or



   (J)    Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom
a warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to
answer charges that the driver violated ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§  6-101,
6-303, or 11-501 of this Code.



(Ord. 1066, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 1609, passed 2-1-10; Am. Ord. 1647,
passed 4-18-11)



§ 97.02  STOLEN VEHICLE EXCEPTION.



   Section 97.01 of this chapter shall not apply:



   (A)   If the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time
and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24
hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been
discovered; or



   (B)   If the vehicle is being operated as a common carrier when the
violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the
vehicle.



(Ord. 1066, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 1647, passed 4-18-11)



§ 97.03  TOWING OF VEHICLE/NOTICE TO OWNER.



   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled
by the village or by its agents. Before or at the time the vehicle is towed,
the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the owner
of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and of the
vehicle owner's right to request the vehicle impoundment hearing under §
97.04 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1066, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 1647, passed 4-18-11)



§ 97.04  VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever the owner of record of a vehicle seized pursuant to
§ 97.01 of this chapter makes a request of the Police Department in person
and in writing for a vehicle impoundment hearing after the seizure, a hearing
officer shall conduct a vehicle impoundment hearing within 24 hours after the
seizure, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the vehicle
impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the
hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the
hearing officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment under § 97.01, the hearing
officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the owner
of the vehicle posts with the Police Department a cash bond in an amount not
to exceed $500 plus all applicable towing and accrued storage fees.



   (B)   Unless a hearing is held pursuant to division (A) above,
within ten days after the vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to §
97.01, the village shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested,
the owner of record of the date, time and location of a hearing which will be
conducted pursuant to this division (B). The hearing shall be scheduled and
held, unless continued by owner of the hearing officer, no later than 30 days
after the vehicle is seized. The hearing shall be conducted by owner of the
hearing officer appointed by the Village President. All interested persons
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. If, after
the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with a violation of an
offense set forth in § 97.01, and that none of the exceptions apply, the
hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the
vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in an amount
not to exceed $500. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing,
the hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village
requiring the payment to the village of an administrative fee in the amount
not to exceed $500. If the hearing officer finds that no such violation
occurred, the hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner's
vehicle or cash bond.



   (C)   The hearing shall be recorded. The hearing officer is
authorized to administer oath and to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the presence of relevant books and records.



(Ord. 1066, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 1609, passed 2-1-10; Am. Ord. 1647,
passed 4-18-11)



§ 97.05  ADMINISTRATIVE FEE/DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to this section,
such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village. If a cash bond
has been posted, the bond shall be applied to the fee. If a vehicle has been
impounded when such a fee is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a
judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle as
provided by law. Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle
shall continue to be impounded until:



      (1)   The fee, plus any applicable towing and storage fees,
are paid to the village, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be
given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle; or



      (2)   The vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy
a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. If the administrative fee
and applicable fees are not paid within 30 days after an administrative fee
is imposed against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at
the hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of
in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles under
Chapter 90 of this Code. In all other cases, if the administrative fee and
applicable fees are not paid within 30 days after the expiration of the time
during which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may
be sought, or within 30 days after an action seeking administrative review
has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the
vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles under Chapter 90 of
this Code.



   (B)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner,
lien holder or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
vehicle impounded under this section until the civil fee of all other towing,
storage and other fees applicable have been paid. However, whenever a person
with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure
proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or
she agrees in writing to refund to the village the amount of the net proceeds
of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of
record, not to exceed $500 plus all applicable towing and storage fees.



   (C)   The administrative fee provided in this chapter shall be in
addition to any fee that may be assessed by a court of law or other entity
for the underlying offense.



(Ord. 1066, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 1647, passed 4-18-11)



§ 97.06  OWNER OF RECORD.



   For purposes of this chapter, the OWNER OF RECORD of a vehicle shall
mean and include the owner or owners as shown on a valid certificate of title
of the vehicle and/or as shown on a valid vehicle registration identification
document; and, in the case of leased vehicles, the OWNER OF RECORD shall
include the named lessee of the vehicle.



(Ord. 1066, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 1647, passed 4-18-11)



CHAPTER 98: ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Alarm installer regulation



   98.03   Servicing on automatic alarms



   98.04   Central stations



   98.05   Automatic dialers



   98.06   Reserved



   98.07   On-premises; outside ringers



   98.08   Enforcement



   98.09   False alarms



   98.10   Noncompliance



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM AGENT. Any person working for an alarm business.



   ALARM BUSINESS. Any business or person who engages in the activity of
altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing,
selling, servicing or responding to an emergency alarm system or which causes
any of these activities to take place.



   ALARM USER.  Any person or entity who owns or controls any premise
where an alarm system is maintained, other than alarm systems on a motor
vehicle.



   ALARM/ALARM SYSTEM. Any signaling device which is electronically
operated and which creates or transmits visual, audible or electronic signals
indicating trouble such as burglary, hold-up, lire or other emergency
situation but does not include such devices on automobiles.



   AUTOMATIC DIGITAL DIALING ALARM EQUIPMENT. An alarm system that has the
capability of transmitting digital code signals to an alarm receiving board.



   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALING ALARM EQUIPMENT. An alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connect, wireless
connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence
of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designated to detect.



   CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM. A system in which the operation of electrical
protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in,
maintained and supervised from a place of business having trained operators
in attendance at all times.



   EMERGENCY ANSWERING SERVICE. A telephone answering service providing
among its services the job of receiving on a continuous basis through trained
employees, emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately
relaying the message by live voice to the P.S.A.P.



   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of
the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents,
except that the following shall not be considered  FALSE ALARMS:



      (1)   Alarms caused by the failure or malfunction of the
equipment located at the P.S.A.P.;



      (2)   Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent
cause within the first 60 days after installation of the alarm system, and
where continuous effort, in the sole opinion of the village Chief of Police
or his or her designee, is being made by the alarm user to correct the
malfunction expeditiously;



      (3)   Alarms caused by an attempted or actual illegal entry of
which there is visible evidence;



      (4)   Alarms caused by on-premises fire or smoke;



      (5)   Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a
reasonable belief that a need exists to call the Police Department or Fire
Department; and



      (6)   Alarms caused by inclement weather or natural disasters.



   HARD WIRE ALARMS.  Any alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to and receiving them at a remote location over
dedicated lines.



   ON-PREMISES ALARM. An alarm system that audibly announces an emergency
condition which may or may not be connected to any Central Station System.



   POLICE AND FIRE COMPUTERIZED ALARM SYSTEM.  The Alarm Monitoring and
Control System located in Western Will County Communication Center.



   P.S.A.P. Public Safety Answering Point, currently the Western Will
County Communication Center.



   REGISTERED ALARM BUSINESS. An alarm business that has registered with
the village as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.02  ALARM INSTALLER REGULATION.



   (A) No alarm system shall be installed or maintained in the village by
an alarm business other than a registered alarm business. Alarm businesses
shall register with the Police Department and provide such information as is
required for such regulation.



   (B)   Each alarm business which sells, leases or installs an
emergency alarm system in the village shall furnish the alarm user with
written instructions as to the way in which the system operates. He or she
shall also provide initial training in the operation of the system and, upon
request from the alarm user, shall provide refresher training. Each alarm
business shall, upon request, exhibit to the Chief of Police for his or her
review a copy of the instructions. If the Chief of Police or his or her
designee finds that the instructions are incomplete, unclear or otherwise
inadequate, he or she may require the alarm equipment supplier to have same
revised.



   (C)   At the time of installation, each alarm business that sells,
leases or maintains an alarm system in the village shall furnish to the alarm
user written information as to how service can be obtained, including the
telephone number to call for service, and the alarm user shall be responsible
for having the alarm system repaired as quickly as possible after a
malfunction is detected.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.03  SERVICING ON AUTOMATIC ALARMS.



   No alarm business shall perform any service on any alarm system in the
village without first notifying the Police Department or Fire Department, as
applicable, and disconnecting the alarm at the alarm user's end and again
notifying the police/fire personnel upon completion of the work.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.04  CENTRAL STATIONS.



   No one shall operate a central station system or other emergency
answering service in the village unless registered as an alarm business.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.05  AUTOMATIC DIALERS.



   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall use or cause or
permit to be used or engage in the business of providing any telephone device
or telephone attachment or other equipment that automatically activates 911
lines connected to any public safety answering point and then reproduce any
voice message to report any robbery, burglary, fire or other emergency.
Further, any alarm user utilizing such telephone devices, telephone
attachments or other equipment that automatically activates the
aforementioned 911 lines shall have 30 days to cease and desist the practice.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.06  RESERVED.



§ 98.07  ON-PREMISES; OUTSIDE RINGERS.



   (A)   No person or entity shall allow or cause to exist an alarm
with an outside ringer which emits an audible sound in any manner similar to
emergency vehicles of the village. In addition, the sound shall also be
distinguishable from any and all village alert systems disseminated in an
audible manner.



   (B)   (1)   All such outside ringers shall be equipped with an
automatic shut-off which will deactivate within five minutes of the initial
alarm. The alarm user owning or operating an outside ringer shall have six
months from the date of this chapter to provide automatic shut-off.



      (2)   Failure to provide the shut-off may result in the
suspension of the alarm permit and shall be a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The authorized village officials shall have the authority to
make inspections and take other steps necessary to enforce this chapter.



   (B)   If the inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of
this chapter, a written report detailing the violation shall be promptly sent
to the alarm business and the alarm user. The report shall require the
correction within 30 days after receipt of the notice of the violation
discovered and shall state that a failure to comply may result in the
revocation of the alarm business's license and/or in the revocation of the
alarm user's permit, in accordance with provisions of this chapter or other
applicable village ordinance relating to revocation of licenses and
registrations.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.09  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   Each alarm user shall be responsible for any false alarms
transmitted by the device which they control, own or supervise.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of all false
alarms so transmitted and pursuant to the required notice and opportunity to
be heard may revoke or suspend the permit for the operation of an alarm
system involved in the transmission of four false alarms in any one calendar
year or may impose a false alarm fine as hereinafter provided.



      (1)   Alarm users may, within ten days of receiving a bill for
false alarm fine, request to utilize the village act process.



   (C)   False alarm fine. The following shall be the fine for false
alarms:



      (1)   0 to 4 in any one-year period;



      (2)   5 and above false alarms in any one year period - $100
per false alarm



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



§ 98.10  NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter,
including provisions adopted by reference, or who refuses to remedy a
violation of any such provision or to remedy violations of this chapter shall
be fined as provided by this Village Code. In addition, if alarm users do not
pay any false alarm fine as provided by this chapter such false alarm fine
shall be considered the minimum fine to be imposed by a court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1643, passed 3-21-11)



CHAPTER 99:  BACKYARD CHICKEN LICENSING



Section



   99.01   License required



   99.02   License permit process



   99.03   Suspension or revocation



   99.04   Summary suspension



   99.05   Notice of hearing



   99.06   Hearings



   99.07   Appeals



   99.08   Eighteen-month pilot project



§ 99.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Chickens are permitted in the R-l, R-2, A-l and A-2 Zoning Districts.
No person shall keep chickens in the R-l or R-2 District without first
obtaining a license therefore issued by the village. Any pen, coop, building
or other enclosure used for the housing of hens may be erected only after
obtaining a building permit as provided for herein. No license shall be
issued unless permitted by the village zoning ordinance. Licenses are not
required in the A-l and A-2 Zoning Districts.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 99.02  LICENSE PERMIT PROCESS.



   (A)   An applicant for a license for the keeping chickens or for a
building permit for any pen, coop, building or other enclosure used for the
housing of chickens must submit the following to the Community Development
Director:



      (1)   Completed applications on forms provided by the village.



      (2)   A current plat of survey accurately depicting the
potential location of the proposed structure housing hens on the
applicant’s property.



      (3)   The required license fee for a license for the keeping
of chickens in the amount of $150 and the required building permit fee in the
amount of $70. The building permit fee for a pen, coop, building or other
enclosure used for the housing of chickens shall be the same fee as for a
shed.



   (B)   A license for the keeping of chickens and a building permit
for a structure for the keeping of chickens shall not be granted unless the
applicant can show proof that a proposed structure that complies with all
provisions of village code.



   (C)   A license for the keeping of chickens and a building permit
for a structure for the keeping of chickens shall not be transferable or run
with the land and shall terminate and become invalid upon the licensee no
longer occupying the property for which the license and permit were issued.



   (D)   The village will begin accepting applications for a license
for the keeping of chickens and for a building permit for any pen, coop,
building or other enclosure used for the housing of chickens beginning
December 1, 2017. In the event applications for such a license and permit
received by the village between December 1, 2017 and January 31, 2018 exceed
eight in number a lottery will be used to determine the order such
applications will be considered by the village.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 99.03  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   In addition to any other penalty which may be authorized by this
chapter or other village ordinances, the Community Development Director may
suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for:



   (A)   Failure of the licensee to comply with any provision of this
code, any other, the laws of the state, federal laws or other applicable
legal requirements; or



   (B)   Finding that the licensee knowingly furnished false or
misleading information or withheld relevant information in any application
for a license for the keeping of chickens or for a building permit for any
structure for the keeping of chickens.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 99.04  SUMMARY SUSPENSION.



   Where the Community Development Director presents to the Village
Administrator sufficient evidence demonstrating probable cause to believe
that the licensee has violated the provisions of this chapter of the laws of
the United States or the state, and that said violation will immediately
threaten the public health, safety or welfare, the Village Administrator may,
upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion,
and without prior notice or hearing, order the licensed structure for the
keeping of chickens closed and the license summarily suspended pending a
hearing and a determination on suspension or revocation. Such hearing shall
be commenced not more than seven days following the entry of such an order,
unless the licensee shall agree to a longer period of time. The procedure for
such a hearing or any appeal with respect thereto shall be as otherwise
provided in this chapter. Upon entry of an order of summary suspension, the
licensee shall be served with a copy of the order and notice of violation and
a hearing in the manner provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 99.05  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   Except as provided in the summary suspension provisions of § 99.03 of
this chapter, prior to suspension or revocation of a license under this
chapter, the licensee shall be notified in writing of the nature of the
violation(s) and an opportunity for a hearing which will be provided if a
written request for a hearing is filed with the Community Development
Director by the holder of the license within ten days. If a written request
is filed within ten days, a hearing date shall be set within ten days of
receipt of the request. If no written request for a hearing is filed within
ten days, the suspension or revocation shall be sustained.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 99.06  HEARINGS.



   A hearing shall be conducted by the Community Development Director or
his or her designee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend the complaints. The Community Development Director shall make a final
decision in writing, including the reasons for such decision, and shall serve
such decision on the licensee within ten days after the conclusion of the
hearing.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 99.07  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the
village’s Community Development Director to deny, suspend or revoke a
license applied for or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have
the right to appeal such action or decision to the Village Administrator
within ten days after the notice of action or decision has been mailed to the
licensee’s address as shown on the license application form, or to the
licensee’s last known address.



   (B)   An appeal shall be taken by filing with the village’s
Community Development Director a written statement setting for the grounds
for appeal.



   (C)   The village's Community Development Director shall transmit
the written statement to the Village Administrator within ten days of its
receipt and the Village Administrator will set a time and place for a hearing
on the appeal. The Village Administrator may designate an authorized
representative to conduct such hearing.



   (D)   A hearing shall be set not later than twenty days from the
date of receipt of the appellant’s written statement.



   (E)   Notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be given to
the appellant in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice of
action decision.



   (F)   The Village Administrator or the Village Administrator’s
designee shall serve a decision on the licensee within ten days after the
conclusion of the hearing on such appeal.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 99.08 EIGHTEEN-MONTH PILOT PROJECT.



   It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the President and
Village Board that the adoption of this chapter and amendments to the zoning
ordinance for the keeping of chickens in R-l and R-2 Districts in the village
is being done on an experimental basis only and that no permitee who is
granted a license for the keeping of chickens or a building permit for a
structure for the keeping of chickens shall have any property interest,
vested right or other continuing protectable interest in the continuation of
a license for the keeping of chickens or for a building permit for a
structure for the keeping of chickens. The Village Administrator is directed
to submit a report to the President and Board of Trustees prior to October 1,
2019, and therein shall advise the President and Village Board as to the
village’s experience with the keeping of chickens and licenses and permits
with respect thereto and recommend whether an ordinance providing for the
keeping of chickens in the R-l and R-2 Districts should be recommended for
adoption the President and Village Board.



(Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



         110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



            APPENDIX:  BUSINESSES TO BE LICENSED



         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



         112.   AMUSEMENTS



         113.   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING ESTABLISHMENTS



         114.   FOOD TRUCKS; MOBILE FOOD VENDORS



         115.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



         116.   SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS



         117.   VENDING MACHINES



         118.   CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS



         119.   RAFFLES



         120.   VIDEO GAMING



         121.   HOME KITCHEN AND COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Construction



   110.02   License required



   110.03   Application for license



   110.04   License Investigator



   110.05   Investigation



   110.06   Issuance of license



   110.07   Bond requirements for clean-up



   110.08   Fees



   110.09   Rebate of fee



   110.10   Fee adjustment



   110.11   Term



   110.12   Renewal



   110.13   Renewal application



   110.14   Transfer prohibited



   110.15   Revocation or suspension



   110.16   Number of licenses required



   110.17   Posting required



   110.18   Duplicate certificate or insignia



   110.19   Alteration or removal of license certificate or insignia



   110.20   Contractors to employ only licensed subcontractors



   110.21   Building and premises regulation



   110.22   Condition of premises for retail sale or storage of goods



   110.23   Inspections



   110.24   Duty of village officials



   110.25   Registration required



   110.26   Compliance with state statutes



   110.27   Offensive and unwholesome businesses prohibited



 



   110.99   Penalty



   Appendix:  Businesses to be licensed



§ 110.01  CONSTRUCTION.



   Whenever the licensing regulations of this chapter require a person to
obtain a license as a prerequisite to “doing,” “conducting,”
“engaging in,” “maintaining,” “operating,” “carrying on,” or
“managing" a business, occupation or activity, such terms, or one or more
of such terms, shall include any person who holds himself forth as being
engaged in the business, occupation or activity, or who solicits patronage
therefor, either actively or passively, or who performs or attempts to
perform any part of such business, occupation, or activity in the village,
and the omission of one or more of these terms shall not be deemed to exclude
the activities described by the other terms where such activities are in fact
carried on by such person.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage a business,
occupation or activity, either by himself or through an agent, employee or
partner, for which a license is required by any provision of this chapter
without first having obtained a license for such business, occupation or
activity.  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined as provided in § 110.99.  Licenses shall be
required for all businesses and occupations listed in the Appendix to this
chapter.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   All applications for licenses of any character whatsoever,
except those licenses specifically excepted, shall be made in writing to the
Village Clerk on a form provided for that purpose, accompanied by the
applicable license fee.  Each application should be made prior to 30 days
before the same is required to allow a period for a proper examination and
investigation to allow proper determination of whether the application should
be granted.  The application shall be accompanied by the necessary license
fee as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Every application for a license shall state the name,
residence address, phone number and social security or employer's
identification number of the applicant; whether the applicant is an
individual, partnership or corporation, and if a corporation the names and
residence addresses of its principal officers, and if closely held its
principal stockholders; the type or kind of license desired; the location or
proposed location of the business; the occupation or activity for which the
license is sought; the state sales tax number of the applicant; the fee to be
paid; and such other information as may be required.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall be the custodian of all applications
for licenses which, under the provisions of this chapter, are required to be
made to the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.04  LICENSE INVESTIGATOR.



   The License Investigator shall be designated and appointed by the
Village Board of Trustees, and shall report all investigations to the Village
President.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.05  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the License Investigator to examine or
cause to be examined all persons and places of business subject to license
for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not such licenses should be issued.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall conduct a thorough examination into
the background and experience of all persons seeking licenses under the
provisions of this chapter.  If such examination results in findings of fact
which the Chief of Police believes may disqualify the applicant as a
licensee, he shall report his findings to the Village President.  If the
Village President shall find that the license applicant should not be issued
a license, he shall notify the applicant of this fact.  The Village
President may instruct the Village Clerk not to issue a license for any one
of the following reasons:



      (1)   That the applicant lacks good character and reputation
in the community, which character and reputation may be determined by
previous arrest record, association with persons known to lack good moral
character, open and notorious adultery, or other acts of moral turpitude, or
other conduct contrary to good morals.



      (2)   That the applicant has previously been charged and
convicted of a violation of other ordinances of the village or the statutes
of the state, except for traffic violations.



      (3)   That the applicant has outstanding judgments against
him, or is otherwise determined to be not financially able to carry out the
activities for which a license is sought.



      (4)   All licensees under this chapter using scales and
devices in their business shall comply with all applicable statutes of the
state dealing with weights and measurements, and all such devices requiring
certification by the state must at all times bear such certification.  A
violation of this division shall be cause for revoking the license of such
licensee.



      (5)   All licensees must possess proof of current inspection
by the Will County Health Department, if appropriate; and failure to maintain
the minimum standard required herein shall be cause for revoking the licenses
of such licensee.



      (6)   Hiring unlicensed subcontractors.



      (7)   Failure to allow entry for inspections and observation
as required by § 110.23 of this chapter.



      (8)   Failure to comply with statutes of the state or laws of
the United States as required in § 110.26 of this chapter.



      (9)   Definition.  For the purposes of this chapter, the term
APPLICANT shall include any individual who has requested a license hereunder;
if the entity requesting a business license is a partnership, the term
APPLICANT shall include the partnership and any partner thereof; if the
entity requesting such a license is a corporation, the term APPLICANT shall
include the corporation and any person or entity which owns 5% or more of the
stock of the corporation.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89; Am. Ord. 949, passed 8-4-97)



§ 110.06  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   In all cases where licenses are to be obtained and compliance is met,
such license shall be granted by the Village President and shall bear the
seal of the village, the name and business address of the licensee, the
nature  or  kind  of business,  occupation or activity licenses, the
amount of fee paid, the license term and such other material information as
is required.  All licenses shall be subject to the provisions of the
ordinance which may be in force at the time of the issuance thereof or which
may subsequently be passed by the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.07  BOND REQUIREMENTS FOR CLEAN-UP.



   In case the license requested shall be for an activity of a transitory
nature, including, but not limited to, circus, carnivals, street shows or
other activities which, in the judgment of the Village President with the
advice of the License Investigator may cause the accumulation of litter,
debris or other undesirable accumulation of material on the site after the
conclusion of the activity, the Village President may in addition to the
other requirements of this chapter, require the posting of a bond in an
amount of not less than $100 nor more than $500, sufficient to guarantee the
clean-up and restoration of the site following the conclusion of
activities.  Bond shall be approved by the Village President and filed with
the Village Clerk.  Bonds shall be returned to the licensee when the License
Investigator certifies to the Village President that the area has been
cleaned and restored to its prior condition.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-9-89)



§ 110.08  FEES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
or operate any business, trade or occupation named in this chapter without
paying in advance the $50 license fee for the businesses listed in the
Appendix to this chapter. Such fees, upon collection, shall become part of
the general corporate fund.  The annual fee shall increase $10 every five
years effective May 1, 2011 and thereafter.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 4-16-06)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.09  REBATE OF FEE.



   In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license fee or
part thereof by reason of the death of the licensee, non-use of such license,
or change in the location of the business, occupation or activity of such
licensee, provided however that the provisions of this section shall not be
construed to prevent the Village Clerk form authorizing a refund of a license
fee or a portion thereof, where the license fee was collected through an
error or where a licensed business is forced to close before the expiration
of the licensed period by reason of the taking over of the licensed premises
by the United States or the state, or an agency or political subdivision
thereof.  In the event an application for license shall be denied, the fee
accompanying such application shall be refunded.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.10  FEE ADJUSTMENT.



   When any licensee, by increasing the number of his employees, or the
amount of business done by him, or the size of his plant, or the number or
size of his vehicles, or by making any change of any kind in his business,
occupation or activity, places himself in a class where the provisions of
this chapter require him to pay a higher license fee, he shall pay the
additional license fee, based on the annual license fee prorated monthly to
the nearest full month for the balance of the license period, and shall be
entitled to receive a supplemental license.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.11  TERM.



   All licenses required by this chapter shall be for a full year from the
date of issuance.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 4-16-06)



§ 110.12  RENEWAL.



   (A)   The Village Clerk shall send written notification of license
renewal and investigation 60 days prior to expiration date.



   (B)   Failure to provide a complete written application prior to
renewal shall result in a penalty of $10 per day first five days; $20 per day
second five days, $30 per day third five days.  After 15 days noncompliance
will result in loss of license.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89; Am. Ord. 1420, passed 4-16-06)



§ 110.13  RENEWAL APPLICATION.



   Applications for renewal require a written application in the same
manner, form and content as applications for original licenses.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.14  TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   No licensee may assign, sell or transfer his license to any other
person, firm or corporation even if such other person, firm or corporation
intends to conduct the same business, occupation or activity as the licensee
at the location used by the licensee.  Such other person, firm or
corporation must apply for a new license in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.15  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Village President because of any violation of this chapter, or whenever the
licensee shall cease to possess the qualifications required in this chapter
for the original license or registration.



   (B)   Upon receipt of information that the licensee has violated
this chapter or no longer possesses the requisite qualifications to be
licensed hereunder, the Village President shall immediately suspend said
license and give the licensee written notice by certified mail of such
suspension.  The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which
the Village President has acted in suspending the permit.  The licensee
shall have the right to demand a hearing to be held within five business days
of the village's receipt of the licensee's demand for hearing.  Upon the
filing of such a demand with the Village Clerk, the Village President shall
affix a time and place for hearing.  At the hearing the licensee, and any
other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence as to the
facts upon which the Village President based the suspension of the license,
and any other facts which may aid the Village President in determine whether
this chapter has been violated.  If, after such hearing, the Village
President finds that the chapter has been violated, the information set forth
in the application has been misrepresented, or the licensee no longer
possesses the requisite qualifications to be licensed under this chapter, he
shall within two days after the hearing file with the Village Clerk for
public inspection and serve upon the licensee, and all interested persons
participating in the hearing, a written statement of the facts upon which he
bases such finding and shall immediately revoke the license.  If, after such
hearing, the Village President finds that the chapter has not been violated,
that the information contained in the application has not been misrepresented
or that the licensee does possess the requisite qualifications to be licensed
under this chapter, he shall within two days after the hearing give to the
licensee a written statement cancelling the suspension of the license.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.16  NUMBER OF LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter to the
contrary, any person licensed under this chapter to engage in a business,
occupation or activity may engage in any other business, occupation or
activity mentioned in this chapter on the licensed premises and in connection
with licensed business, occupation or activity without obtaining and paying
for any additional license therefor, provided that the fee paid for the
licensed business, occupation  or activity is at least equal in the amount
to the highest license fee required for such other activity, occupation, or
business. This section shall not be so construed as to relieve any person
from complying with the regulatory requirements applicable to such other
business.



   (B)   The foregoing exemption, however, shall not apply to any
person engaging in the sale of cigarettes at retail or in the sale of
alcoholic beverages or vending machines, and such dealer shall be required to
purchase a license for such cigarette and alcoholic beverage business and
vending machines, notwith-standing the fact that such person may be engaging
in some other business, occupation or activity for which a license was
obtained hereunder.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.17  POSTING REQUIRED.



   Every license issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a
prominent location within the licensed premises.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.18  DUPLICATE CERTIFICATE OR INSIGNIA.



   In case any licensee who has been furnished a license certificate or
license insignia, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
lose the same, the Village Clerk shall issue a duplicate certificate or
insignia upon the making of an affidavit of loss by such person and the
payment of a fee of $1 to the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.19  ALTERATION OR REMOVAL OF LICENSE CERTIFICATE OR INSIGNIA.



   (A)   No person shall add to, alter, deface, forge or counterfeit
any license certificate or sticker or other insignia which has been or is
being issued by the village.



   (B)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry
away without the consent of the owner any license certificate or sticker or
other insignia which has been issued by the village, except that said
certificate or said sticker or other insignia may be removed after the
licensed business, occupation or activity has been discontinued or the
licensed premises has been abandoned.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.20  CONTRACTORS TO EMPLOY ONLY LICENSED SUBCONTRACTORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any contractor having a contract or agreement
with the owner of any land or building for the construction, repair,
remodeling, alteration or demolition thereon or thereof to contract with any
person, firm or corporation, other than employees of the contractor, not
licensed by the village as a contractor for labor, materials or services. 
Violation of this section may, in addition to penalty upon conviction, be
grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license of any person, firm
or corporation in violation hereof.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.21  BUILDING AND PREMISES REGULATION.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, occupation
or activity if the premises and building to be used for such purpose do not
fully comply with all applicable provisions of all other ordinances of the
village, including fire prevention, building and zoning regulations.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.22  CONDITION OF PREMISES FOR RETAIL SALE OR STORAGE OF GOODS.



   All premises used for retail sale or storage of goods shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.  Said premises shall be kept in full
compliance with ordinances of the village and the county and in addition, if
applicable, to rules and regulations of the Will County Health Department
concerning the condition of premises used for storage or sale of food for
human consumption.  Further, the premises both inside and out shall at all
times be kept free of all debris, litter and trash.  The exterior of the
premises shall be checked on a regular basis and all debris, litter and
trash, including, but not limited to, cans, bottles and paper wrappers shall
be immediately removed.  Trash dumpsters shall not be permitted to
overflow.  All garbage placed into said dumpsters shall be at a height lower
than the top of the dumpster and the dumpster tops shall at all times be
completely closed.  All trash dumpsters shall be situated in a location that
is completely screened from the public view.  Screening as herein required
shall be effected by construction of a fence conforming to all village
ordinances and of a size and construction sufficient to completely hide the
dumpster.  Failure to comply with any of the terms of this section shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of the business license of the licensed
premises in addition to other fines or penalties which may be imposed.



(Ord. 536, passed 8-7-89)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.23  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever inspection of the premises, vehicles, equipment or
methods of operation used in conducting a licensed business, occupation or
activity are authorized or required by this chapter, or are reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with any provision of this chapter or to
detect violation thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or person  in
charge of such premises, vehicles, equipment or methods of operation to
permit, at any reasonable time, any law enforcement officer or employee of
the village who is authorized or directed to make such inspections to be
admitted to such premises, to have access to such vehicles or equipment, and
to observe such methods of operation for the purpose of making said
inspections.



   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any provision of this chapter
or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, upon
request, to give any authorized law enforcement officer or employee of the
village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity
necessary to perform such analysis.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
Village President may revoke the license of any licensee who refuses to
permit any such law enforcement officer or employee to make such inspections
or take such samples of material or commodity, or who interferes with such
law enforcement officer or employee while in the performance of this duty;
provided, however, that no license shall be revoked for failure to allow any
such inspection or observation to provide any sample as herein authorized
unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the
premises, in the name of the village, stating that such inspection or sample
is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection, or to obtain the
sample.



   (D)   All licensees under this chapter using scales and devices in
their businesses shall comply with all applicable statutes of the state
dealing with weights  and measurements, and all such devices requiring
certification by the state must at all times bear such certification.  A
violation of this division shall be cause for revoking the license of such
licensee.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.24  DUTY OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS.



   It shall be the duty of the head of the department or official of the
village charged with the enforcement of any regulatory provision of this
chapter, other than the mere procurement of a license, to take such action as
shall be necessary to compel compliance with said regulatory provision. 
Such department head or official shall have authority to call upon the Police
Department for aid in the enforcement of said regulatory provision, and it
shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, when called upon, to act according
to the instructions of such department head or official and to perform such
duties as may be required of him in order to enforce or put into effect said
regulatory provision.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



§ 110.25  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of all construction contractors,
solicitors and door-to-door salesmen to be licensed as herein provided and in
addition thereto to register their name, job and job location or sales
program and sales area, as the case may be, with the Village Clerk in the
Municipal Building for each construction project or sales program in which
they may engage in the village corporate limits.



   (B)   The Superintendent of Streets is hereby directed to post and
maintain appropriate signs at the limits of the village with the following
language:



   “SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS, AND CONTRACTORS  MUST BE LICENSED AND
REGISTERED AT  THE CHANNAHON MUNICIPAL BUILDING.”



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.26  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STATUTES.



   It shall be the duty of each licensee to comply with all applicable
laws of the United States and statutes of the state pertaining to their
licensed business, activity or occupation, and failure to so comply shall be
cause, in addition to other causes set forth herein, for revocation of the
license of such licensee failing to so comply.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.27  OFFENSIVE AND UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The conducting or operation of the following offensive and
unwholesome businesses is prohibited within the corporate limits of the
village and within the distance of one mile beyond the corporate limits of
the village:  any waste storage site, landfill, waste disposal site, waste
transfer station or waste incinerator that accepts special waste, industrial
process waste, hazardous or toxic waste, pollution control waste or nuclear
waste.



   (B)   The definition contained in paragraph 3 of the Environmental
Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5 § 3) are herein incorporated by
reference as the definitions of this section.



   (C)   In the event a business or establishment shall violate this
section, the remedies at law available to the village shall be inadequate to
protect its interest and in that event, in addition to any other remedies the
village may have, the village may seek the relief of a court of equity to
obtain a preliminary or permanent injunction, restraining the business or
establishment from violating the provisions of this section, and in addition
to such equitable relief, may exercise such further or other remedies as may
be available to it and in the event the village shall institute any such
legal action and upon final hearing and determination, a court of competent
jurisdiction shall find, among other things, that the business or
establishment has violated provisions of this section, then and in that event
in addition to such other relief which may be awarded, if any, there shall be
awarded in such action all costs and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees incurred in prosecuting such litigation and any appeals and
the said court shall enter a money judgment for the same against the
violating business or establishment.



   (D)   Any business or establishment defined in division (A) of this
section in operation as of August 12, 1982 shall be exempted from the
provisions of this section.



(Ord. 287, passed 8-2-82; Am. Ord. 1068-D, passed 10-18-99)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   All persons who shall violate the provisions of this chapter,
for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be deemed
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $10 or more than
$500 for each violation.



   (B)   Whoever violates the provisions of § 110.02 shall be guilty
of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $500 for each offense. 
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



   (C)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of § 110.19 shall
be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $100.



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



   (D)   The penalty for violation of § 110.22 shall be a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $500.  Each day that a violation exists shall be
deemed a separate offense and subject to the penalties as herein provided. 



(Ord. 536, passed 8-7-89)



   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of §
110.27 shall, in addition to revocation of license, be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during and on which a violation occurs or
continues. 



(Ord. 287, passed 8-2-82)



APPENDIX:  BUSINESSES TO BE LICENSED



Arborist



Alarm System Installers



Animal Hospitals



Ambulances (Private)



Amusements



   Circuses



   Coin-Operated Games or Musical Devices



   Motion Pictures



   Public Dances



   Shooting Galleries



   Skating Rinks



   Tennis Clubs



   Theatrical Exhibitions



   Video Arcades



Appliances Sales and Repairs



Athletic Contests



Auctioneers



Automobile Repairs and Servicing



Banks and Savings Institutions



Barber Shops



Beauty Shops



Bed and Breakfast Establishments



Billiard Tables



Breweries



Brick, Firewood, Coal, Hay Sales



Brokers



Carnivals



Car Wash



Caterers



Cigarette Sales



Coal and Lumber Yards



Coffee Houses



Coin-in-the-Slot Devices



Coliseums



Consumers Clubs or Organizations



Community Antenna Television System



Convention Hall



Dancing School



Day Care Centers



Department Stores



Detective Agency



Docks, Wharves



Draymen



Dry Cleaners



Electrical Equipment



Elevator Operators



Exhibitions



Expressmen



Farmers Markets



Filling Stations



Florists



Food Dealers



   Bakeries



   Delicatessen



   Food Manufacturers and Delivery Vehicles



   Fruit Stores



   Grocery Stores



   Ice Cream Parlors



   Markets



   Meat Dealers



   Mild Dealers



   Restaurants



   Tobacconists



Foundries



Garbage Collectors



Greenhouses/Nurseries



Grocery Stores



Hackmen



Harbors



Harbors for Recreational Use



Hawkers



Health Clubs



Horse Racing



Hospitals



House Movers



House Trailers



Hotels or Motels



Itinerant Merchants



Itinerant Vendors



Junk Yards



Kennels



Laundries, Laundromats



Livery Stables



Locksmiths



Lumber Yards



Machine Shops



Markets and Market Houses



Massage Parlors



Meat Markets



Medical Dispensaries



Mills



Mobile Home Sales and Service



Money Changers



Motor Vehicles, dealers in dismantled or wrecked vehicles



Motor Vehicle Dealers, new and used



Motor Vehicle Leasing



Movers



Music School



Nursing Home and Home for the Aged



Oil and Gas Mines



Packing Houses



Parking Garages



Pawnbrokers



Peddlers



Pest Control Operators



Pesticide Applicators



Pet Shops



Pin Ball



Pool Tables



Printing Shops



Public Scales



Raffles



Retail Business and Sales



Rooming Houses



Scavengers and Garbage Collectors



Second-Hand Shops



Sign Painters



Steam Boiler Operator



Street Advertising



Street Sales



Tanneries



Taxicabs



Theatrical Ticket Brokers



Towing Services



Transient Merchants



Transient Vendors



Tree Experts



Truck and Trailer Leasing



Undertaking Establishments



Video, sales and rental



Water Craft Sales and Service



Weights and Measures



Wholesale Houses



(Ord. 520, passed 6-19-89)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Construction



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   Local Liquor Control Commissioner



   111.04   Appeals from the decisions of the Liquor Commission limited
to review of the record



Licensing



   111.10   License required



   111.11   Application for license



   111.12   Denial of license



   111.13   Classes of licenses; fees



   111.14   Approval of application; issuance



   111.15   Limit on number of licenses



   111.16   Term



   111.17   Fees prorated



   111.18   Record of licenses



   111.19   Rights of licensee



   111.20   Renewal



   111.21   Change of location



   111.22   Location restrictions



   111.23   Denial of license where majority of customers are minors



   111.24   License to be posted



   111.25   Suspension or revocation



   111.26   Property to be in city limits



   111.27   Bringing alcohol into certain premises prohibited



Operation and Sales



   111.35   Condition of premises



   111.36   Employees



   111.37   Gambling devices prohibited



   111.38   Licensee to control conduct on premises



   111.39   Sale in residential dwelling prohibited



   111.40   Compliance with regulations



   111.41   Hours of operation



   111.42   Persons on premises after closing hours



   111.43   Warning to underage persons to be displayed



   111.44   Underage person may not remain on premises; exception



   111.45   Prohibited sales, gifts or deliveries by non-license holders



   111.46   Prohibited sales, gifts or deliveries by licensees



   111.47   Prohibited possession



   111.48   As to sell or deliver alcoholic liquor



   111.49   Discrimination prohibited



   111.50   Inspection



   111.51   Happy hour regulation



   111.52   Nudity prohibited



   111.53   Fashion shows, sexually oriented business, and sale of
clothing



Town Center District



   111.100   Licenses



 



   111.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  CONSTRUCTION.



   This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the village shall be protected and
temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and
promoted by careful control and regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.  Spirits, wine, beer and every other liquid or solid
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of being consumed as a
beverage by human beings.



   BAR.  A counter over and upon which alcoholic beverages are prepared
and where consumers of alcoholic beverages sit or stand to receive or consume
such beverages.



   BEER.  A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an
infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water and
includes among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the
like.



   CLASS B ESTABLISHMENT.  Such business must have 60% or more of the
gross sales receipts attributable to sales other than alcoholic beverages on
the premises.



   CLUB.  A corporation organized under the laws of this state, and not
for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other
than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, which conforms to the
definition of a club in ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5 § 1-3.24 of “An Act relating
to alcoholic liquors“ or as the same may be hereafter amended.



   LICENSED PREMISES.  The provision described in the application for a
license, or in the license as issued, as the place where the business is to
be, or is carried on.



   LICENSEE.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or club holding
a license under the provisions of this chapter.



   LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.  The Village President is authorized to
be the LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.  A person or persons acting, singing, playing an
instrument or otherwise performing in person for compensation or profit.



   ORIGINAL PACKAGE.  Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or
capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to
contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.



   PREMISES.  That area as described in the application where alcohol is
served, stored or sold and areas internally connected thereto by a doorway
which areas are integrally related to the operation of the licensed
establishment.



   RESTAURANT.  Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually served without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook and
serve suitable food for its guests.



   RETAILER.  A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor 
for  use  or  consumption  and not for resale in any form.



   SALE.  Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes
and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee.



   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL.  Sales for use and consumption and
not for resale in any form.



   SERVICE BAR.  A counter over and upon which alcoholic liquor is served
separating the area within which alcoholic drinks are prepared from the area
where a waitress or other employee of the dram shop receives said alcoholic
beverages for delivery to customers seated at tables or elsewhere within the
dram shop other than the SERVICE BAR.



   SPIRITS.  Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by
distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes
brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when
rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.



   TO SELL.  To solicit or receive an order for or keep or expose for
sale and to keep with intent to sell.



   WINE.  Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such
beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above
defined.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1315, passed 11-17-03)



§ 111.03  LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   The Village President is hereby designated the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner and is charged with the administration of this chapter
and the Liquor Control Act, ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5 § 1-2 et seq., as the same
now exists or may be hereafter amended, and of such other ordinances and
resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be needed.  The Village
President may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of
the power and performances of the duties provided for such Local Liquor
Control Commissioner. 



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



   (B)   In addition to any other powers conferred by the state or the
village, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power and
authority to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction any decision of the
Illinois Liquor Control Commissioner which either reverses or modifies any
ruling or decision of the Local Commissioner. 



(Ord. 563, passed 12-4-89)



§ 111.04  APPEALS FROM THE DECISIONS OF THE LIQUOR COMMISSION LIMITED TO
REVIEW OF THE RECORD.



   (A)   In all hearings before the Liquor Commissioner or such other
person duly appointed by the Commissioner there shall be present a certified
court or shorthand reporter.  The reporter shall transcribe the proceedings
and maintain a record of the proceedings.



   (B)   All appeals from the decisions, opinions or orders of the
Liquor Commissioner or such other person appointed by the Commissioner shall
be made to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.  Any such appeal shall be
limited solely to a review of the official record of the proceeding.



(Ord. 643, passed 4-1-91)



LICENSING



§ 111.10  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, firm, partnership or
club to sell or offer for sale at retail within the village any alcoholic
liquor without having a retail liquor dealers license, or in violation of the
terms of such license, or in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.11  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for such license shall be made to and filed with the
Village President, shall be in writing, under oath and signed by the
applicant, if an individual, by at least two partners if a partnership, or
president and secretary if a corporation.  Such application shall be
accompanied by a set of inked fingerprints  of the above named persons on a
form  as may from time to time be proscribed by the Village President. 
Said fingerprints shall be submitted along with a filing fee in the amount of
$50 to offset the cost of processing such fingerprints.  The application
shall be presented no less than ten days prior to the date issuance is
desired.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 507, passed 2-6-89)



§ 111.12  DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   No such license shall be issued to:



      (1)   A person who is not a resident of the village. The
residency requirements shall not apply to a corporation or a partnership;



      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in
the community in which he resides;



      (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



      (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any
federal or state law;



      (5)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or
is keeping a house of ill fame;



      (6)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other
crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



      (7)   A person whose license issued under the laws of the
state or this chapter has been revoked for cause;



      (8)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of
any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a
first application;



      (9)   A partnership, unless all of the members of such
partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license;



      (10)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director
thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
5% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within
the village;



      (11)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or
unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois;



      (12)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent, unless the manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required by the licensee;



      (13)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any
federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer
charges for any such violation;



      (14)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued;



      (15)   Any law enforcing public officials, including members
of the Village Liquor Control Commission, the Village President, any member
of the Village Board of Trustees or any president or member of the County
Board, except that a license may be granted to such official in relation to
premises which are not located within the territory subject to the
jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by
the State Liquor Control Commission;



      (16)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business
to be operated by the licensee;



      (17)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense
as proscribed by any of subsection  (2)(3) through (a)(10) of Section 28-1
of, or as proscribed by Section 28-3 of the “Criminal Code of 1961”
approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed
by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;



      (18)   A person to whom a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or a
Federal Wagering Stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period;



      (19)   A partnership to which a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or
a Federal Wagering Stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current  tax period, or if any of the partners have  been issued a Federal
Gaming Device Stamp or Federal Wagering Stamp by the federal government for
the current tax period;



      (20)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director
thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation has been issued a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or a
Federal Wagering Stamp for the current tax period;



      (21)   Any premises for which a Federal Gaming Device Stamp or
a Federal Wagering Stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period;



      (22)   Any person, firm or corporation not eligible for a
state retail liquor dealer's license;



      (23)   Any applicant who fails to obtain a state liquor
license.



      (23)   Any person, partnership, firm, or corporation which
does not present evidence of dram shop insurance, in the form of a
Certificate of Insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in Illinois, insuring the applicant, and the owner or lessor of the
premises, in at least the amounts recoverable under the Illinois Liquor
Control Act.  Further, the Certificate of Insurance must contain an
affirmative statement that the village will be notified upon the
cancellation, revocation, or suspension of the policy of insurance.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 851, passed 6-5-95; Am. Ord. 959, passed
12-15-97)



§ 111.13  CLASSES OF LICENSES; FEES.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the term "entertainment" is
defined as the offering or permitting of any amusement feature, including
music, singing, acting, dancing or contests, whether by personal performance,
instrumental or mechanical reproduction, but excluding music by juke box or
radio reception.



   (B)   Every person, partnership, firm or corporation engaged in the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the village shall pay an annual license
fee.



   (C)   Such licenses shall be divided into the following classes:



      (1)   Class A - Restaurant permitting bar and package
liquor.  Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon the premises
specified of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the operation of a
restaurant as herein defined.  Sales at or over a bar, a service bar and at
tables are permitted.  The sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the
premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly prohibited except the
retail sale of only alcoholic liquor in its original package with the seal
unbroken for consumption off the premises where it is sold is permitted. 
The annual fee for a Class A license shall be $1,000 for an establishment not
offering entertainment on the premises.  The annual fee for a Class A
license shall be $1,600 for an establishment offering entertainment on the
premises.



      (2)   Class B - Establishment permitting bar.  Class B
licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon the premises specified of
alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the operation of a Class B establishment
as herein defined.  Sales at or over a bar, a service bar and tables are
permitted.  The sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the premises
where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly prohibited.  Sixty percent or
more of the gross sales receipts must be attributable to sales other than
alcoholic beverages on the premises.  The annual fee for a Class B license
shall be $1,000 for an establishment not offering entertainment on the
premises.  The annual fee for a Class B license shall be $1,600 for an
establishment offering entertainment on the premises.



      (3)   Class C - Package liquor store (Carry-outs).  Class C
licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in its original
package with seals unbroken for consumption at places other than upon the
licensed premises.  The consumption of alcoholic liquors upon such premises
is expressly prohibited.  The annual fee for a Class C license shall be
$1,000.



      (4)   Class D - Outing permits.  Class D licenses shall
authorize the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors at the place
specified in the application for picnics or other public outings for periods
not to exceed one day.  The fee for a class D license shall be $50 for each
day the license is in effect.  Said fee shall be waived twice per calendar
year for any unit of local government and for any not for profit corporation
whose principal address is within the village.  A series of fund-raising
events with the same common theme shall be considered one waiver for the
entire series.



      (5)   Reserved.



      (6)   Class F - Beer and wine package sales (Carry-outs). 
Class F licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in their
original package with seals unbroken for consumption at places other than
upon the licensed premises.  The consumptionof beer, wine or any other
alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises is expressly prohibited.  The
annual fee for a Class F license shall be $1,000.



      (7)   Class G - Resort permitting bar and package liquor. 
Class G licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon the premises specified
of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises at or over a
bar, a service bar and/or at tables.  The sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption off the premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly
prohibited except that the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in its original
package with the seal unbroken for consumption off the premises where they
are sold is permitted.  The sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor outside
the enclosed structure described in the application is expressly permitted. 
The annual fee for a Class G license shall be $1,400 for an establishment not
offering entertainment on the premises.  The annual fee for a Class G
license shall be $2,000 for an establishment offering entertainment on the
premises.



      (8)   Entertainment fee.  Prior to permitting entertainment,
the licensee shall first pay to the village a $600 entertainment fee.  This
fee shall be in addition to any license fee previously paid.



      (9)   Class H - Town Center.  Class H license shall authorize
the retail sale upon the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for
consumption upon the specified premises at or over a bar, a service bar
and/or at tables.  The sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the
premises where they are sold (carry outs) is expressly prohibited. The annual
fee for the Class H license shall be $1,000 for an establishment not offering
entertainment on the premises. The annual fee for a Class H license shall be
$1,600 for an establishment offering entertainment on the premises. Any Class
H establishment must conform to the following:



         (a)   A Class H license shall only be issued for a
restaurant.



         (b)   At least 60% of the gross sales at such restaurant
must be generated from the sale of food.



         (c)   The restaurant must contain a minimum of 1,500
square feet of indoor dining area with sit down dining.  Dining area shall
not include any bar area.



         (d)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor in outdoor
dining areas is permitted in areas approved in conjunction with the liquor
license.



      (10)   Class I - Beer and Wine. Class I license shall
authorize the retail sale upon the premises specified of alcoholic liquor for
consumption upon the specified premises.  The premises shall not serve at or
over a bar but may serve at a service bar or at tables.  At least 60% of the
gross receipts upon the premises must be generated from sales of goods other
than alcoholic beverages or from fees for services or entertainment. The
annual fee for the Class I license shall be $1,000 for an establishment not
offering entertainment on the premises. The annual fee for a Class I license
shall be $1,600 for an establishment offering entertainment on the premises.



      (11)   Class J - Extended Time.  A Class J license shall
authorize the holder of a Class B license to stay open one hour longer than
the hours set forth for a Class B license in § 111.41.  The Class J license
shall be in addition to the Class B license and may be issued, suspended or
revoked together with or separate from the Class B license.  That except for
the extended closing time, all other terms, conditions and restrictions of
the Class B license shall remain in full force and effect.  The annual fee
for the Class J license shall be $200.



      (12)   Class K - Winery/Microbrewer/Distiller. Class K
Winery/Microbrewery/Craft Distilling License shall authorize a winery, craft
distillery or microbrewery to: a) ferment/distill/produce wine, spirits or
beer only on the specified licensed premises (“in-house products”), b)
furnish samples of those in-house products for consumption on the premises,
c) sell the in-house products by the glass for consumption on the premises,
d) sell the in-house products in the original corked, capped or sealed and
labeled container for consumption on or off the premises. The annual fee for
the Class K license shall be $1,000 for an establishment not offering
entertainment on the premises. The annual fee for a Class K license shall be
$1,600 for an establishment offering entertainment on the premises.



         (a)   In addition to the sale of products produced at
the licensed premises, the licensee may also sell for consumption on or off
the premises products fermented or distilled by the licensee at another
location.



         (b)   The Class K License does not allow the sale of
alcoholic beverage other than as herein specifically permitted.



      (13)   Class L - Outdoor Dining. Shall authorize the sale,
delivery and consumption of alcoholic beverages outside of the licensed
premises in an “outdoor dining area” subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   The outdoor sale, delivery and consumption of
alcoholic beverages (“outdoor service”) is only permitted in conjunction
wit the sale and consumption of food. The licensee shall utilize the same
menu for outdoor dining as it utilizes for food service at its licensed
premises. All food items shall be available at all times the outdoor dining
is open.



         (b)   The outdoor dining area must close and there shall
be no outdoor service after 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday or after 10:00
p.m. on Sunday.



         (c)   1.   An applicant for an outdoor dining area
license shall mail, by first class mail, notices to all residences within 250
feet and to all businesses which are adjacent to the proposed outdoor dining
area within 250 feet of the property lines of the location for which the
license is sought. The applicant must file with the Liquor Control
Commissioner the following:



               a.   A certificate of service which shall
consist of an affidavit signed by the person or persons who effectuated the
mailing, verifying the date of mailing and listing the names and addresses of
individuals served;



               b.   An affidavit verifying that all persons
entitled to notice under this section are listed in the certificate of
service as having been served with notice;



               c.   A complete list containing the names
and addresses of the persons served with notice; and



               d.   A written statement certifying that the
requirements of this Section have been met.



            2.   This notice shall be sent to all persons to
whom the current real estate tax bills are sent as shown on the record of the
Will or Grundy County Treasurer’s Office. The notice shall be sent no
sooner than 60 days and no later than 30 days before the filing of the
outdoor dining license application with the Liquor control Commissioner. Such
notice shall state the name and residence address of the applicant, the
street number and location of the premises for which the license is sought,
the type of license sought, the hours of operation for the premises to be
licensed, and the date on which the application will be filled. The notice
shall also state that any objection to the granting of the license sought
shall be made to the Liquor Control Commissioner, in writing, signed by the
objector and sent before or within ten days after the date for filing the
application as indicated on the notice, and shall set forth the specific
grounds for the objection.



         (d)   No alcoholic beverages may be sold, served or
transported beyond the established perimeter fence of the outdoor dining area
at any time whatsoever, except to return into the primary establishment.



         (e)   No person shall possess or consume alcoholic
beverages in the outdoor dining area at any time other than during the
permitted outdoor dining area open hours.



         (f)   Outdoor loudspeakers or amplified music or sound
systems shall be permitted in the outdoor dining area, however, any music or
audio programming played on such equipment shall be permitted only when it is
not audible at the property line of any residence 150 feet or more from the
perimeter of the outdoor dining area.



         (g)   The licensee shall be required to adopt adequate
internal controls or rules to limit the noise generated by any patrons or
other persons in the outdoor dining area so that the noise shall not be
audible at any point 100 feet from the perimeter.



         (h)   When the outdoor dining area is located on a
public sidewalk, at least six (6') feet of clearance shall be afforded in a
convenient location for pedestrians to walk through.



         (i)   The outdoor dining license may only be held by
Class A, B or H Licensees. An outdoor dining license may be suspended or
revoked independent of or in conjunction with the underlying license.



         (j)   The applicant for an outdoor dining license must
submit a site plan for the proposed area. The site plan shall depict the area
for outdoor dining. The outdoor dining area shall be operated in conformance
with the approved site plan.



         (k)   The licensee must have a lease for the outdoor
dining area for the same term as the licensed premises.



         (l)   The outdoor dining area must be adjacent and
contiguous to the indoor establishment.



         (m)   The outdoor dining area must be enclosed by a
minimum four (4') foot decorative fence which shall be brick, stone, wrought
iron, PVC, aluminum, or wood. Chain link is expressly prohibited. The fence
is subject to review and approval by the Liquor Commissioner as part of the
site plan.



         (n)   The annual fee for a Class L License shall be $500.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83;  Am. Ord. 442, passed 2-22-88;  Am. Ord. 494,
passed 11-30-88;  Am. Ord. 665, passed 7-15-91; Am. Ord. 891, passed 2-5-96;
Am. Ord. 1082, passed 12-20-99; Am. Ord. 1315, passed 11-17-04; Am. Ord.
1377, passed 3-21-05; Am. Ord. 1384, passed 6-6-05; Am. Ord. 1541, passed
7-7-08; Am. Ord. 1620, passed 4-19-10; Am. Ord. 1852, passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord.
1853, passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord. 1888, passed 3-20-17; Am. Ord. 1916, passed
12-15-17)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.14  APPROVAL OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   When the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall approve any
application, the applicant shall be issued a license upon the payment in
advance of the required fee, which license shall be in writing over the name
and under the seal of the village and executed by the President of the
village and attested by the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.15  LIMIT ON NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   There shall be issued in the village not more than two Class A
licenses.



   (B)   There shall be issued in the village not more than four Class
B licenses.



   (C)   There shall be issued in the village not more than two Class C
licenses.



   (D)   There is no limitation upon the number of Class D licenses,
but their issuance is entirely within the reasonable discretion of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner, provided however that no more than two Class D
licenses shall be outstanding at any time.



   (E)   Reserved.



   (F)   There shall be issued in the village not more than six Class F
licenses.



   (G)   There shall be issued in the village not more than four Class
G licenses.



   (H)   There shall be issued not more than three Class H licenses.



   (I)   There shall be issued in the village not more than two Class I
liquor licenses.



   (J)   There may be issued the same number of Class J licenses as the
number of Class B licenses that are issued.



   (K)   There shall be issued not more than two Class K licenses.



   (L)   There shall be issued not more than three Class L licenses.



(Ord. 494, passed 11-30-88; Am. Ord. 564, passed 1-8-90; Am. Ord. 665, passed
7-15-91; Am. Ord. 725, passed 8-3-92; Am. Ord. 891, passed 2-5-96; Am. Ord.
988, passed 6-15-98; Am. Ord. 1315, passed 11-17-04; Am. Ord. 1371, passed
1-17-05; Am. Ord. 1384, passed 6-6-05; Am. Ord. 1413, passed 3-6-06; Am. Ord.
1510, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 1537, passed 4-21-08; Am. Ord. 1541, passed
7-7-08; Am. Ord. 1610, passed 2-15-10; Am. Ord. 1620, passed 4-19-10; Am.
Ord. 1664, passed 9-19-11; Am. Ord. 1702, passed 8-6-12; Am. Ord. 1722,
passed 1-7-13; Am. Ord. 1810, passed 7-20-15; Am. Ord. 1827, passed 1-18-16;
Am. Ord. 1838, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord. 1839, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord. 1852,
passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord. 1853, passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord. 1862, passed 7-5-16;
Am. Ord. 1888, passed 3-20-17; Am. Ord. 1902, passed 8-7-17; Am. Ord. 1903,
passed 8-7-17)



§ 111.16  TERM.



   No license, except Class D, shall be issued under this chapter for a
period of less than one calendar year, unless the same is issued pursuant to
application made subsequent to the first day of any calendar year, in which
event the license shall be issued for the remaining period of the year, and
no license shall be issued for a period of more than one year.  All licenses
issued hereunder shall be valid from January 1 to December 31 of each year.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.17  FEES PRORATED.



   For all licenses issued and in effect on or before June 30 of each year
either the full fee or a minimum of one-half of the full fee shall be paid
with the first payment plus an additional fee of $10 per license being due
prior to the issuance of the license and the second payment being due on or
before June 30 of each year.  For all licenses issued on or after July 1 of
each year, the fee shall be 50% of the annual fee as hereinbefore
established.  All license fees shall be paid to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner at the time the application is made and shall be forthwith
turned over to the Treasurer of the village.  The required fee shall be
submitted with the application.  In the event the license applied for is
denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.  If the license is
granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in
such other fund as shall have been designated by the Village Board by proper
action.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.18  RECORD OF LICENSES.



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of all such licenses issued by him and shall furnish the
Clerk of the village, the Treasurer of the village and the Chief of Police
each with a copy thereof upon the issuance of any new license and shall
notify each of the said officers, in writing, upon the issuance of any new
licenses or revocation of any old licenses, within 24 hours of its issuance
or revocation.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.19  RIGHTS OF LICENSEE.



   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, valid  for  a 
period  not  to  exceed  one  year,  unless sooner revoked as in this
chapter provided, and the same shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or be subject to being encumbered
or hypothecated.  Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee,
and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution,
provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor may continue the business of the
sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor as authorized by law, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee
after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.20  RENEWAL.



   Any licensee may apply to renew his license at the expiration thereof,
provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and provided
further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed
as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the President and Board of
Trustees of the village from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued
within the village by amending this chapter.  However, when the number of
applications made for a liquor license, or for any class of license, exceeds
the number of licenses permitted under this chapter, prior licensees shall be
given preference over new applicants, provided that such prior licensees
otherwise qualify for such license.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.21  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   (A)   Licenses issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application for license.  Such
location may be changed only upon written approval to make a change issued by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.  No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed  new  location is a proper one for  the 
retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state and the
ordinances of this village.



   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically permitted by a particular class
of license, the licenses issued hereunder shall permit the sale or
consumption (except permitted carry-out sales) of alcoholic liquor only
within the enclosed structures described in the application for license.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83;  Am. Ord. 667, passed 7-15-91)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.22  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans,
their spouses or children or any military or naval station, provided that
this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, to
regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such
place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes
prior to the effective date of this chapter; nor to the renewal of a license
for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any
church or school where such church or school has been established within such
100 feet since the issuance of the original license.  In the case of a
church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any
building used for worship services or educational programs and not to
property boundaries.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of
a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if
such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises
solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.23  DENIAL OF LICENSE WHERE MAJORITY OF CUSTOMERS ARE MINORS.



   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority
of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business
transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks
for minors.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.24  LICENSE TO BE POSTED.



   The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a
prominent place within the licensed premises.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.25  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner  may suspend for not
more than 30 days (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5 § 4-4) or may revoke for cause, any
license issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of
the provisions of “An Act relating to alcoholic liquors,” ILCS Ch. 235,
as it now exists and may hereafter be amended or the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation established by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner or State Liquor Commissioner, which is not inconsistent with
law, all in the manner and as provided in ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5 § 7-5.



   (B)   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke the retail liquor dealer's license
for any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.26  PROPERTY TO BE IN CITY LIMITS.



   No liquor license shall be granted nor renewed unless all property used
in conjunction with the licensed premises, including but not limited to,
storage areas, buildings and structures and parking areas are within the
corporate limits of the village.



(Ord. 757, passed 4-5-93)



§ 111.27  BRINGING ALCOHOL INTO CERTAIN PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   The owners, agents and employees of restaurants, dining rooms,
cabarets, night clubs, dance halls and places in which entertainment is
provided or food served are prohibited from allowing patrons to bring upon
the premises alcoholic beverages to be served to or consumed by said
patrons.  Provided further that persons are prohibited from bringing
alcoholic beverages into such places for the purpose of consumption therein.



(Ord. 1164, passed 3-5-01)  Penalty, see § 111.999



OPERATION AND SALES



§ 111.35  CONDITION OF PREMISES.



   All premises used for the retail sale of liquor or for the storage of
such liquor shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.  Said premises
shall be kept in full compliance with ordinances of the village and the
county in addition to rules and regulations of the County Health Department
concerning the condition of premises used for storage or sale of food for
human consumption;  further, the premises both inside and out shall be kept
free of all debris, litter and trash.  The exterior of the premises shall be
checked on a regular basis and all debris, litter and trash, including, but
not limited to, cans, bottles and paper wrappers shall be immediately
removed.  Trash dumpsters shall be kept within a screened area and not be
permitted to overflow.  All garbage placed into said dumpsters shall be at a
height lower than the top of the dumpster and the dumpster tops shall at all
times be completely closed.  All trash dumpster tops shall at all times be
completely screened from the  public view.  Screening as herein required
shall be effected by construction of a fence conforming to all village
ordinances and of a size and construction sufficient to completely hide the
dumpster.  Failure to comply with any of the terms of this section shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of the liquor license of the licensed
premises in addition to other fines or penalties which may be imposed.



(Ord. 535, passed 8-7-89)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.36  EMPLOYEES.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such diseases to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.37  GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to keep, have, use or permit to be used in any
premises in the village used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any
slot machine, pin ball machine or other instrument device upon which money is
staked or hazarded or into which money is paid or played upon chance, or upon
the result of the action of which money or other valuable thing is staked,
bet, hazarded, won or lost.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.38  LICENSEE TO CONTROL CONDUCT ON PREMISES.



   No licensee hereunder shall permit hoodlums, police characters,
vagrants or vagabonds to congregate  upon or loiter upon the premises, nor
shall such licensee permit any disorderly conduct or disturbance of the peace
thereon.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.39  SALE IN RESIDENTIAL DWELLING PROHIBITED.



   No license shall be issued for the purpose of selling or offering for
sale at retail any intoxicating liquor in any dwelling, house, flat or
apartment building.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.40  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   The licensee and its associates, members, representatives, agents,
officers and employees, shall at all times be personally responsible for the
proper operation of the business, including compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and the observation of all laws and regulations applicable
thereto.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.41  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   No licensee shall keep open or allow his place of business to
remain open or sell or offer for sale at retail, or offer to give away on any
licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor in the village during the following
hours:



      (1)   Class A license.



         (a)   Tuesday through Friday inclusive:  Between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   Saturday:  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
(effective 1/1/2017) and 6:00 a.m. (effective 1/1/2017);



         (c)   Sunday:  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
(effective 1/1/2018) and 8:00 a.m. (effective 1/1/2017);



         (d)   Monday:  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m.



      (2)   Class C license.



         (a)   Tuesday through Friday inclusive:  Between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   Saturday:  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.;



         (c)   Sunday:  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00
a.m.;



         (d)   Monday:  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m.



      (3)   Class D license.



         (a)   Tuesday through Friday inclusive:  No service
from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   Saturday:  No service from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.;



         (c)   Sunday:  No service from 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.;



         (d)   Monday:  No service from 12:00 midnight to 6:00
a.m.



      (4)   Reserved.



      (5)   Class F license.



         (a)   Tuesday through Friday inclusive:  Between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   Saturday and Sunday:  Between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (c)   Monday:  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m.



      (6)   Class G license.



         (a)   Tuesday through Friday inclusive:  Between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   Saturday:  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
(effective 1/1/2017) and 6:00 a.m. (effective 1/1/2017);



         (c)   Sunday:  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
(effective 1/1/2018) and 8:00 a.m. (effective 1/1/2017);



         (d)   Monday:  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m.



      (7)   Class B license.



         (a)   Monday through Friday inclusive between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.;



         (c)   Sunday: no service from 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.



      (8)   Class H license:



         (a)   Tuesday through Friday inclusive between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



         (b)   Saturday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.



         (c)   Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.



         (d)   Monday between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m.



      (9)   Class I license.



         (a)   Monday through Thursday from midnight to 6:00 a.m.



         (b)   Sunday: between the hours of midnight and 8:00 a.m.



         (c)   Friday and Saturday.  1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      (10)   Class K license. Notwithstanding the above, the Class K
license may be open from 10:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.



      (11)   Class L license. Notwithstanding the above, the Class L
license may be open:



         (a)   Monday through Saturday between the hours of 10:00
a.m. to 11:00 p.m.;



         (b)   Sundays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.



   (B)   Sale of alcoholic liquors shall cease immediately at the
aforesaid first hour noted above.  Members of the general public must leave
the licensed premises before the closing hours herein established.  Any
license so further restricted as to time shall, when issued, indicate on the
face thereof the hours during which the licensee thereunder may keep open or
allow his place of business to remain open as aforesaid.  The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may, at his discretion, further reasonably restrict the
above general hours during which any licensee may keep open or allow his
place of business to remain open, or sell or offer for sale or offer to give
away any alcoholic liquor at any licensed premises when in the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner’s judgment, a further restriction would be in the best
interest of the public and the village and in furtherance of the general
welfare and safety thereof.



   (C)   Notwithstanding anything contained in division (A) of this
section, all Class A and G licenses effective 1/1/2018 may remain open and
continue the sale of alcohol until 3:00 a.m. on the morning following:



      (1)   New Years Eve;



      (2)   The night of the official Channahon fireworks display;



      (3)   The day preceding Thanksgiving Day;



      (4)   St. Patrick’s Day if St. Patrick’s Day falls on a
Friday or Saturday, or, if it falls on another day, then the Saturday
immediately preceding St. Patrick’s Day; and



      (5)   A day once per calendar year to be determined by the
licensee. In order to utilize this “floater” option, the licensee must
notify the Village President and the Chief of Police in writing not less than
14 days prior to the date requested.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 397, passed 9-9-85; Am. Ord. 442, passed
2-22-88; Am. Ord. 748, passed 12-21-92; Am. Ord. 891, passed 2-5-96; Am. Ord.
1082, passed 12-20-99; Am. Ord. 1315, passed 11-17-03; Am. Ord. 1384, passed
6-6-05; Am. Ord. 1541, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 1641, passed 2-21-11; Am. Ord.
1852, passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord. 1853, passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord. 1875, passed
12-19-16; Am. Ord. 1888, passed 3-20-17)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.42  PERSONS ON PREMISES AFTER CLOSING HOURS.



   No person other than the licensee or his employees shall remain upon
the licensed premises after the designated closing hour.  Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent the licensee or his employees from
remaining upon the licensed premises after the aforesaid closing hours. 
Should any person other than the licensee, members of his family or his
employees, agent or servants be found upon or leaving the licensed premises
after the closing hour, the village shall have the right to presume that such
person was served alcoholic liquor after the closing hour and such
presumption may be raised in any court in a proceeding for violation of the
terms of this chapter or at any hearing concerning the revocation of the
license issued to the licensee of the premises in question.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.43  WARNING TO UNDERAGE PERSONS TO BE DISPLAYED.



   In every tavern or other place in the village where alcoholic liquor is
sold there  shall be  displayed at  all times in a prominent place a
printed card which shall read substantially as follows:



   “WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21



      It is unlawful for you to purchase alcoholic liquor or to
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor."



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.44  UNDERAGE PERSON MAY NOT REMAIN ON PREMISES; EXCEPTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license
or his agent or employee to suffer or permit any person under the age of 21
to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or
situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located;
provided that this section shall not apply to any person under the age of 21
who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or to any licensed
premises which derives its principal business from the sale or service of
other commodities than alcoholic liquor.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.45  PROHIBITED SALES, GIFTS OR DELIVERIES BY NON-LICENSE HOLDERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the
village for any person to sell, give or deliver an alcoholic beverage to any
person under the age of 21 years, unless such person is the parent or legal
guardian of the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold, given or
delivered.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the consumption
of alcoholic beverages by any person under the age of 21 years on any
premises owned, possessed or controlled by such person within the corporate
limits of the village unless such consumption is under the direct supervision
of a parent or legal guardian of the person under 21 years.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent a hotel  or 
motel  room  from  the  proprietor  or  agent thereof for the purpose
of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of
alcoholic beverages by persons who are under the age of 21 years.



(Ord. 508, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.46  PROHIBITED SALES, GIFTS OR DELIVERIES BY LICENSEES.



   (A)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any
intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be an habitual drunkard,
spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental
treatment.  No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony
or service.  For the purpose of preventing violation of this section, any
licensee or his agent or employee may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
liquor to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity or of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21 years.



   (B)   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is
a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to a motor vehicle
operators license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces.  Proof that the defendant, licensee or his employees or agent
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be
considered in any prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.



   (C)   Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under
the age of 21 years, any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic
evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives or
furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years, evidence of age and
identification of any other person is guilty of a violation of this
section.  Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any
licensee, his agent or employee any written, printed or photostatic evidence
of age and identity which is false, fraudulent  or not actually his own, for
the  purpose  of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure serving of any alcoholic liquor or who has
in his possession any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic
evidence of age and identity is guilty of a violation of this section.  Any
person under the age of 21 years, who has any alcoholic liquor in his
possession on any street or highway or in any public place open to the public
is guilty of a violation of this section.  This does not apply to a person
under the age of 21 years making a delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance
of the order of his parent or in pursuance of his employment.  Whoever
violates provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.47  PROHIBITED POSSESSION.



   (A)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of
such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.  If a
licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that
the sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the
non-age of the prospective recipient, he shall before making such sale or
delivery demand presentation of some form of positive identification
containing proof of age.  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an
identification card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a
false or forged identification card or obtain an identification card by means
of false information.  No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have
possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this section.  The
consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of 21 years is
forbidden.  Whoever violates provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Possession and dispensing or consumption by a minor of
alcoholic liquor in a performance of a religious service or ceremony or the
consumption by a minor under the direct supervision and approval of the
parent or parents of such minor in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by
this section.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.48  AS TO SELL OR DELIVER ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.



   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years of age shall attend any
bar, draw, mix or pour any alcoholic liquor or provide alcoholic beverages to
any wait person for delivery to a customer or other individual.



   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years of age shall sell or
otherwise transfer a package liquor alcohol.



   (C)   No person under the age of 18 years of age may act as a server
of alcoholic liquor.



(Ord. 1873, passed 11-21-16)  Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.49  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



   No licensee licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall deny or
permit his agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantagements, facilities and privileges on
any premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject
only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable
alike to all citizens.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83) Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.50  INSPECTION.



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner is hereby given the power to
enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any
premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of
this chapter, "An act relating to alcoholic liquor," ILCS Ch. 235, or any
rules or regulations adopted by him or by the State Liquor Commissioner have
been or are being violated and at such time to examine the premises of said
licensee in connection therewith.



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83)



§ 111.51  HAPPY HOUR REGULATION.



   (A)   All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices
charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the
licensed premises or in any room or part thereof.  Whenever a hotel or
multi-use establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on
its premises more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor
are sold at retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall maintain at
each establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for drinks at
that establishment.



   (B)   Happy hours are regulated as follows.  No retail licensee or
employee or agent of such licensee shall:



      (1)   Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the
price of one drink of alcoholic liquor, serve two or more drinks of alcoholic
liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that one person, except
conducting product sampling as permitted by law or selling or delivering wine
by the bottle or carafe;



      (2)   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited
number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a
fixed price, except at private functions not open to the general public or as
provided in this section;



      (3)   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic
liquor to any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that
charged other purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a
promotion to encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized
in division (D)(7) below;



      (4)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a
drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing
proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink on that day.



   (C)   Permitted happy hours and meal packages, party packages and
entertainment packages.  As used in this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DEDICATED EVENT SPACE.  A room or rooms or other clearly
delineated space within a retail licensee's premises that is reserved for the
exclusive use of party package invitees during the entirety of a party
package.  Furniture, stanchions and ropes, or other room dividers may be
used to clearly delineate a dedicated event space.



      MEAL PACKAGE.  A food and beverage package, which may or may not
include entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an
accompaniment to food, including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting,
or any combination thereof for a fixed price my a retail licensee or any
other licensee operating within a sports facility, restaurant, winery,
brewery or distillery.



      PARTY PACKAGE.  A private party, function or event for a
specific social or business occasion, either arranged by invitation or
reservation for a defined number of individuals, that is not open to the
general public and where attendees are served both food and alcohol for a
fixed price in a dedicated event space.



   (D)   A retail licensee may:



      (1)   Offer free food or entertainment at any time;



      (2)   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal
package;



      (3)   Sell or offer for sale a party package only if the
retail licensee:



         (a)   Offers food in the dedicated event space;



         (b)   Limits the party package to no more than three
hours;



         (c)   Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts or any
other such wearable items to identify party package attendees so the
attendees may be granted access to the dedicated event space; and



         (d)   Excludes individuals not participating in the
party package from the dedicated event space;



      (4)   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel
package;



      (5)   Negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel
package;



      (6)   Provide room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;



      (7)   Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not
limited to, buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor
which are customarily sold in such manner, or sell bottles of spirits;



      (8)   Advertise events permitted under this section;



      (9)   Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a
specified time period only if:



         (a)   The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not
changed during the time that it is discounted;



         (b)   The period of time during which any drink of
alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed four hours per day and 15
hours per week; however, this period of time is not required to be
consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner;



         (c)   The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the licensed premises' closing hour; and



         (d)   Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic
liquor during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the
licensee's publicly available website at least seven days prior to the
specified time.



   (E)   A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a retailer's license, in addition to any other penalties or
fines.



(Ord. 552, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 1811, passed 8-17-15)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.52  NUDITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, while on any premises licensed hereunder and in
public view, shall engage in the following conduct:



      (1)   Expose his or her genital, pubic hair buttocks, anus or
anal cleft;



      (2)   Employ any device or covering which is intended to give
the appearance of or simulate his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anus
or anal cleft; or



      (3)   Appear without a fully opaque covering of his or her
genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anus or anal cleft.



   (B)   No female person, while on the premises and in public view,
shall engage in the following conduct:



      (1)   Expose that area of the human breast below the top of
the areola;



      (2)   Employ any device or covering which is intended to give
the appearance of or simulate that area of the human breast below the top of
the areola; or



      (3)   Appear without a fully opaque covering of that area of
the human breast below the top of the areola.



(Ord. 586, passed 5-7-90) Penalty, see § 111.999



§ 111.53  FASHION SHOWS, SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, AND SALE OF CLOTHING.



   (A)   No fashion shows shall be permitted at which male or female
undergarments, bathing suits, or lingerie is displayed on human bodies.



   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted.  The term
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall have the same meaning as the SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS as that term is defined in § 115.01.



   (C)   No person shall sell or offer for sale or offer as a prize for
a raffle any clothing that constitutes male or female undergarments, bathing
suits, or lingerie.



(Ord. 782, passed 12-20-93)



Cross-reference:



   Sexual conduct in business establishments, §§ 115.40 - 115.42



TOWN CENTER DISTRICT



§ 111.100  LICENSES.



   The Class H license is only authorized in an area subject to the Town
Center zoning classification.  The only licenses which may be issued in the
Town Center District are Class C and Class H.



(Ord. 1384, passed 6-6-05)



§ 111.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically
provided, shall, in addition to suspension or revocation of license as above
provided, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which
a violation occurs or continues. 



(Ord. 337, passed 12-5-83).



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating § 111.52 shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $500. 



(Ord. 586, passed 5-7-90)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Public Amusements



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License required; deposit



   112.03   Tax imposed



   112.04   Filing of tax return



   112.05   Failure to pay tax



   112.06   Admission tickets



   112.07   Fire exits



   112.08   Inspection for fire hazards



   112.09   Premises to be clean and sanitary



   112.10   Drunken conduct



   112.11   Possession or use of alcoholic beverages prohibited;
exception



   112.12   Exemption for charitable organizations and units of local
government



Coin-Operated Amusement Devices



   112.20   Definitions



   112.21   Exemption from regulations



   112.22   License required



   112.23   Application for license



   112.24   License fee



   112.25   Issuance; term



   112.26   License to be posted



   112.27   Gambling laws to be complied with



   112.28   Revocation of license



   112.29   Administration and enforcement



 



   112.99   Penalty



PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC AMUSEMENT.  Any occasion to which the public generally may be
admitted upon payment of an admission fee or other charge whether direct or
indirect to witness or participate in any theatricals, exhibitions, movies,
motion pictures, amusements, ice skating rinks, roller skating rinks,
circuses, shows, golf courses, rebound tumbling centers, or indoor or outdoor
tennis clubs.



   PUBLIC PLACE OF AMUSEMENT.  Any building, hall, theatre, room, place,
or enclosure where public amusements are carried on.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; DEPOSIT.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall manage, conduct, produce,
personally operate or carry on any public amusement or public place of
amusement without having obtained a license therefor.  Application shall be
on forms provided by the village.  Before any license is issued, the
applicant shall execute a written undertaking conditioned that the taxes
imposed herein will be paid and collected in the names and at the times
provided herein.



   (B)   Every applicant for a license for a public amusement or public
place of amusement shall furnish a refundable deposit fee of $50
simultaneously with the application for said license.  The deposit shall be
refunded upon the faithful observance of all ordinances of the village
relevant to the operation of a public amusement or public place of amusement,
including the payment of any taxes pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A license tax is imposed upon all public amusements or public
places of amusement located within the corporate limits of the village, such
license tax to be in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross
receipts derived from the sale of admission tickets to said public amusement
or public place of amusement.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person or other business entity to
operate a public amusement or public place of amusement for gain or profit
within the corporate limits of the village without payment of the tax
specified in this section.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84; Am. Ord. 358, passed 8-6-84)  Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.04  FILING OF TAX RETURN.



   Every owner, manager or operator of a public amusement or place of
public amusement within the village shall file a sworn tax return on a
quarterly basis with the Village Administrator on forms prescribed by the
Village Administrator, showing receipts received with respect to gross
receipts derived from the sale of admission tickets during the preceding
quarterly period.  At the time of filing of said tax return, the owner,
manager or operator of the public amusement or public place of amusement
shall pay to the village all taxes due for the period to which the tax return
applies.  The dates upon which said quarterly returns are to be filed shall
be provided by rules and regulations promulgated by the Village Administrator.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.05  FAILURE TO PAY TAX.



   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate
of two percent per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be
added and collected.  Whenever any person, firm or corporation shall fail to
pay any tax as herein provided, upon the request of the Corporate
Authorities, the Village Attorney shall bring or cause to be brought an
action to enforce the payment of said tax in behalf of the village in any
court of competent jurisdiction.  In addition to such other  relief which
may be awarded, if any, there shall be awarded in such action all costs and
expenses of the village, including all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
the village in bringing said action and any appeals, if any.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  ADMISSION TICKETS.



   Admission to all public amusements or public places of amusement shall
be by ticket.  The ticket shall bear printed thereon in plain figures its
price and no ticket shall be sold by or for any licensee for morethan the
price printed or stamped thereon.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.07  FIRE EXITS.



   Every public place of amusement shall provide adequate exits in case of
fire and shall at all times keep aisles or approaches to the exits free and
unobstructed.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.08  INSPECTION FOR FIRE HAZARDS.



   Places from time to time shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal or
Chief of Police who shall immediately report to the Corporate Authorities any
conditions in any places which render them hazardous in case of fire.  The
Corporate Authorities shall thereupon by appropriate resolution fix
requirements as necessary to remove the hazard.  The requirements shall
immediately be communicated to and carried out by the licensee.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.09  PREMISES TO BE CLEAN AND SANITARY.



   Every public place of amusement shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition with sufficient toilet and plumbing facilities for the health,
safety, and comfort of its patrons and shall provide adequate ventilation to
afford clean fresh air to its patrons at all times.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.10  DRUNKEN CONDUCT.



   No person who is intoxicated, shall be admitted or permitted to remain
in any public place of amusement.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)



§ 112.11  POSSESSION OR USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   No vinous, spirituous or malt liquors or other alcoholic beverage of
any kind or description shall be kept in or upon a place of public amusement
or given away or sold nor shall any person in or about the premises, as
patrons thereof or otherwise, be allowed to carry, bring or use any of such
alcoholic beverages upon the premises, unless the place of public amusement
is also licensed as a retail liquor dealer by the village and the state.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.12  EXEMPTION FOR CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS AND UNITS OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT.



   The taxation provisions of this chapter shall not apply to units of
local government nor to religious, educational, or charitable organizations
qualified under Section 501(c)(3) or its successor provision of the Internal
Revenue Code or to any entertainment the entire net proceeds of which are
donated to charity.



(Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84; Am. Ord. 377, passed 1-7-85)



COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 112.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any mechanical or electronic
amusement machine or device, the operation of which is governed or controlled
by the deposit or payment of a coin or token, including without being limited
thereto, any such coin-controlled machine or device capable of producing or
reproducing any vocal or instrumental sounds, for the purpose of amusement or
skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged.  The term does include
any coin-operated mechanical musical devices and billiard or pool tables but
it does not include vending machines in which gambling or amusement features
are not incorporated.



   OPERATOR.  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association
who sets up for operation by another or leases or distributes for the purpose
of operation by another, any machine or device as herein described, whether
such setting up for operation, leasing or distribution be for a fixed charge
or rental or on a basis of a division of the income derived from such a
device or otherwise.



   PROPRIETOR.  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association
or club, who as the owner,lessee or proprietor has under his or its control
any establishment, place or premises in or at which such machine or device is
placed or kept for use or play or on exhibition for the purpose of use or
play.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)



§ 112.21  EXEMPTION FROM REGULATIONS.



   This subchapter shall not apply to any club maintaining coin-operated
amusement devices exclusively for the use of members and guests of the club
nor to any such devices maintained by any public utility for furnishing
service of any public utility.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)



§ 112.22  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether an
operator or proprietor, to operate, install, keep, maintain, use or permit
the use upon his premises any coin-operated amusement device for which a
current license is not first obtained and the license fee paid.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.23  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for the license required by this subchapter shall set forth
a description of the coin-operated amusement device for which a license is
sought, which description shall contain the manufacturer's name, the make of
the device, the factory number thereof, if any, and any other identifying
numbers, marks or symbols.  The applicant shall also set forth the exact
address of the premises upon which the coin-operated amusement device is to
be installed, kept, maintained or used and any other relevant information
required by the village.  Such license shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable and in the case of a proprietor shall apply only to the
device for which such license is issued.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)



§ 112.24  LICENSE FEE.



   The annual fee for each coin-operated device shall be $30 payable upon
application for the license.  The annual fee shall increase $10 every five
years effective May 1, 2011 and thereafter.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84; Am. Ord. 1419, passed 4-3-06)



§ 112.25  ISSUANCE; TERM.



   Upon payment of the license fee established in this subchapter, the
Village Administrator or his or her designee shall issue a license in the
name of the owner of the business in which the device is located as licensee,
authorizing the use of the device for the license period ending one year
following issuance of the license.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84; Am. Ord. 1419, passed 4-3-06)



§ 112.26  LICENSE TO BE POSTED.



   The licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently or
conspicuously on the machines or devices being licensed.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.27  GAMBLING LAWS TO BE COMPLIED WITH.



   No coin-operated amusement device shall be operated or permitted to be
used in such a manner as to violate the gambling laws of the village or of
the state.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.28  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The President and Board of Trustees shall have the right to revoke any
license issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)



§ 112.29  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized to make, promulgate and
enforce reasonable rules and regulations relating to the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(Ord. 344, passed 4-16-84; Ord. 347, passed 4-16-84)



CHAPTER 113:  AUTOMOBILE WRECKING ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   [Reserved]



   113.03   [Reserved]



   113.04   Purchase of articles from minors



   113.05   Record of articles purchased



   113.06   Condition of premises



   113.07   Nuisance



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING ESTABLISHMENT.  Any establishment, building or
other place where the business is carried on of wrecking old, used, or
secondhand automobiles or other motor vehicles, and adding or employing the
accessories or parts thereof in equipping, repairing or rebuilding motor
vehicles, or storing, selling, or otherwise disposing of such accessories,
parts, secondhand automobiles or other motor vehicles.



   LICENSEE.  Any holder of a license issued under the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 75, passed 2-2-70)



§ 113.02  [RESERVED]



§ 113.03  [RESERVED]



§ 113.04  PURCHASE OF ARTICLES FROM MINORS.



   A licensee, under this chapter, shall not purchase or receive from
minors any article whatsoever without the written consent of the parent or
guardian of any such minor.



(Ord. 75, passed 2-2-70)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.05  RECORD OF ARTICLES PURCHASED.



   Each licensee under this chapter shall keep in such form as the
President and Board of Trustees may prescribe, and written in ink or
indelible pencil, a daily record in the English language of articles
purchased including an accurate description of the name and residence of the
person from whom each article was purchased and the name of the employer of
such person, if any; also the day and hour of such purchase and the price
paid.  The records shall at reasonable times, be open the inspection of any
police official or the Village President, Chief of Police or other person
duly authorized in writing for such purpose by the Chief of Police.  No
entry in such records shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced.



(Ord. 75, passed 2-2-70)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.06  CONDITION OF PREMISES.



   Any premises, area, piece or parcel of land used or operated in
connection with a license issued hereunder as an automobile wrecking
establishment shall have no more than two exits and two entrances each which
shall not exceed 15 feet in width at the perimeter of the premises.  Such
premises, area, piece or parcel of land shall be enclosed with either a solid
nontransparent wall or fence or link-weave steel wire or combination thereof
with a minimum height of seven feet from the ground level; excepting for
entrances and exits, the fence or wall shall not contain any poster or
advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee not exceeding 100
square feet in size.  The premises shall be kept in a clean and sightly
condition, and no vehicles, parts or accessories shall be stored outside of
the enclosure or fence hereinabove provided, nor shall any such vehicle, part
or accessory, be stored or visible, over, above or through said enclosure or
fence.



(Ord. 75, passed 2-2-70)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  NUISANCE.



   Any automobile wrecking establishment begun or operated in the village
contrary to the terms of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
subject to the penalties herein set forth.



(Ord. 75, passed 2-2-70)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500, and each day that said
violation continues shall be construed as a separate violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 75, passed 2-2-70)



CHAPTER 114:  FOOD TRUCKS; MOBILE FOOD VENDORS



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Mobile food service on public property



   114.03   Issuance of license



   114.04   Mobile food service on private property



   114.05   Mobile food service requirements



   114.06   Servicing area and operations



   114.07   Time limit/restrictions



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE. The preparation or sale of food, beverages or
other products from a mobile food vehicle/truck or pushcart.



   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE/TRUCK. A vehicle or trailer mounted food service
used to conduct a mobile food service and designed to be readily moveable.



   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person conducting mobile food services in a
mobile food vehicle/truck or push cart within the village.



   PERMITTED SPECIAL EVENTS. Events which have been issued a special
events permit by the village.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any residential dwelling, business or taxing district
property where the vending would not be located in or on public streets,
roadways, alleys, sidewalks, or rights-of-way within the village.



   PUSHCART. A non-motorized unit limited to serving non-potentially
hazardous foods or commissary wrapped food maintained at proper temperatures.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17)



§ 114.02  MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate as a
mobile food vendor on village roads without having first obtained a license
from the Village Clerk. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the
Village Clerk upon forms provided for that purpose. Each application shall
provide the following information:



      (1)   Applicant name, present place of residence, length of
residence at such address, phone number, email address, business name,
business address, type of business, length of time in type of business being
applied for;



      (2)   Name, address, phone number and email address for all
drivers or operators of the mobile food vehicle/truck or pushcart operator;



      (3)   Copy of a valid driver’s license, state ID or other
government identification from all applicants, members, partners, officers,
stockholders, directors, registers agents, managers, drivers, and operators;



      (4)   List of mobile food vehicles/trucks or pushcarts
intended to be operated including the make, model, year, vehicle
identification number and license number for each;



      (5)   Statement whether the applicant has made similar
applications for a license other than described in this application;



      (6)   Statement whether a similar license has been revoked by
the village or any other licensing body and reasons therefor;



      (7)   Statement whether the applicant or operator has ever
been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the
ordinance of any other Illinois municipality regulating the activities of
mobile food vendors;



      (8)   Statement whether the applicant or operator has ever
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of
Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States;



      (9)   Provide an Illinois Department of Revenue identification
number for the retailers’ occupation tax. No license shall be issued if the
applicant does not have an identification number except that no
identification number shall be required if a mobile food vendor is sponsored
by or working for a religious, educational, or charitable organization where
such organization is entirely a nonprofit organization and who can furnish
the village with a “tax exempt number” and written proof of its “tax
exempt status”;



      (10)   Copy of all required Health Department permits;



      (11)   Copy of state license and vehicle registration;



      (12)   Proof of liability and automobile insurance;



      (13)   Each applicant and operator shall submit a photo that
must be the same size as required for passports: two inches by two inches.



   (B)   Each applicant shall pay a $200 application fee per
application. The application fee covers the first mobile food vehicle/truck
or pushcart. Additional mobile food vehicles/trucks or pushcarts will be $100
each. All fees are non-refundable. No application fee shall be charged of a
mobile food vendor sponsored by or working for a religious, educational, or
charitable organization where such organization is entirely a nonprofit
organization and who can furnish the village with a “tax exempt number”
and written proof of its “tax exempt status.”



   (C)   No such license shall be issued to, or held by any person who:



      (1)   Has provided incomplete or incorrect information;



      (2)   Has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
State of Illinois or any other state or federal law of the United States,
within the past five years of the date of the application;



      (3)   Has been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or to any person whose business registration or
license has previously been revoked;



      (4)   Must register as a sex offender as required by the Sex
Offender Registration Act, ILCS Ch. 730, Act 150.



   (D)   A criminal background fingerprint check will be performed by
the Police Department for all applicants, drivers and operators.



      (1)   The applicant shall furnish a list of all applicants and
persons who will be employed as a mobile food vendor, including their names,
addresses and a statement that each person has never been convicted of a
felony;



      (2)   A non-refundable fee equal to the amount charged to the
village for state and federal records checks for each person required to be
fingerprinted shall be paid at the time of application.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person, mobile food vehicle/truck
vendor, or pushcart to drink any alcoholic beverages, shout or call to
prospective customers, or to disturb the peace in any manner while on duty.



   (F)   All statements made upon the application by the applicant
shall be under oath.



   (G)   The office of the Village Clerk shall keep an accurate record
of every application received and acted upon with all other information and
data pertaining to all business registrations and licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter and of the denial of applications.



   (H)   The allowed number of licenses for mobile food vehicles/trucks
or pushcarts may be limited by ordinance.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17; Am. Ord. 1919, passed 1-2-18)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.03  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The office of the Village Clerk shall determine whether the
applicant is fully qualified to receive a mobile food vehicle/truck or
pushcart license.



   (B)   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on
December 31 of each year.



   (C)   A license shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
transferable.



   (D)   No mobile food vehicles/trucks or carts shall operate unless
it is covered by a liability policy and any vehicle insurance required by
law. The applicant shall furnish a copy of such insurance policy prior to the
issuance of a license.



   (E)   All licenses shall be displayed at all times in a place
readily visible to all customers.



   (F)   The fee required by § 114.02(B) for mobile food
vehicles/trucks, or pushcarts is waived for all permitted special events.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.04  MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate as a
mobile food vendor on private property without having first obtained a
registration from the Village Clerk. Mobile food vendor registrations shall
be made to the Village Clerk upon forms provided for that purpose. Each
registrant shall pay a $50 registration fee for the first vehicle or
pushcart, and a $10 fee for each additional vehicle or pushcart. All fees are
non-refundable. No registration fee shall be charged of a mobile food vendor
sponsored by or working for a religious, educational, or charitable
organization where such organization is entirely a nonprofit organization and
who can furnish the village with a “tax exempt number” and written proof
of its “tax exempt status”. Each registrant shall provide the following
information:



      (1)   Completed mobile food vendor registration;



      (2)   Registrant name, address, phone number and email address;



      (3)   Business name, address, phone number, email address,
nature of business and whether the business is tax exempt;



      (4)   Driver/operator name, address, phone number and email
address;



      (5)   List of mobile food vehicles/trucks or pushcarts
intended to be operated including the make, model, year, vehicle
identification number and license number for each;



      (6)   Provide an Illinois Department of Revenue identification
number for the retailers’ occupation tax. No registration shall be issued
if the registrant does not have an identification number except that no
identification number shall be required if a mobile food vendor is sponsored
by or working for a religious, educational, or charitable organization where
such organization is entirely a nonprofit organization and who can furnish
the village with a “tax exempt number” and written proof of its “tax
exempt status”;



      (7)   Copy of driver’s license for all registrants, drivers
and operators;



      (8)   Written permission from the property owner;



      (9)   Copy of Health Department permits;



      (10)   Except for licensing, all mobile food-vending
provisions of this chapter are applicable.



   (B)   The registration fee for mobile food vehicles/trucks or
pushcarts is waived for all permitted special events.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.05  MOBILE FOOD SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All mobile food vendors shall comply with the following:



      (1)   All food preparation shall be conducted in strict
accordance with all applicable village ordinances, county health department
codes, regulations and ordinances, and fire protection district ordinances,
codes and regulations.



      (2)   All food items available for sale, and the price of each
food item must be posted on the exterior of the mobile food vehicles/trucks
or pushcarts.



      (3)   Each mobile food vehicle/truck or pushcart shall have on
each side, in letters readable from a distance of 50 feet, the name of the
licensee operating it. If more than one mobile food vehicle/truck or cart is
operated by a licensee, each mobile food vehicle/truck shall be designated by
a different number, and such number shall appear on each side of such mobile
food vehicle/truck. The licensee shall be responsible for numbering.



      (4)   Each mobile food vehicle/truck or pushcart operator
shall have an operator's identification card, including a picture of the
operator, prominently displayed upon the operator so that it is clearly
visible to the customers at the point of sale. The licensee will be
responsible for providing identification cards to the operators.



      (5)   No mobile food vehicle/truck shall be operated unless it
is equipped with required brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision
mirror, and windshield wipers in good condition.



      (6)   The owner/applicant shall furnish the village, on an
annual basis, an inspection and certificate of safety for each mobile food
vehicle/truck or pushcart indicating the mobile food vehicle/truck or
pushcart is in a safe mechanical condition.



      (7)   Must meet all zoning ordinance requirements.



   (B)   Sale of food from mobile food vehicles/trucks or pushcarts
shall be prohibited as follows:



      (1)   Upon the following roadways with the village:



         (a)   U.S. Route 6, Bell Road north of U.S. Route 6,
Ridge Road, Tryon Street/Knapp Street/Ford Road, McKinley Woods Road south of
U.S. Route 6, Bluff Road, Thomas Dillon Drive, N.W. Frontage Road, S.W.
Frontage Road and S.E. Frontage Road.



      (2)   Within 200 feet of any school property between 7:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. or when school is in session unless the mobile food vendor
possesses written permission from the school district that contains a date
and time range that they are authorized to operate as a mobile food vendor on
school district property.



      (3)   In any park, or on park district property within the
village unless the mobile food vendor possesses written permission from the
park district that contains a date and time range that they are authorized to
operate as a mobile food vendor on park district property.



      (4)   In any area where the operation impedes vehicular or
pedestrian travel as determined by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.



      (5)    Prohibitions listed will be waived if a special event
permit is issued by the village.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17; Am. Ord. 1919, passed 1-2-18)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.06  SERVICING AREA AND OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No person who operates mobile food vehicles/trucks or
pushcarts shall place any food or supplies on the ground, or on a table or
any other object not part of the mobile food vehicles/trucks or pushcarts.



   (B)   No person who operates mobile food vehicles/trucks or
pushcarts shall place tables or chairs adjacent to the mobile food
vehicles/trucks or pushcarts unless the mobile food vehicles/trucks or
pushcarts are located on private property or as part of a permitted special
event.



   (C)   Mobile food vehicles/trucks or pushcarts equipped with any
form of mechanical sound equipment shall not exceed the sound levels set
forth in village code. No sound shall be allowed while the mobile food
vehicles/trucks or pushcarts are stopped.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.07  TIME LIMIT/RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Mobile food vendors may conduct business from 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m., Sunday through Saturday, including holidays unless such business
is located on private property or as part of a permitted special event.



   (B)   Mobile food vendors are not licensed to conduct business door
to door.



   (C)   A mobile food vendor shall not conduct business from a
stationary public location for more than 90 minutes.



   (D)   The village shall have the ability to restrict the location of
mobile food vendors should it be determined the location creates a parking
shortage, parking issue, or unsafe parking conditions.



   (E)   A mobile food vendor must move a minimum of one-half mile in
order to be deemed at a new location for purposes of division (C) above.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17; Am. Ord. 1919, passed 1-2-18)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found liable/guilty by a preponderance of the
evidence of a violation of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 or
more than $750.



   (B)   Each day a violation occurs is considered a separate offense
in which the vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment.



   (C)   In lieu of division (A) above, violations may be prosecuted
via the Village Act process.



(Ord. 1904, passed 8-21-17)



CHAPTER 115:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   List of prohibited sexually oriented businesses



Licenses



   115.10   License required



   115.11   License application; accompanying material



   115.12   Issuance or denial



   115.13   Transfer prohibited



   115.14   License valid only for location listed



   115.15   Altering, defacing, forging or counterfeiting license
unlawful



   115.16   Cancellation upon request of licensee



   115.17   Revocation or suspension



   115.18   Eligibility for license after revocation



Operation



   115.25   Hours of operation; inspection



   115.26   No minors allowed on premises



   115.27   Alcoholic beverages prohibited



   115.28   Certain conduct prohibited



   115.29   Responsibilities of operator



   115.30   Separation from sensitive uses



Sexual Conduct in Business Establishments



   115.40   Definitions



   115.41   Underwear modeling



   115.42   Prohibited conduct



 



   115.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fashion shows, sexually oriented business, and  sale of clothing, §
111.53



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For  the  purpose  of  this  chapter  the  following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.  Also, the definitions set forth in the Zoning Chapter are made a
part hereof.



   ADULT ARCADE.   Any place where the public is permitted or invited
where coin-operated, slug-operated, or otherwise in exchange for any form of
consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still
or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, any
other image-producing devices or sexually explicit media (defined below) are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images displayed are distinguished or characterized by
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE.



      (1)   A commercial establishment which has at least one
business purpose of selling, renting or exchanging the materials listed
below, a commercial establishment in which 15% or more of the square footage
of the floor space in the public area of the store where merchandise is
displayed is used for the sale, rental or exchange of the materials listed
below, or 15% or more of the merchandise offered for sale, rental, or
exchange, for any form of consideration, includes the materials listed below:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter or photographs which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below.



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve offering such material for sale,
rental, or exchange, however, the fact that other business purposes exist
will not operate as an exemption under this chapter, and the establishment
will still be categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE if it otherwise meets this
definition.



   ADULT CABARET.   A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
or



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities as
defined below; or



      (3)   Sexually explicit media (defined below) which is
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT ENTERTAINER. Any person who engages in acts, displays, or
otherwise performs primarily to arouse sexual senses in connection with a
sexually oriented business, including dancing, (hereinafter sometimes
referred to only as ENTERTAINER ).



   ADULT MASSAGE.



      (1)   Any place that offers treatment of the body, including
superficial parts of the body, or otherwise offers services, by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding vibrating or stimulating the body with
hands or any instrument, or by the application of air, liquid or vapor baths
of any kind whatsoever where:



         (a)   Any employee in the establishment is less than
fully dressed or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or



         (b)   The massage is intended to bring about a sensual
state or a state of sexual arousal.



      (2)   Adult massage is prohibited.



   ADULT MOTEL.



      (1)   A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:



         (a)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form
of consideration; provides patrons with sexually explicit media (defined
below), including closed-circuit television transmissions and/or photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (defined below);
and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of such media, televisions transmissions or photographic
reproductions; or



         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time that is less than ten hours; or



         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sublet the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



      (2)   Adult motels are prohibited.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, in
exchange for any form of consideration, sexually explicit media (defined
below), including, but not limited to: films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly or
frequently shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (defined below).



   ADULT NOVELTY STORE. A commercial establishment which displays, sells,
rents or exchanges, for any form of consideration, instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual
activities.  For medical purposes, a commercial establishment which sells
birth control devices, personal lubricants, and/or rings which fit over male
genitalia shall not be defined as an ADULT NOVELTY STORE if no other
instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities are displayed or offered for sale.



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live performances which are characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities (defined below).



   ADULT VIDEO STORE.



      (1)   A commercial establishment which has at least one
business purpose of selling, renting or exchanging the materials listed
below, a commercial establishment in which 15% or more of the square footage
of the floor space in the public area of the store where merchandise is
displayed is used for the sale, rental or exchange of the materials listed
below, or 15% or more of the merchandise offered for sale, rental, or
exchange, for any form of consideration, includes the materials listed below:



         (a)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video
reproductions, slides, DVDs, digital images or digital sounds, any other form
of media containing visual or audio representations, or photographic or other
still picture reproductions, or anything else which qualifies as sexually
explicit media (defined below), which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
(defined below).



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve offering such material for sale,
rental, or exchange, however, the fact the other business purposes exist will
not operate as an exemption under this chapter, and the establishment will
still be categorized as an ADULT VIDEO STORE if it otherwise meets the above
definition.



   APPLICANT.   The applicant for a license shall be the intended
operator of the business.



   CONDUCT ANY BUSINESS. Any person who does any one or more of the
following shall be deemed to be conducting business in a sexually oriented
business:



      (1)   Operates a cash register, cash drawer, or other
depository on the enterprise premises where cash funds or records or credit
card or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of
the establishment or the activities conducted therein are kept;



      (2)   Displays or takes orders from any customer for any
merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered on the premises;



      (3)   Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise,
goods, entertainment, or other services offered on the premises;



      (4)   Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers
or other persons into the premises; or



      (5)   Supervises or manages other persons in the performance
of any of the foregoing activities on the enterprise premises.



   CUSTOMER.   Any person who:



      (1)   Is allowed to enter a licensed business in return for
the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or
gratuity;



      (2)   Enters a licensed business and purchases, rents, or
otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other
services offered therein; or



      (3)   Is a member of and on the premises of a licensed
business operating as a private club.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the
customers of a licensed business or who works in or about a licensed business
and who receives compensation for such service or work from the operator or
owner of the licensed business or from the customers therein.



   ENTERTAINER.   See ADULT ENTERTAINER above.



   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees, offers or
advertises to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease
for another person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.



      (1)   A person or business association who furnishes, agrees,
offers or advertises to furnish an escort for a fee, tip, or the exchange of
other consideration as at least one of its business purposes.



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other business
purposes that do not involve agreeing, offering or advertising to furnish an
escort as provided above, however, the fact the other business purposes exist
will not operate as an exemption under this chapter, and the establishment
will still be categorized as an ESCORT AGENCY if at least one of its business
purposes is also to agree, offer or advertise the furnishing of an escort in
exchange for any form of consideration.



   LICENSED BUSINESS. Any sexually oriented business licensed under this
chapter.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person appears semi-nude, in a
state of nudity, or displays specified anatomical areas to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons in exchange for money or any other form of consideration. NUDE
MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of
Illinois or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in
part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in
a structure:



      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person
is available for viewing; and



      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.   Exposure of any of the following parts of
the human body to any person: male or female genital hair, buttocks, anus or
anal cleavage, female breasts below the top of the areola or the employment
of any device or covering which is intended to give the impression of, or
stimulate, such parts of the male or female anatomy.



   OPERATOR. The manager or other natural person principally in charge of
a licensed business.



   OWNER. The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general
and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors, and persons
holding 10% or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation.



   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.   The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or
the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   SENSITIVE USES. Other sexually oriented businesses, residences or
residentially zoned districts, religious institutions, schools, day care or
child care businesses, cemeteries, public parks and recreation areas.



   SEXUAL CONTACT, SEXUAL CONDUCT or SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Any conduct by a person intended to induce another
person to, or to engage in, any act of sexual contact, including sexual
intercourse, oral or anal intercourse, or masturbation; or



      (2)   The touching of the female breasts, male or female
genitals, anus, or anal cleavage, by any person, whether male or female.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that has
at least one principal business purpose of offering any of the following in
exchange for any form of consideration:



      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or



      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of
nudity or semi-nude.



   SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MEDIA.   Any film, motion picture, video cassette,
video reproduction, slide, DVD, digital image, digital sound, any other means
to view or listen to live or previously recorded images or sounds, any means
by which live images or sounds may be presently recorded, or any other
photographic or still picture reproductions which depict or describe
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS or ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any premises to
which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so
physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or
stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of
viewing sexually oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides
adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS further includes, adult arcades, adult bookstores,
adult cabarets, adult entertainers, adult entertainment studios, escorts,
escort agencies, adult massage, adult motels, adult motion picture theaters,
adult mini-motion picture establishments, adult novelty stores, nude modeling
studios, sexual encounter centers, adult video stores, underwear modeling, or
any premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised
or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance
studio, sensitivity studio, encounter studio, or modeling studio, or any
business which defines itself in its name or in its advertising by using the
letters "XXX," or the words "Adult", "Sex", or "Erotic," or any variations
thereof or other terms or symbols of like import which are consistent with
this context of this chapter.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA.



      (1)   The human male genitals in a noticeably distended state,
even if completely and opaquely covered; or



      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.   See SEXUAL CONTACT, SEXUAL CONDUCT or
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES above.



   STATE OF NUDITY.   See NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY   above.



   UNDERWEAR. Any article or item of clothing designed to be worn by a
male or female as an undergarment, including, but not limited to, lingerie,
underpants, teddies, g-strings, panties, brassieres, bustiers, bikinis and
swim wear.



   UNDERWEAR MODELING. To model underwear in any business establishment,
or to own or operate a corporation, partnership, joint venture or other type
of business entity where underwear is modeled or worn without any covering by
exterior clothing, except that, for the purposes of this chapter, UNDERWEAR
MODELING shall not include clothing stores, boutiques, department stores and
other similar establishments whose primary purpose is the wholesale or retail
sale of clothing apparel.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



§ 115.02  LIST OF PROHIBITED SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   The following sexually oriented businesses are prohibited:



   (A)   Adult massage;



   (B)   Adult motels;



   (C)   Sexual encounter centers; and



   (D)   Underwear modeling.



(Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



LICENSES



§ 115.10  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall own, operate, or conduct any business in a
sexually oriented business located within the village unless there is a
license for the business.



   (B)   A license may be issued only for one "sexually oriented
business" located at a fixed and certain place.  Any person who desires to
operate more than one sexually oriented business must have a license for each.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employee, or
operator to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service
directly related to the operation of any unlicensed sexually oriented
business.



   (D)   No person shall own, operate, or conduct any sexually oriented
business unless the license is posted at or near the principal public
entrance to the business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to
patrons who enter the premises.



   (E)   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate
at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner
revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following
year.  Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to
the Village President or the Village President's designee.  The application
for renewal must be filed not later than 30 days before the license expires.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.11  LICENSE APPLICATION; ACCOMPANYING MATERIAL.



   (A)   Applications for a license, whether original or renewal, must
be made to the Village President or the Village President's designee by the
intended operator of the sexually oriented business.  Applications must be
submitted during regular working hours.  Application forms shall be supplied
by the village.  The intended operator shall be required to give the
following information on the application form:



      (1)   The name, street address (and mailing address if
different), age, and driver's license number of the intended operator, and
any and all aliases; the name and street address (and mailing address if
different) of the owner(s);



      (2)   The name under which the business is to be operated and
a general description of the services to be provided;



      (3)   The telephone number of the business;



      (4)   The address and legal description of the parcel of land
on which the business is to be located;



      (5)   The date on which the owner(s) acquired the business for
which the license is sought, and the date on which the business began or is
to begin operations as an enterprise at the location for which the permit is
sought;



      (6)   A list of all employees or contractors involved in
providing the services to be provided by the business;



      (7)   Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any
other county, city or state under a sexually oriented business license or
similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license
revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade
name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or
revocation; and



      (8)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony
within the last ten years or any criminal offense involving controlled
substances, moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or other crime of a
sexual nature.



   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   Payment in full of a fee of $1,000 for an original
application, or $500 for a renewal application, as applicable, which fee
shall not be refundable under any circumstances;



      (2)   A certified copy of the assumed name certificate if the
business is to be operated under an assumed name;



      (3)   If the business is an Illinois corporation, a certified
copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto;



      (4)   If the business is a foreign corporation, a certified
copy of the certificate of authorization to transact business in this state,
together with all amendments thereto;



      (5)   If the business is a limited partnership formed under
the laws of Illinois, a certified copy of the certificate of limited
partnership, together with all amendments thereto;



      (6)   If the enterprise is a foreign limited partnership, a
certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the
qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto;



      (7)   Any of divisions (B)(2) through (6) above shall not be
required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents
previously furnished with the original application or previous renewals
thereof remain correct and current;



      (8)   If the premises are leased or being purchased under
contract, a copy of such lease or contract shall accompany the application.



   (C)   The application shall contain a statement under oath that:



      (1)   The applicant has personal knowledge of the information
contained in the application and that the information contained therein is
true and correct; and



      (2)   The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



§ 115.12  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.



   (A)   Within 20 days of receipt of any application, either original
or renewal, the Village President or the Village President's designee shall
grant or deny the requested license and give written notice to the applicant
as to the decision.



   (B)   The Village President or the Village President's designee
shall issue the license to the applicant unless one or more of the following
conditions exist:



      (1)   The applicant failed to supply all of the information
requested on the application;



      (2)   The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent, or
untruthful information on the application;



      (3)   The applicant's business is not in compliance with
Section 6.50 of the Zoning Ordinance [sic];



      (4)   The application or the business does not meet any other
requirement of this chapter;



      (5)   The applicant has not fully complied with all state,
federal, and local laws or regulations affecting the conduct of its business;



      (6)   The applicant or owner has had a license revoked for the
same business or same type of business;



      (7)   The applicant is not at least 18 years of age;



      (8)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the
last ten years or any criminal offense involving controlled substances, moral
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or other crimes of sexual nature.  In
the case of a corporation, partnership, or joint venture, any officer,
director stockholder controlling more than 25% of the corporate stock,
partner, or joint venturer shall be deemed to be an applicant.



   (C)   In the event that the Village President or the Village
President's designee determines that an applicant is not eligible for a
license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for
the denial within 20 days of the receipt of its application.  An applicant
may appeal such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the
Village President within five days after the applicant is given notice of
such denial.  The decision on the application shall be final unless an
appeal is timely filed.  An appeal shall not stay the decision on the
issuance of a license.  The applicant's written request for a hearing shall
set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged.  The hearing shall be
conducted by the Village President.  At the hearing, the Village President
shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. 
Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the Village President,
which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure
that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and be
represented by legal counsel.



   (D)   The Village President shall conduct the hearing within 15 days
after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the
applicant requests an extension in writing.  The Village President shall
render a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within
five days after the conclusion of the hearing.  The written decision of the
Village President shall be final.



   (E)   Failure of the Village President to give timely notice of
action on an application, or failure of the Village President to timely
conduct or give notice of the Village President's decision on an appeal
within the limitations of time specified above shall entitle the applicant to
the issuance of temporary license upon written demand therefor filed by the
applicant with the Village President.  Such a temporary license shall only
be valid until the third day after the Village President gives notice of
action on the application or gives notice of his decision on the appeal.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



§ 115.13  TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   A license issued under this chapter is personal to the owner and
operator of a sexually oriented business and may not be transferred or
otherwise conveyed to a third party.  Any transfer or conveyance of the
business shall require the transferee to apply and otherwise qualify for the
issuance of a new license.  The transfer of a license or any interest in a
license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



§ 115.14  LICENSE VALID ONLY FOR LOCATION LISTED.



   A license is valid only at the location for which it is issued.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



§ 115.15  ALTERING, DEFACING, FORGING OR COUNTERFEITING LICENSE UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change,
deface, or alter a license.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.16  CANCELLATION UPON REQUEST OF LICENSEE.



   A license may be cancelled upon written request of the owner or
operator and surrender of the license itself to the Village President.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



§ 115.17  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The Village President or the Village President's designee
shall have the authority to revoke a license for any one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)   The owner or operator or employee of the licensed
business knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the
business;



      (2)   The licensed business does not conform to the provisions
of this chapter or is in violation of any other applicable federal, state, or
local law or regulations;



      (3)   The owner or operator of the licensed business gave
materially false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the original or
renewal application form;



      (4)   The business has been closed for business for a period
of 30 consecutive days, unless such closure is due to circumstances beyond
the control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with due diligence,
given all attendant circumstances, to re-open the business;



      (5)   The operator or owner becomes ineligible to obtain a
license;



      (6)   Any cost, bill, or fee required to be paid by this
chapter or any other village ordinance is not paid;



      (7)   Any alcoholic beverage is served or consumed on the
premises of the sexually oriented business;



      (8)   Any other act or omission which demonstrates the owner's
or operator's inability to operate the sexually oriented business in
accordance with applicable law.



   (B)   Prior to revocation or suspension of a license, the Village
President or the Village President's designee shall investigate whether
probable cause for revocation or suspension may exist and if so, shall notify
the licensee in writing of reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension
and grant such licensee the opportunity to appear before the Village
President or the Village President's designee at a time and place specified
within such notice.  Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days after
the notice is given.  Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the
Village President.  Such rules shall be consistent with the nature of the
proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence,
cross-examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel.  If, after the
hearing, the Village President or the Village President's designee finds that
the license should be revoked or suspended the Village President or the
Village President's designee shall issue a written order revoking or
suspending such license which shall be effective on the third day after
notice thereof is given to the owner or operator.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



§ 115.18  ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE AFTER REVOCATION.



   Any owner or operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to
receive a license for five years from the date of revocation.  No location
or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as a sexually
oriented business two years from the date of revocation of the license.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



OPERATION



§ 115.25  HOURS OF OPERATION; INSPECTION.



   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours
of 12:01 a.m. and 12:01 p.m.



   (B)   All sexually oriented businesses shall be open to inspection
at all reasonable times by the village or such other persons as the Village
President may designate.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.26  NO MINORS ALLOWED ON PREMISES.



   No person under the age of 18 years shall be allowed on or enter the
premises of a sexually oriented business.  A sign indicating the prohibition
against the entry of minors shall be posted in a conspicuous place at all
public entrances to the sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.27  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   The consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the
licensed business is prohibited.  No sexually oriented business shall be
located on the premises for which a license to sell alcoholic beverages has
been issued.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.28  CERTAIN CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   No owner, operator, employee of an operator, or customer shall on the
premises, engage in or permit the  occurrence  of acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or other contact stimulation of the
genitalia, or engage in or permit the occurrence of any act constituting the
offense of obscenity under the Illinois Criminal Code.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.29  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OPERATOR.



   (A)   The operator shall maintain a register of all employees,
showing the name, and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth
date, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, Social
Security Number, date of employment and termination, and duties of each
employee and such other information as may be required by the Village
President.  The above information on each employee shall be maintained in
the register on the premises for a period of three years following
termination.



   (B)   The operator shall make the register of employees available
immediately for inspection by police upon demand of the village at all
reasonable times.



   (C)   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall
be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator
committed the act or caused the omission.



   (D)   An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all
employees while on the licensed premises and any act or omission of any
employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining
whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.30  SEPARATION FROM SENSITIVE USES.



   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted, and no
person or business entity shall operate or cause to be operated, a sexually
oriented business within 1,000 feet of the property line of any property
containing any other sexually oriented businesses, residences, residentially
zoned districts, religious institutions, schools, day cares or other child
care businesses, cemeteries, public parks or recreation areas, or any other
uses which may be defined as a sensitive use in § 115.01 of this chapter.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the measurement of distance
between properties shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, objects or streets between the subject properties.
The measurement shall begin on the property line of the property containing
the proposed sexually oriented business at the point where it is nearest to
the other property being measured for distance; the measurement shall end on
the property line of the property containing a sensitive use at the point
where it is nearest to the property containing the proposed sexually oriented
business.



   (C)   In addition to the above separation requirements, sexually
oriented businesses will only be permitted in areas which comply with the
village's zoning ordinances.



(Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



SEXUAL CONDUCT IN BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 115.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For  the  purpose  of  this  chapter,  the  following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   NUDITY.  Exposure of any of the following parts of the human body to
any person:  male or female genital hair, buttocks, anus or anal cleavage,
female breasts below the top of the areola or the employment of any device or
covering which is intended to give the impression of or stimulate such parts
of the male or female anatomy.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Any conduct by a person intended to induce any other
person or engage in any act of sexual contact, including sexual intercourse,
oral or anal intercourse or masturbation.



   SEXUAL CONTACT.  The touching of the female breasts, male or female
genitals, anus or anal cleavage, by any person, whether male or female.



   UNDERWEAR.  Any article or item of clothing designed to be worn by a
male or female as an undergarment, including, but not limited to, lingerie,
underpants, teddies, g-strings, panties, brassieres, bustiers, bikinis and
swim wear.



(Ord. 839, passed 2-6-94)



§ 115.41  UNDERWEAR MODELING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to model underwear in any business
establishment or for any person, including any corporation, partnership joint
venture or other entity to own or operate a business establishment where
underwear is modeled or worn without any covering by exterior clothing. 
This prohibition shall not apply to clothing stores, boutiques, department
stores and other similar establishments whose primary purpose is the
wholesale or retail sale of clothing apparel.



(Ord. 839, passed 2-6-94)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.42  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   No employee, agent, independent contractor or patron shall appear nude
in any business establishment.  No employee, agent, independent contractor
or patron shall participate in any sexual contact in any business
establishment.  No employee, agent, independent contractor or patron shall
engage in any sexual conduct within any business establishment.  It shall be
unlawful for any manager ofany business establishment to allow any nudity,
sexual conduct or sexual contact to occur within any business establishment.



(Ord. 839, passed 2-6-94)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this
chapter, for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $500, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day any such violation shall continue. 



(Ord. 505, passed 2-6-89)



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of
§§ 115.40 through 115.42 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$500 for each offense and further may be subject to revocation or suspension
of the business license for that establishment as provided by village
ordinance.  Each separate act which can constitute a violation of §§
115.40 through 115.42 shall be deemed to be a separate act for the purpose of
imposing a fine or penalty under this provision. 



(Ord. 839, passed 2-6-94)



CHAPTER 116:  SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS



Section



General Provisions



   116.01   Definitions



Licensing



   116.15   License required



   116.16   Registration of peddlers and solicitors of books,
periodicals and publications



   116.17   Application for peddlers, solicitors and canvassers



   116.18   Term of license



   116.19   Limit of one license per calendar year



   116.20   Investigation; denial of permit



   116.21   Fraud



   116.22   Revocation



   116.23   Tag days



   116.24   Street solicitation permits



   116.25   License fee



   116.26   Issuance by Administrator



Soliciting, Peddling and Canvassing Regulations



   116.30   Hours of operation



   116.31   Notice regulating soliciting, peddling and canvassing



   116.32   Signs at village limits



   116.33   Licenses and identification badges



 



   116.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS ENTITY.  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who has
or engages a peddler, solicitor or canvasser in its behalf.



   CANVASSER.  Any person, business entity, firm or corporation, who,
going from place to place, without prior appointment or pre-arrangement meets
with persons, firms or corporations for the purpose of soliciting funds or
donations of property, or for conducting surveys, or for conducting polls or
for obtaining endorsements for any product, service, group or association.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  Any patriotic, philanthropic, social
service, welfare, athletic, political, benevolent, education, civic or
fraternal organization which was organized and exists as a not for profit
entity. 



   PEDDLER.  Any person, business entity, firm or corporation, who, going
from place to place, shall at retail sell, offer for sale, sell and deliver,
barter or exchange any goods, products or services.  It shall not include a
service person who is responding to a prior call.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, or any
entity who is over 18 years of age.



   PUBLIC WAYS.  All streets, highways, and roadways within the village
and shall include the entire right of way.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person, business entity, firm or corporation, who,
goes from place to place, without prior appointment or pre-arrangement with
the customer, to take orders for future delivery at retail of any merchandise
or other article or thing, or any service.



   STREET SOLICITATION.  A day or days upon which a charitable
organization may conduct a tag day on the public ways within the village.



   TAG DAY.  A day or days upon which a charitable organization may
solicit contributions in the village at locations other than on public ways
by means of distributing emblems, flowers, edible items or tags to persons
who make a contribution to such charitable organization.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Channahon, Will County, Illinois



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



LICENSING



§ 116.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No business entity or person shall cause or engage in the business or
activity of a peddler, solicitor or canvasser within the village without
first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter, provided that
no such license shall be required for peddlers and solicitors dealing only in
books, periodicals and publications; however, such persons shall be
registered as provided in § 116.16.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.16  REGISTRATION OF PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS OF BOOKS, PERIODICALS AND
PUBLICATIONS.



   No business entity or person shall engage in the business or activity
of a peddler or solicitor of books, periodicals and publications within the
village without first registering with the Village Clerk.  Such registration
shall include the name, address, social security and driver's license numbers
of such person, the name and address of the employer and supervisor of such
person, the name and address of the publisher and the names of the books,
periodicals and publications involved.  Such registration shall be valid for
a period of not more than three consecutive days.  The times for such
activities are regulated by § 116.30.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.17  APPLICATION FOR PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.



   (A)   An application for a peddler's, solicitor's or canvasser's
license shall be made by each business entity, as well as each person causing
or intending to solicit, peddle or canvass within the village to the Village
Clerk in conformity with the general requirements of this chapter and the
village ordinances relating to the application for license.



   (B)   The application herein required shall be fully completed and
signed under oath and contain the following information:



      (1)   Business entity application.  The application for the
business entity which shall be completed under oath and signed by an officer
or executive shall include:



         (a)   Full name, address, telephone number of the
business entity;



         (b)   Number of years in existence;



         (c)   Names, addresses and titles of all officers of the
entity;



         (d)   Whether the business entity is a charitable
organization and, if so, whether it is recognized as such by the Internal
Revenue Service and the state;



         (e)   Name, addresses and telephone numbers of persons
representing the entity who will directly supervise the peddlers, canvassers
or solicitors in the village;



         (f)   A description of the merchandise or goods to be
peddled or offered for sale or order, or the purpose and nature of the
materials to be canvassed;



         (g)   Whether a license to the business entity has ever
been suspended or revoked;



         (h)   A written representation by the business entity
that it has instructed persons conducting the peddling, soliciting and
canvassing on its behalf not to perform such activities at any residence or
business which has a sign posted in the following or similar words NO
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS, OR CANVASSERS;



         (i)   Name, address, telephone, social security and
driver's license number and date of birth of all persons who will be
conducting the solicitation, canvassing or peddling on behalf of the business
entity in the village;



         (j)   A written statement which is specifically
designated to be relied upon by the village and its residents that within a
month prior to submitting its application the business entity has personally
and fully conducted an investigation on the background of each person the
entity proposes to conduct the canvas, solicitation or peddling on its behalf
and that each such person is a law abiding person of good moral character and
has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within ten
years from the date of this application; and



         (k)   The first day upon which the entity would like to
peddle, solicit or canvass in the village.  The completed application must
be filed not less than three business days prior to the first date requested.



      (2)   Application for individual.  The application for the
person who will peddle, solicit or canvas shall be completed and signed under
oath by the applicant and shall include:



         (a)   The name, address, date of birth, social security
and driver's license number of the applicant;



         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant's employer and the name and address of the applicant's supervisor;



         (c)   The kind of merchandise or goods to be peddled or
offered for sale or order, or the purpose and nature of the matters to be
canvassed;



         (d)   The number and description, including make, model
and license plate numbers of vehicles, if any, intended to be operated in the
village by the person in the course of soliciting, canvassing or peddling;



         (e)   The name of all cities, villages or towns where
applicant has engaged in peddling, soliciting or canvassing;



         (f)   Whether the applicant, or his or her employer,
principal or the entity which is represented by the applicant, has ever had a
peddler's, solicitor's or canvasser's license revoked and/or been convicted
of violating any statute or ordinance relating to the same;



         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony or crime of moral turpitude, including fraud, forgery, theft or
deceptive practices, and, if so, the case disposition, case number, offense
charges, offense convicted of, and date and place of such conviction; and



         (h)   An acknowledgement there shall be no canvassing,
peddling or soliciting at any business or residence which has signs posted in
the following or similar words NO SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS ORCANVASSERS.



   (C)   The applicant shall state the exact first date the applicant
desires to peddle, solicit or canvass.  The completed application must be
filed at least three business days prior to the first date requested.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.18  TERM OF LICENSE.



   All peddler's, solicitor's and canvasser's licenses issued to business
entities and persons hereunder shall be for a term of 15 days.  Licensees
must register at Village Hall and will be issued a ”solicitor's card“ for
each day (up to 15 days in a calendar year) they want to conduct operation in
the village.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.19  LIMIT OF ONE LICENSE PER CALENDAR YEAR.



   Not more than one peddler's, solicitor's or canvasser's license shall
be issued to any person, or business entity during any calendar year.  Any
license issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.20  INVESTIGATION; DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
felony or any offense which involved fraud, forgery, moral turpitude, theft
or deceit within the last ten years.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.21  FRAUD.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser to cheat,
deceive or fraudulently misrepresent, whether through himself or through an
employee or agent, while acting as a peddler, solicitor or canvasser in the
village, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares or to
solicit funds, take surveys or polls other than those specified in his
application for a license.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.22  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any license, registration or permit issued under this chapter
may be revoked by the Village President because of any violation of this
chapter, or whenever the licensee or registrant shall cease to possess the
qualifications required in this chapter for the original license or
registration.



   (B)   Upon receipt of information that the licensee has violated
this chapter or no longer possesses the requisite qualifications to be
licensed hereunder, the Village President shall immediately suspend the
license and give the licensee written notice by certified mail of the
suspension.  The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which
the Village President has acted in suspending the permit.  The licensee
shall have the right to demand a hearing to be held within five business days
of the village's receipt of the licensee's demand for hearing.  Upon the
filing of such a demand with the Village Clerk, the Village President shall
affix a time and place for hearing.  At the hearing the licensee, and any
other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence as to the
facts upon which the Village President based the suspension of the license,
and any other facts which may aid the Village President in determining
whether this chapter has been violated.  If, after such hearing, the Village
President finds that this chapter has been violated, or the information set
forth in the application has been misrepresented, he shall within two days
after the hearing file with the Village Clerk for public inspection and serve
upon the licensee, and all interested persons participating in the hearing, a
written statement of the facts upon which he bases such finding and shall
immediately revoke the permit.  If, after such hearing the Village President
finds that this chapter has not been violated or the information has not been
misrepresented, he shall within two days after the hearing give to the
licensee a written statement canceling the suspension of the license.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.23  TAG DAYS.



   Any organization which desires to conduct a tag day within the village
shall make application for a tag day permit on a form provided by the
village.  Tag days may be conducted subject to the following regulations:



   (1)   Tag day permits shall only be issued to charitable
organizations.



   (2)   Not more than two tag day permits may be issued for any given
day.



   (3)   A tag day permit shall be valid for not more than three days.



   (4)   An organization may not be issued more than two tag day
permits in a calendar year.



   (5)   Tag day permits may be requested not more than 364 days nor
less than 30 days prior to the first day upon which a tag day permit is
requested.



   (6)   If multiple organizations requested to conduct tag days on the
same day, preference shall be given to the applicant first applying for the
permit.



   (7)   No tag day may be conducted without first having obtained a
tag day permit.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.24  STREET SOLICITATION PERMITS.



   Any organization which desires to conduct a tag day upon public ways
within the village shall make application for a ”street solicitation“
permit on a form as provided by the village.  Street solicitation days may
be conducted subject to the following regulations:



   (1)   No street solicitation may be conducted without first having
obtained a street solicitation permit.



   (2)   Street solicitation applications shall specify the locations
where street solicitations are sought to be conducted.  No street
solicitation may be conducted at a location not approved in the street
solicitation permit.



   (3)   Not more than one street solicitation permit may be issued for
a given location on any given day.



   (4)   Street solicitation permits may be requested not more than 364
days prior to the first day upon which a street solicitation will occur.



   (5)   If multiple organizations file for street solicitation permits
for the same location, preference shall be given to the applicant first
applying.



   (6)   Street solicitations are prohibited between dusk and dawn.



   (7)   No organization may receive more than two street solicitation
permits in a calendar year.



   (8)   Street solicitors may not solicit from occupants of any
vehicle which has a green light.



   (9)   Street solicitation is prohibited at the intersection of Reed
Street and U.S. Route 6.



   (10)   Street solicitation permits may only be issued to charitable
organizations registered with the Office of the Attorney General of the State
of Illinois.



   (11)   All organizations which are issued street solicitation
permits shall be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of
the soliciting agency.



   (12)   All persons engaged in street solicitations must be at least
16 years of age and shall wear a high visibility vest.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.25  LICENSE FEE.



   The fee for any peddler's, solicitor's or canvasser's license hereunder
shall be $100, provided however, that no fee shall be charged for any
charitable organization.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.26  ISSUANCE BY ADMINISTRATOR.



   All license and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued
by the Village Administrator or his designee.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



SOLICITING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING REGULATIONS



§ 116.30  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No soliciting, peddling or canvassing shall be permitted before the
hour of 10:00 a.m. or after the hour of 8:00 p.m. within the village.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.31  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING.



   (A)   The occupant of any premises shall give notice to the licensee
of the determination not to allow any solicitors, peddlers or canvassers in
the following manner:  a weatherproof notice, at least three inches by four
inches in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
following or similar words:



   “NO SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS OR CANVASSERS ALLOWED”



   (B)   The letters of this notice shall be at least one-third-inch in
height.  For the purpose of uniformity, the notices shall be provided by the
Village Clerk to persons so requesting, at the cost thereof.  Such notices
so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor, peddler or
canvasser of the determination of the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



   (C)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any business
entity or person, whether licensed or not, to engage in the activities of
peddling, soliciting or canvassing at any residence displaying the aforesaid
notice in conformity with the provisions herein.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.32  SIGNS AT VILLAGE LIMITS.



   The Street Department is directed to post and maintain appropriate
signs at the limits of the village with the following language:



   “Solicitors, peddlers and canvassers and contractors must be licensed
and registered at the Channahon Municipal Building”.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



§ 116.33  LICENSES AND IDENTIFICATION BADGES.



   A copy of the license and daily solicitor's card issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be carried with the licensee while he is engaged in
peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the village.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, business entity, firm or corporation violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$500 for each violation, and each day such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 840, passed 3-6-95)



CHAPTER 117:  VENDING MACHINES



Section



   117.01   License required



   117.02   Application for license



   117.03   Fees



   117.04   Payment of fee



   117.05   License tag



   117.06   License to be posted



   117.07   Inspection



   117.08   Revocation of license



   117.09   Exemption from regulations



   117.10   Issuance; term



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall operate, keep, use, permit the use
of, install or maintain within the village for business or the use of the
public any vending machine, automatic or otherwise any device which is
designed and used strictly as a vendor of merchandise or service and which is
not an amusement device, or any coin-operated machine dispensing goods of
whatsoever sort such as but not limited to food, coffee, alcoholic beverages
of any sort, milk, cigarettes, candy, peanuts, soft drinks, popcorn, gum or
other commodity, without a license therefor, nor shall any person, firm or
corporation allow to be installed, operated or maintained by one other than a
licensee hereunder, any such machine on premises controlled by him.  This
chapter shall apply to all vending machines not licensed and regulated under
Chapter 112.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made upon a form
prepared by the Village Administrator except that the applicant shall attach
an affidavit stating the number of machines.  Such license shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable and shall apply only to the vending machine
for which such license is issued.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)



§ 117.03  FEES.



   The annual license fee for each coin-operated device shall be $30
payable upon application for the license.  The annual fee shall increase $10
every five years effective May 1, 2011 and thereafter.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84; Am. Ord. 1418, passed 4-3-06)



§ 117.04  PAYMENT OF FEE.



   The fee is payable by the owner of the machine, but in default thereof,
shall be payable by the owner or person in control of the premises on which
the machine is located.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)



§ 117.05  LICENSE TAG.



   The Village Administrator shall assign to each licensee at the time of
original application a license number which the licensee shall display, in
addition to his name and address, on each machine.  The tag shall bear the
words VENDING MACHINE OPERATOR'S LICENSE NO.                   and
shall show the year for which the license fee is paid.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.06  LICENSE TO BE POSTED.



   The licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently or
conspicuously on the vending machines being licensed.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.07  INSPECTION.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his duly authorized
agent, and they are authorized and empowered to inspect and examine all food
or drink being offered for sale by means of such automatic vending machine
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state and of the
village in relation to sales from said vending machines are complied with and
that said food and drink so offered for sale has been kept fresh, clean and
wholesome and it shall be the duty of all persons, firms or corporations
operating said vending machines upon the demand of the Chief of Police or his
duly authorized agent to furnish him for his inspection samples of all said
food and drink, which samples may be analyzed by or under the direction of
said Chief of Police or Will County Health Department and a record of such
analysis shall be made and kept in his office for the inspection of the
public.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.08  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The President and Board of Trustees shall have the right to revoke any
license issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)



§ 117.09  EXEMPTION FROM REGULATIONS.



   Sections 117.01, 117.03 and 117.04 of this chapter shall not apply to
municipal charitable, religious or not-for-profit organizations in the
village or which provide services to the village provided said organization
supplies the Village Administrator with a copy of a letter from the Internal
Revenue Service showing said organization to be tax-exempt under the Internal
Revenue Code.  Failure to do so will not exempt an organization from the
requirements of §§ 117.01, 117.03 and 117.04 of this chapter.



(Ord. 420, passed 12-1-86)



§ 117.10  ISSUANCE; TERM.



   Upon payment of the license fee established in § 117.03, the Village
Administrator or designee shall issue a license in the name of the owner of
the business in which the device is located as licensee, authorizing the use
of the device for the license period ending one year following issuance of
the license.



(Ord. 1418, passed 4-3-06)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(Ord. 345, passed 4-16-84)



CHAPTER 118:  CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS



Section



Cable and Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed



   118.03   PEG access support fee imposed



   118.04   Applicable principles



   118.05   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   118.06   Audits of cable/video service provider



   118.07   Late fee payments



Cable and Video Customer Protection Law



   118.15   Customer service and privacy protection law



   118.16   Enforcement



   118.17   Customer credits



 



   118.99   Penalty



CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES.   All consideration of any kind or nature, including
without limitation cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received
by the holder for the operation of a cable or videosystem to provide cable
service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service
area within the village.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including without limitation pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges.



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment.



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including without limitation activation,
installation and repair charges.



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including without limitation service order
and service termination charges.



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments.



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement.



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject
to division (i) below.



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities
or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business.



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi).



         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that
reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service.



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including without limitation revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
non-cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder's books
and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any
applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders.



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser's subscribers, to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service.



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes.



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or
similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading
the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, 21-401.



   PEG.   Public, educational and governmental.



   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.   The amount paid under this subchapter and
ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



   SERVICE.   The provision of CABLE SERVICE or VIDEO SERVICE to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.   The amount paid under this subchapter and ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE.   Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider, as defined in
47 U.S.C. § 332(d), or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail or other services offered over the public Internet.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.02  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the village.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder's gross revenues, provided, however, that such amount shall
be no greater than the fee paid to the village by an incumbent cable operator
providing cable service.



   (C)   Notice to the village.  The holder shall notify the village
at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the village.



   (D)   Holder's liability.  The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt of the ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The
ordinance adopting this subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to
the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6) to the village.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
division (B) above.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.03  PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   PEG fee imposed.  A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed
on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to § 118.02.



   (B)   Amount of fee.  The amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be 1% of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the
village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.



   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to
the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access.
The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the
date set forth in § 118.02(D).



   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall
be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.



   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All
payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under
division (B) above.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.04  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.05  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a
holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including
without limitation any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or
through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A
state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder
with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.06  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement.  The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act,  ILCS Ch.
50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the municipality's submission of an
invoice for the sum.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.07  LATE FEE PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by the village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers'
Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW



§ 118.15  CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.



   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.



   (B)   Amendments.  Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this
subchapter shall be incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
subchapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the village.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce
all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and
Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents
within the village.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.17  CUSTOMER CREDITS.



   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for
violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the
discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the
credit.



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   The Village, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the
Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a
material breach per customer.



   (A)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or
video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified
in any provision of the law.



   (B)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written
notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at
least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.



   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties,
shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in division
(B).



(Ord. 1509, passed 11-19-07)



CHAPTER 119: RAFFLES



Section



   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   License required



   119.03   Application



   119.04   Investigation



   119.05   Issuance or denial of license



   119.06   Eligibility and restrictions



   119.07   Limitations



   119.08   Raffles manager; bond



   119.09   Conduct of raffles



   119.10   Records



   119.11   Licenses not assignable; unlawful use



   119.12   Suspension or revocation



   119.13   Limited application



   119.14   Non-liability of village



   119.15   Tax on raffle machines



   119.16   Persons under 18 years of age



§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.



   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in
their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported
schools.



   FRATERNAL.  An organization of persons having a common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for
by the government.



   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective
of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.



   NET PROCEEDS.   The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.



   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a
not-for-profit basis, with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result
of the operation.



   RAFFLE.  A form of lottery conducted by an organization licensed under
this chapter in which:



      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for
a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be
designated the winning chance;



      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing
or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except
that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.



   RELIGIOUS.  Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.



   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare
of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way
as to confer a public benefit.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances within
the Village of Channahon without having first obtained a license therefor
pursuant to this chapter. Such license must specify the area or areas within
the village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period
during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination
of winning chances, and the location or locations at which winning chances
will be determined. Such license shall be good for only one raffle, except
that a license which is issued to an organization described in this chapter
which utilizes raffle machines shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.03  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for raffle licenses shall be made to the Director
of Finance in writing on a form provided for that purpose. Application forms
shall be made available by the Director of Finance at Village Hall.



   (B)   The application for a license must specify the area or areas
within the village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time
period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of
determination of winning chances, and the location or locations at which
winning chances will be determined. The application shall also contain a
sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective
licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of
that organization.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.04  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license, the Director
of Finance shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such
investigation within five days of the time of such receipt. The officer
charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten days after receiving the
application or a copy thereof.



   (B)   Upon receipt of all related investigative and inspection
reports, the Director of Finance shall forward such reports, together with
the application, to the Village President for final determination.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.05  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   If, after due consideration of the information contained with
the application and related investigative and inspection reports, the Village
President shall determine that the application is satisfactory, the
application shall be approved. Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall notify the
applicant that his or her or its application is approved. The license shall
be signed by the President, attested by the Clerk, and then issued to the
licensee.



   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained
within the application and related investigative and inspection reports, the
Village President shall determine that matters concerning the application are
unsatisfactory, the application shall be disapproved, indicating the
reasons  therefore. Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall notify the applicant
that his or her or its application has not been approved and that no license
will be issued. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Village
President, within ten days of receipt thereof, by submitting a petition for
appeal, in writing, to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may, by
vote of a majority of the Trustees, reverse the decision of the Village
President.



   (C)   The Village President shall act on a license application
within 30 days from the date of application.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.06  ELIGIBILITY AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that
operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five years immediately before making application
for a license and which have had during that entire five-year period a bona
fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives or to a non-profit
fundraising organization that is organized for the sole purpose of providing
financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals
suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability,
accident or disaster.



   (B)   A license may not be issued under this chapter to:



      (1)    Any person who has been convicted of a felony;



      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter;



      (3)   Any person who is not a good moral character;



      (4)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in
divisions (B)(1), (2) or (3) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit
interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;



      (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions
(B)(1), (2) or (3) above is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not;



      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions
(B)(1), (2) or (3) above is to participate in the management or operation of
a raffle as defined in this chapter.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.07  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The maximum aggregate retail value of all prizes or
merchandise awarded by a license in a single raffle shall be $150,000 unless
the applicant follows the procedure as established in division (E) below.



   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee
in a single raffle shall be $150,000 unless the applicant follows the
procedure as established in division (E) below.



   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance
issued or sold shall be $250.



   (D)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued
or sold for any raffle shall be 364 days.



   (E)   Any applicant requesting a license for a raffle in which the
maximum aggregate retail value of all prizes or the maximum retail value of
each individual prize will exceed $150,000 must receive prior approval of the
Village Board of Trustees. The application for a raffle in which prizes
exceed the value of $150,000 shall be made and investigated as outlined in
this chapter. Following the investigation the Village President shall cause
the application to be placed on the meeting agenda for action by the Board of
Trustees prior to the issuance of said license.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.08  RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND.



   (A)   All operation of and conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of the aggregate retail value
of all prizes or merchandise to be awarded by the licensee in the raffle,
conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or her duties.
Such bond shall be given before the issuance of a license under this chapter,
shall be in the name of the Village of Channahon, and shall be in a form and
with a surety acceptable to the village.



   (B)   Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation.



   (C)   The Mayor shall be authorized to waive the bond requirement
and to include a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization
under this chapter, provided that:



      (1)   All the requirements of this chapter have been met by
the applicant;



      (2)   The applicant has complied with the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 15, § 5, being Sec. 5 of the Illinois Raffles Act; and



      (3)   The organization provides a resolution adopted by a
unanimous vote of its governing body request such a waiver. An appeal of the
decision of the Mayor with regard to waiving bond may be made to the Board of
Trustees within five days of said decision.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.09  CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.



   Raffles licensed by this chapter shall be conducted subject to the
following restrictions.



   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct that
raffle.



   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management of the raffle.



   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this chapter, or from an entity which has obtained a special
use permit under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 156 of this
Code of Ordinances, to conduct bingo games.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.10  RECORDS.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances
shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each
raffle. All deductions from gross receipts for each raffle shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a
description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the
deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.



   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization. Each organization shall
have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report
monthly to its membership, and to the village its gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized
as required by this section.



   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.11  LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE.



   (A)   No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as
collateral or otherwise encumbered.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall alter, deface, forge or
counterfeit any license by the village.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.12  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   A raffle license issued under the provisions of this chapter
may be revoked or suspended by the President and Board of Trustees if the
licensee or raffle manager has:



      (1)   Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Violated any ordinance of the village or any state law
of the State of Illinois, or any federal law of the United States, the
violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the licensee or
raffle manager to continue to conduct the licensed raffle within the village;
or



      (3)   The licensing requirements are no longer met.



   (B)   Prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given
notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be
heard by the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.13  LIMITED APPLICATION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting
or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other
than raffles as provided for herein.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.14  NON-LIABILITY OF VILLAGE.



   The Village of Channahon expressly assumes no responsibility or
liability whatsoever with regard to the collection of monies, the conduct of,
the results of, or any matter relating to, any raffle conducted pursuant to
this chapter.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.15  TAX ON RAFFLE MACHINES.



   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      RAFFLE. The meaning set forth in § 119.01.



      RAFFLE DEVICE. Any raffle machine or any software program that,
upon the deposit of money, insertion of a credit card or the use of other
means for the exchange of currency or other valuable consideration, allows a
person to participate in a raffle or similar amusement.



      RAFFLE MACHINE.  Any mechanical or electronic device that, upon
the deposit of money, insertion of credit card or the use of other means for
the exchange of currency or other valuable consideration, allows a person to
participate in a raffle or similar amusement.



      RAFFLE REVENUES. The gross revenues received by the owner or
operator of any premises at which raffle devices are located or by the owner
or operator of any raffle device software from the use or operation of raffle
devices less the aggregate cost of payouts and prizes from the raffle devices.



   (B)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the use and operation of raffle
devices for raffles licensed by the village at the following rates:



      (1)   Five percent of the raffle revenues up to the first
$10,000 of total monthly raffle revenues;



      (2)   Seven and one-half percent of the raffle revenues for
the total monthly revenues which are between $10,001 and $15,000; or



      (3)   Ten percent of the raffle revenues for the total monthly
raffle revenues which are in excess of $15,001.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to operate or to suffer or
permit the operation of any raffle device without payment of the tax imposed
herein. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other
taxes. Every owner and operator of a raffle device is required to collect the
tax levied by this section.



   (D)   No more than six raffle machines may be located on the
premises of any business in the village.



   (E)   Every owner or operator of a raffle device shall be required
to have a business license issued by the village.



   (F)   On the tenth day of each month, the owner or operator of the
raffle device shall transmit a report of raffle revenues in the previous
month to the village on such forms and in such manner as described by the
Finance Director. Each report shall be accompanied by a remittance of the
appropriate amount of tax applicable as hereinabove provided.



   (G)   The Finance Director may promulgate rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section concerning the enforcement
and application of this section.



   (H)   If for any reason the owner or operator of a raffle device
does not pay the tax when due, penalties shall be at the rate of 2% per month
on the past due amount. In addition, whenever any person shall fail to pay
any tax herein provided, the village may bring or cause to be brought an
action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any
court of competent jurisdiction.



   (I)   Each owner or operator of a raffle device shall keep books
which, at a minimum, include:



      (1)   The gross revenue received from the operator of raffle
devices on a daily and monthly basis;



      (2)   The value of payouts on a daily and monthly basis;



      (3)   The cost to the owner or operator of prizes distributed
as raffle winnings on a daily or monthly basis; and



      (4)   A computation of the tax owed to the village on a
monthly basis.



   (J)   If the Board of Trustees, after a hearing held by the Board,
shall find that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed
by this section, the Board may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by
said tax evader. The owner or operator shall have an opportunity to be heard,
and such hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice of the
time and place of the hearing addressed to the owner and operator at his or
her last known place of business has been deposited in the United States mail
with postage prepaid. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not
release or discharge the owner or operator from his or her civil liability
for the payment of the tax nor from prosecution of such offense.



   (K)   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under
this section, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the
village and shall be credited to and deposited in the General Corporate Fund
of the village.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



§ 119.16  PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.



   A person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of
raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian.  A
person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances
are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.



(Ord. 1625, passed 7-19-10)



CHAPTER 120:  VIDEO GAMING



Section



   120.01   Fee for video gaming terminals



§ 120.01  FEE FOR VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS.



   An annual fee in the amount of $100 is hereby imposed upon each video
gaming terminal as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act (the “Act”).
The fee shall be paid by the terminal operator as defined by the Act. The fee
shall be paid for each calendar year or portion thereof without proration.



(Ord. 1708, passed 9-17-12)



Statutory reference:



   Illinois Video Gaming Act, see ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40



CHAPTER 121: HOME KITCHEN AND COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS



Section



   121.01   Sale of food products from home kitchen and cottage food
operations



§ 121.01  SALE OF FOOD PRODUCTS FROM HOME KITCHEN AND COTTAGE FOOD
OPERATIONS.



   (A)   The village hereby adopts and incorporates the provisions of
the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act (ILCS Ch. 410, Act 625 §§ 1 et
seq.), as amended.



   (B)   Home kitchen operations and cottage food operations, as
defined by the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, as amended, are
permitted within the village.  The sale of non- potentially hazardous food
by home kitchen operations and cottage food operations within the village is
also permitted in accordance with the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement
Act.



(Ord. 1801, passed 3-16-15)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



         13.5.   MISDEMEANORS



         131.   DRUG AND RELATED OFFENSES



         132.   GAMBLING OFFENSES



CHAPTER 13.5:  MISDEMEANORS



Section



General Definitions



   13.5/2-.5   Meanings of words and phrases



   13.5/2-1   Acquittal



   13.5/2-2   Act



   13.5/2-3   Another



   13.5/2-4   Conduct



   13.5/2-5   Conviction



   13.5/2-6   Dwelling



   13.5/2-9   Included offense



   13.5/2-10   Includes



   13.5/2-11   Misdemeanor



   13.5/2-12   Offenses



   13.5/2-13   Peace officers



   13.5/2-15   Person



   13.5/2-15a   Physically handicapped person



   13.5/2-16   Prosecution



   13.5/2-19   Reasonable belief



   13.5/2-20   Solicit



   13.5/2-21   State



   13.5/2-25   Village



Sex Offenses



   13.5/11-7   Adultery



   13.5/11-8   Fornication



   13.5/11-9   Public indecency



   13.5/11-14   Prostitution



   13.5/11-15   Soliciting for a prostitute



   13.5/11-17   Keeping a place of prostitution



   13.5/11-18   Patronizing a prostitute



   13.5/11-19   Pimping



Bodily Harm



   13.5/12-1   Assault



   13.5/12-3   Battery



   13.5/12-3.2   Domestic battery



   13.5/12-5   Reckless conduct



   13.5/12-10   Tattooing body of minor



Offenses Directed Against Property



   13.5/15-1   Property



   13.5/15-2   Owner



   13.5/15-3   Permanent deprivation



   13.5/15-4   Deception



   13.5/15-5   Threat



   13.5/15-6   Stolen property



   13.5/15-7   Obtain



   13.5/15-8   Obtains control



   13.5/15-9   Value



Theft and Related Offenses



   13.5/16-1   Theft



   13.5/16-2   Theft of lost or mislaid property



   13.5/16-3   Theft of labor or services or use of property



   13.5/16-3.1   False report of theft and other losses



   13.5/16-5   Theft from coin-operated machines



   13.5/16-10   Cable television service offenses



   13.5/16-11   Unauthorized use of television interception or decoding
device; prima facie evidence



   13.5/16-12   Contributing to unauthorized use of television
interception or decoding device; prima facie evidence



   13.5/16-13   Violation of §§ 13.5/16-10, 13.5/16-11, 13.5/16-12;
treble and punitive damages; costs and fees; injunction



Deception



   13.5/17-1   Deceptive practices



   13.5/17-2   Impersonating member of police, fraternal or veteran's
organization or representative of charitable organization—use of words
"Channahon Police" etc.—sentence



Damage and Trespass to Property



   13.5/21-1   Criminal damage to property



   13.5/21-2   Criminal trespass to vehicles



   13.5/21-3   Criminal trespass to real property



Deadly Weapons



   13.5/24-1   Unlawful use of weapons



   13.5/24-2   Exemptions



   13.5/24-3   Unlawful sale or delivery of firearms



   13.5/24-3.1   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition



   13.5/24-6   Confiscation and disposition of weapons



   13.5/24-7   Discharge of firearms within village limits



Disorderly Conduct



   13.5/26-1   Disorderly conduct



   13.5/26-2   Interference with emergency communication



   13.5/26-3   Use of a facsimile machine in unsolicited advertising or
fund-raising



   13.5/26-4   Unauthorized video recording and live video transmission



Interference with Public Officers



   13.5/31-1   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, firefighter or
correctional institution employee



   13.5/31-3   Obstructing service of process



Fireworks



   13.5/35-1   Fireworks defined



   13.5/35-2   Possession, sale and use of fireworks



   13.5/35-2.1   Pyrotechnic displays or pyrotechnic service



   13.5/35-2.2   Consumer displays



   13.5/35-2.3   Consumer distributors and retailers



Litter Control Act



   13.5/105-1   Short title



   13.5/105-2   Legislative findings and determination



   13.5/105-3   Definitions



   13.5/105-4   Dumping, deposit, etc. of litter prohibited - exceptions



   13.5/105-5   Dumping, deposit, etc. from motor vehicle prohibited -
deposit of garbage or refuse in receptacles along public highways



   13.5/105-6   Accumulation of litter prohibited



   13.5/105-7   Abandonment of motor vehicle - presumption



   13.5/105-8   Violations - penalty



   13.5/105-9   Presumption of violation by operator - throwing,
deposit, etc., of litter from motor vehicle



   13.5/105-10   Place for public assemblage, transaction of business,
etc. - placing and maintaining receptacles for litter - types of receptacles
for Departments of Transportation and Conservation



   13.5/105-11   Enforcement of Act - prosecutions for violations



Sale of Immoral Publications to Children



   13.5/670-0.01   Short title



   13.5/670-1   Sale of certain publications to minors prohibited



   13.5/670-2   Exhibition prohibited



   13.5/670-3   Employing minor child to sell such publications
prohibited



Use of Intoxicating Compounds



   13.5/690-0.01   Short title



   13.5/690-1   Use prohibited



   13.5/690-2   Sale or delivery prohibited



   13.5/690-3   Direction or prescription of practitioner



   13.5/690-4   Sentence



   13.5/690-4.5   Exemption



Suppression of Gang Activity



   13.5/700-1   Graffiti prohibited



   13.5/700-12   Curfew



   13.5/700-3   Parental responsibility



   13.5/700-4   Temporary questioning without arrest



   13.5/700-5   Gang signs prohibited



   13.5/700-6   Loitering for the purpose of causing street gang
activity or recruitment is prohibited



   13.5/700-7   Maintaining public nuisance



   13.5/700-8   Loitering for the purpose of illegally using,
possessing or selling cannabis or controlled substances



   13.5/700-9   Truancy prohibited



Sale and Possession of Smoking Materials with Respect to Minors



   13.5/705-1   Definitions



   13.5/705-2   Prohibited sales, delivery



   13.5/705-3   Warning signs



   13.5/705-4   Minimum age to sell smoking materials



   13.5/705-5   Purchase by minors prohibited



   13.5/705-6   Possession by minors prohibited



   13.5/705-7   Certain free distributions prohibited



   13.5/705-8   Vending machines; locking devices



   13.5/705-9   Responsibility for agents and employees



   13.5/705-10   Revocation of license



   13.5/705-11   Smoking materials



General Offenses



   13.5/800-1   Public place defined



   13.5/800-2   Unlawful assembly



   13.5/800-3   Public intoxication



   13.5/800-4   Police order to disperse



   13.5/800-5   Loud or unnecessary noises



 




   13.5/999-1   Penalty




Editor’s notes:



   The Air Rifle Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, portions of which were
codified in this chapter, was repealed by P.L. 97-1108



   The Neglected Children Offense Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 130 (portions of
which were previously codified in this chapter) was repealed by P.L. 97-1109



   The Harassing and Obscene Communications Act, Ch. 720, Act 135,
portions of which were codified in this chapter, was repealed by P.L.
97-1108. New provisions concerning obscene harassing and obscene
communications are codified in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 26.5 et seq.



GENERAL DEFINITIONS



§ 13.5/2-.5  MEANINGS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.



   For the purposes of this code, the words and phrases described in this
article have the meanings designated in this article, except when a
particular context clearly requires a different meaning.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-1  ACQUITTAL.



   A verdict or finding of not guilty of an offense, rendered by a legally
constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction authorized to try
the case without a jury.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-2  ACT.



   ACT includes a failure or omission to take action.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-3  ANOTHER.



   A person or persons as defined in this code other than the offender.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-4  CONDUCT.



   An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-5  CONVICTION.



   A judgment of conviction or sentence entered upon a plea of guilty or
upon a verdict or finding of guilty of an offense, rendered by a legally
constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction authorized to try
the case without a jury.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-6  DWELLING.



   A building or portion thereof, a tent, a vehicle, or other enclosed
space which is used or intended for use as a human habitation, home or
residence.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-9  INCLUDED OFFENSE.



   An offense which:



   (A)   Is established by proof of the same or less than all of the
facts or a less culpable mental state (or both), than that which is required
to establish the commission of the offense charged, or



   (B)   Consists of an attempt to commit the offense charged or an
offense included therein.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-10  INCLUDES.



   INCLUDES or INCLUDING means comprehending among other particulars,
without limiting the generality of the forgoing word or phrase.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-11  MISDEMEANOR.



   Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other
than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-12  OFFENSES.



   A violation of any statute of this village.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-13  PEACE OFFICERS.



   (A)   Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is
vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make public arrests
for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses, or is limited to
specific offenses.



   (B)   For purposes of sections concerning unlawful use of weapons,
officers,  agents or employees of the federal government commissioned by
federal statute to make arrests of federal criminal laws shall be considered
Peace Officers under this code, including but not limited to all criminal
investigators of:



      (1)   The United States Department of Justice, The Federal
Bureau of Investigation, The Drug Enforcement Agency and The Department of
Immigration and Naturalization;



      (2)   The United States Department of the Treasury, The Secret
Service, The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the Customs Service;



      (3)   The United States Internal Revenue Service;



      (4)   The United States General Services Administration;



      (5)   The United States Postal Service; and



      (6)   All United States Marshalls or Deputy United States
Marshalls whose duties involve the enforcement of federal criminal laws.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-15  PERSON.



   An individual, public or private corporation, government, partnership,
or unincorporated association.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-15a  PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON.



   A person who suffers from a permanent and disabling physical
characteristic, resulting from disease, injury, functional disorder, or
congenital condition.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-16  PROSECUTION.



   All legal proceedings by which a person's liability for an offense is
determined, commencing with the indictment or the issuance of the
information, and including the final disposition of the case upon appeal.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-19  REASONABLE BELIEF.



   REASONABLE BELIEF or REASONABLY BELIEVES means that the person
concerned, acting as a reasonable man, believes that the described facts
exist.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-20  SOLICIT.



   SOLICIT or SOLICITATION means to command, authorize, urge, incite,
request, or advise another to commit an offense.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-21  STATE.



   STATE or THIS STATE means the State of Illinois has exclusive or
concurrent jurisdiction, and the air space above such land and water.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/2-25  VILLAGE.



   VILLAGE or VILLAGE OF CHANNAHON means the Village of Channahon, and all
land and water in respect to which the Village of Channahon has exclusive or
concurrent jurisdiction, and the air space above such land and water.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



SEX OFFENSES



§ 13.5/11-7  ADULTERY.



   (A)   Any person who has sexual intercourse with another not his
spouse commits adultery, if the behavior is open and notorious, and



      (1)   The person is married and the other person involved in
such intercourse is not his spouse; or



      (2)   The person is not married and knows that the other
person involved in such intercourse is married.



   (B)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section
if his liability is based solely on evidence he has given in order to comply
with the requirements of section 4-1.7 of The Illinois Public Aid Code,
approved April 11, 1967, as amended.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/11-8  FORNICATION.



   (A)   Any person who has sexual intercourse with another not his
spouse commits fornication if the behavior is open and notorious.



   (B)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section
if his liability is based solely on evidence he has given in order to comply
with the requirements of section 4-1.7 of The Illinois Public Aid Code,
approved April 11, 1967, as amended.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/11-9  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   (A)    Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs
any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:



      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as
defined herein; or



      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with the intent to
arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.



   (B)   "Public place" for the purposes of this section means any
place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.



   (C)   Definition.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Any intentional or knowing touching or fondling by
the victim or the accused, either directly or through clothing, of the sex
organs, anus or breast of the victim or the accused, or any part of the body
of a child under 13 years of age, for the purpose of sexual gratification or
arousal of the victim or the accused.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/11-14  PROSTITUTION.



   Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual
penetration as defined in § 13.5/11-9(C) for money, or any touching or
fondling of the sex organs of one person by another person, for money or
anything of value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification commits
an act of prostitution.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/11-15  SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE.



   Any person who commits any of the following acts commits soliciting for
a prostitute:



   (A)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution; or



   (B)   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the
purpose of prostitution; or



   (C)   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the
purpose of prostitution.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/11-17  KEEPING A PLACE OF PROSTITUTION.



   Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which
could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution who
performs any of the following acts keeps a place of prostitution.



   (A)   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the
purpose of prostitution; or



   (B) Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances from
which he could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used for
the purposes of prostitution;



   (C) Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts
or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is being
used for the purpose of prostitution.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/11-18  PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE.



   Any person who performs any of the following acts with a person not his
or her spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:



   (A)    Engages in an act of sexual penetration as defined in §
13.5/11-9(C) with a prostitute; or



   (B)    Enters or remains in a public place of prostitution with
intent to engage in an act of sexual penetration as defined in §
13.5/11-9(C).



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/11-19 PIMPING.



   Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute, not
for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from
the practice of prostitution, commits pimping.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



BODILY HARM



§ 13.5/12-1  ASSAULT.



   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages
in conduct which is conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension
of receiving a battery.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/12-3  BATTERY.



   A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal
justification and by any means,



   (A)   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or



   (B)   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature
with an individual.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/12-3.2  DOMESTIC BATTERY.



   A person commits domestic battery if he intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification by any means:



   (A)   Causes bodily harm to any family or household member as
defined in subsection (3) of Section 112A-3 of the Illinois Code of Criminal
Procedure of 1963, as amended;



   (B)   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature
with any family or household member as defined in subsection (3) of Section
112A-3 of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963, as amended.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/12-5  RECKLESS CONDUCT.



   A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly
the acts which causes the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are
lawful or unlawful.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/12-10  TATTOOING BODY OF MINOR.



   (A)   Any person, other than a person licensed to practice medicine
in all its branches, who tattoos or offers to tattoo a person under the age
of 21 is guilty of tattooing body of a minor.



   (B)   As used in this section, a tattoo means to insert pigment
under the surface of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a needle or
otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the
skin.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY



§ 13.5/15-1  PROPERTY.



   As used in this section, "property" means  anything of value. 
Property includes real estate, money, commercial instruments, admission or
transportation tickets,  written instruments representing or embodying
rights concerning anything of value, labor, or services or otherwise of value
to the owner; things growing on, affixed to, or found on land, or part of or
affixed to any building; electricity, gas and water; birds, animals and fish,
which ordinarily are kept in a state of confinement; food and drink; samples,
cultures, microorganisms, specimens, records, recordings, documents,
blueprints, drawings, maps, and whole or partial copies, descriptions,
photographs, computer programs or data, prototypes or models thereof, or any
other articles, materials, devices, substances and whole or partial copies,
descriptions, photographs, prototypes, or models thereof which constitute,
represent, evidence, reflect or record a secret scientific, technical,
merchandising, production or management information, design, process,
procedure, formula, invention, or improvement.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-2  OWNER.



   A person, other than the offender, who has possession of or any other
interest in the property involved, even though such possession is unlawful,
and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert control over
the property.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-3  PERMANENT DEPRIVATION.



   To permanently deprive means to:



   (A)   Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner; or



   (B)   Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the
property; or



   (C)   Retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner
only if the owner purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or other
compensation for its return; or



   (D)   Sell, give, pledge, or otherwise transfer any interest in the
property or subject it to the claim of a person other than the owner.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-4  DECEPTION.



   Knowingly to:



   (A)   Create or confirm another's impression which is false and
which the offender does not believe to be true; or



   (B)   Fail to correct a false impression which the offender has
previously has created or confirmed; or



   (C)   Prevent another from acquiring information pertinent to the
disposition of the property involved; or



   (D)   Sell or otherwise transfer or encumber property, failing to
disclose a lien, adverse claim, or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of
the property, whether such impediment is or is not a matter of official
record; or



   (E)   Promise performance which the offender does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform standing alone is
not evidence that the offender did not intend to perform.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-5  THREAT.



   A menace, however communicated, to:



   (A)   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other
person or on property; or



   (B)   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or



   (C)   Commit any criminal offense; or



   (D)   Accuse any person of a criminal offense; or



   (E)   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or



   (F)   Harm the credit or business repute of any person; or



   (G)   Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the person
threatened; or



   (H)   Take action as an official against anyone or anything, or
withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or



   (I)   Bring about or continue to a strike, boycott or other similar
collective action if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit
of the group which he purports to represent; or



   (J)   Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or
information with respect to another's legal claim or defense; or



   (K)   Inflect any other harm which would not benefit the offender.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-6  STOLEN PROPERTY.



   Property over which control has been obtained by theft.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-7  OBTAIN.



   (A)    In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of
interest or possession, whether to the offender or to another, and



   (B)   In relation to labor or services, to secure the performance
thereof.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-8  OBTAINS CONTROL.



   As used in this section, "obtains or exerts control" means over
property, includes but is not limited to the taking, carrying away, or the
sale, conveyance, or transfer of title to, or interest in, or possession of
property.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



§ 13.5/15-9  VALUE.



   The value of any property of any commercial instrument or any written
instrument representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value,
labor, or services or otherwise of value to the owner shall be:



   (A)   The market value of such instrument if such instrument is
negotiable and has a market value; and



   (B)   The actual value of such instrument if such instrument is not
negotiable or is otherwise without a market value. For the purpose of
establishing such actual value, the interest of any owner or owners entitled
to part or all of the property represented by such instrument, by reason  of
such instrument, may be shown, even if another owner may be named in a
complaint, information, or other indictment.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES



§ 13.5/16-1  THEFT.



   (A)   A person commits theft when he knowingly:



      (1)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of
the owner; or



      (2)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner;
or



      (3)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or



      (4)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing them to
have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him
to believe that the property was stolen, and



         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the
use or benefit of the property; or



         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property
in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently such use or benefit; or



         (c)   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing
such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use or benefit; or



      (5)   Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody
of The Channahon Police which is explicitly represented to him by a Channahon
Police Officer or any individual acting in behalf of The Channahon Police
Department as being stolen.



   (B)   This section applies only if:



      (1)   The property is under $300 in value.



      (2)   The property stolen is not a firearm.



      (3)   The property stolen is not from a person.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-2  THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY.



   A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits
theft when he:



   (A)   Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is
aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and



   (B)   Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to
the owner; and



   (C)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-3  THEFT OF LABOR OR SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   A person commits theft when he obtains the temporary use of
property, labor or services of another which are available only for hire, by
means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent
of the person providing the property, labor or services.



   (B)   A person commits theft when after renting or leasing a motor
vehicle, obtaining a motor vehicle through a "driveaway" service mode of
transportation or renting or leasing any other type of personal property
exceeding $500 in value, under an agreement in writing which provides for the
return of the vehicle or other personal property to a particular place at a
particular time, he without good cause wilfully fails to return the vehicle
or other personal property to that place within the time specified, and is
thereafter served or sent a written demand mailed to the last known address,
made by certified mail return receipt requested, to return such vehicle or
other personal property within three day from the mailing of the written
demand, and who without good cause wilfully fails to return the vehicle or
any other personal property to any place of business of the lessor within
such period.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-3.1  FALSE REPORT OF THEFT AND OTHER LOSSES.



   A person who knowingly makes a false report of a theft, destruction,
damage or conversion of any property to a law enforcement agency or other
governmental agency with the intent to defraud an insurer is guilty of false
report of theft and other losses.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-5  THEFT FROM COIN-OPERATED MACHINES.



   (A)   A person commits theft from a coin-operated machine when he
knowingly and without authority and with intent to commit a theft from such
machine, opens, breaks into, tampers with, or damages a coin operated machine.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term coin-operated machine shall
include any automatic vending machine or any part thereof, parking meter,
coin telephone, coin laundry machine, coin dry cleaning machine, amusement
machine, music machine, vending machine dispensing goods or services, money
changer.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-10  CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE OFFENSES.



   (A)   As used in this section cable television service means any and
all services provided by or through the facilities of any cable television
system or closed circuit coaxial cable communication system,  or any
microwave or similar transmission service used in connection with any cable
television system or similar closed circuit coaxial cable communications
system.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly obtain or use cable television
service without the authorization of or compensation paid to the operator of
such service. The existence of any connection, wire, conductor, or other
device whatsoever, which affects the use of cable television service by any
person without such use being specifically authorized by, or compensation
paid to the operator of the cable television service may be considered as
evidence of intent to violate this section.



   (C)   No person shall, with intent to defraud a cable television
operator, assist or instruct any other person in obtaining any cable
television service.



   (D)   No person shall, with intent to defraud a cable television
operator, sell or rent, or offer to sell or rent any instrument, apparatus,
equipment or device, or any plans, specifications or instructions for making
or assembling  any instrument, apparatus, equipment or device to any person
with knowledge that the person to whom the item is sold or offered intends to
use it to make unauthorized use of cable television service.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-11  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF TELEVISION INTERCEPTION OR DECODING
DEVICE; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of the unauthorized use of a
television interception or decoding device if:



      (1)   With the intent to intercept or decode a transmission by
a subscription television service without the authorization of the provider
of the service; or



      (2)   With the intent to obtain or use any cable television
service without the authorization of the cable television system which
provides such cable television system which provides such cable television
service, the person knowingly attaches to, causes to be attached to, or
incorporates in a television set, video tape recorder, or other equipment
designed to receive a television transmission or cable television service, a
device that intercepts or decodes the transmission or the cable television
service.



   (B)   "Subscription television service" means a service whereby
television broadcast programs intend to be received in an intelligible form
by members of the public only for a fee or charge are transmitted pursuant to
a grant of subscription television authority by the Federal Communications
Commission.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the term cable television
service shall have the meaning ascribed to it in § 13.5/16-10(A).



   (D)   The actual possession by a person of any device proscribed by
this section shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by
such person; however, this presumption shall not apply unless the person
charged has received the direct benefit of the reduction of the cost of the
cable television service or the subscription television service or has
received remuneration for the conduct proscribed in this section.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-12  CONTRIBUTING TO UNAUTHORIZED USE OF TELEVISION INTERCEPTION
OR DECODING DEVICE; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of contributing to the
unauthorized use of a television decoding or interception device when he
knowingly manufactures, distributes, or sells, for remuneration, and with the
intent to aid an offense under § 13.5/16-11, a device plan or kit of parts
for a device that intercepts or decodes a cable television service or a
transmission by a subscription television service.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, "subscription television
service" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in § 13.5/16-11(B).



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, "cable television service"
shall have the meaning ascribed to it in § 13.5/16-11(B).



   (D)   For purposes of this section, the sale or distribution by a
person of any device proscribed by § 13.5/16-11 shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section by such person, provided that such
sale or distribution is made to a person who uses such device to intercept or
decode a cable television service or transmission by a subscription
television service without the specific authorization of the provider of such
cable television service or subscription service.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/16-13  VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 16-10, 16-11, 16-12; TREBLE AND
PUNITIVE DAMAGES; COSTS AND FEES; INJUNCTION.



   (A)  Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 13.5/16-10,
13.5/16-11, or 13.5/16-12, shall be liable to the cable television system or
subscription television service whose transmission or cable television
service has been intercepted or decoded for monetary damages measured by
three times the amount of actual damages sustained by the plaintiff as result
of the violation and any resulting profits of the person committing the
violation plus an amount equal to three times the amount of services
unlawfully obtained. For the purpose of this division (A), to establish
profits the plaintiff is required to present proof only of the gross revenue
of the person committing the violation, and such person is required to prove
his deductible expenses and the elements of profit attributable to factors
other than the violation. In addition to the foregoing, the Court may award
punitive damages where the Court finds that the violation was committed for
the purpose of commercial advantage.



   (B)   In any civil action brought under this section, the Court
shall allow the recovery of full costs plus an award of reasonable attorney's
fees to the prevailing party.



   (C)   In any civil action brought under this section, the plaintiff
may also bring an action to enjoin and restrain any violation of §§
13.5/16-10, 13.5/16-11, or 13.5/16-12 without having to make a showing of
special damages, irreparable harm or the inadequacy of other legal remedies,
and may in the same action seek damages as provided in division (A) of this
section.  Upon execution of a proper bond against damages for an injunction
improvidently granted, a temporary restraining order or a preliminary
injunction may be issued in any such action before a final determination on
the merits.



   (D)   It is not a necessary prerequisite to an action pursuant to
this section that the plaintiff has suffered, or to be threatened with,
actual damages.



(Ord. 149, passed 4-2-90)



DECEPTION



§ 13.5/17-1  DECEPTIVE PRACTICES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   A financial institution means any bank, savings and loan
association, credit union, or other depository of money, or medium of savings
and collective investment.



      (2)   An account holder is any person, having a checking
account or savings account in a financial institution.



      (3)   To act with the "intent to defraud" means to act
wilfully, and with the specific intent to deceive or cheat, for the purpose
of causing financial loss to another, or to bring some financial gain to
oneself.  It is not necessary to establish that any person was actually
defrauded or deceived.



   (B)   General Deception.  A person commits a deceptive practice
when, with intent to defraud:



      (1)   He causes another, by deception or threat to execute a
document disposing of property or a document by which a pecuniary obligation
is incurred, or



      (2)   Being an officer, manager or other person participating
in the direction of a financial institution, he knowingly receives or permits
the receipt of a deposit or other investment, knowing that the institution is
insolvent, or



      (3)   He knowingly makes or directs another to make a false or
deceptive statement addressed to the public for the purpose of promoting the
sale of property or services, or



      (4)   With intent to obtain control over property or to pay
for property, labor or services of another, or in satisfaction of an
obligation for payment of tax under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act or any
other tax due to the State of Illinois, he issues or delivers a check or
other order upon a real or fictitious depository for the payment of money,
knowing that it will not be paid by the depository.  Failure to have
sufficient funds or credit with the depository when the check or other order
is issued or delivered, or when such check or other order is presented for
payment and dishonored on each of 2 occasions at least 7 days apart, is prima
facie evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the
depository, and that he has the intent to defraud.



      (5)   He issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real
or fictitious depository in an amount exceeding $150 in payment of an amount
owed on any credit transaction for property, labor or services, or in payment
of the entire amount owed on any credit transaction for property, labor or
services, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository, and thereafter
fails to provide funds or credit with the depository in the face amount of
the check or order within seven days of receiving actual notice from the
depository or payee of the dishonor of the check or order.



   Sentence.



   A person convicted of deceptive practice under divisions (B)(1) through
(5), except as otherwise provided by this section, is guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.



   A person convicted of a deceptive practice in violation of division (D)
a second or subsequent time shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony and shall be
prosecuted according to appropriate state law.



   A person convicted of deceptive practices in violation of division (D),
when the value of the property so obtained, in a single transaction or in
separate transactions within a 90 day period, exceeds $150, shall be guilty
of a Class 4 felony and shall be prosecuted according to appropriate state
law.  In the case of prosecution for separate transactions totaling more
than $150 within a 90 day period, such separate transactions shall be alleged
in a single charge and provided in a single prosecution.



   (C)   Deception on a Bank or Other Financial Institution False
Statements.



      (1)   Any person who, with the intent to defraud, makes or
cause to be made, any false statement in writing in order to obtain an
account with a bank or other financial institution, knowing such writing to
be false, and with the intent that it be relied upon, is guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.



         For the purposes of this division (C), a false statement
shall mean any false statement representing identity, address, or employment,
or the identity, address or employment of any person, firm or corporation.



      (2)   Any person who possesses, with the intent to defraud,
any check or order for the payment of money, upon a real or fictitious
account, without the consent of the account holder, or the issuing financial
institution, is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



         Any person who, within any 12 month period, violates this
section with respect to 3 or more checks or orders for the payment of money
at the same time or consecutively, each the property of a different account
holder or financial institution, is guilty of a Class 4 felony.



      (3)   Possession of Implements of Check Fraud.  Any person
who possesses, with the intent to defraud, and without the authority of the
account holder or financial institution any check imprinter, signature
imprinter, or "certified" stamp is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



         A person who within any 12 month period violates this
division (C) as to possession of 3 or more such devices at the same time or
consecutively, is guilty of a Class 4 felony.



   Possession of Identification Card.



      (4)   Any person, who with the intent to defraud, possesses
any check guarantee card or key card or identification card for cash
dispensing machines without the authority of the account holder or financial
institution, is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.



         A person who, within any 12 month period, violates this
section at the same time or consecutively with respect to 3 or more cards,
each the property of different account holders, is guilty of a Class 4 felony.



         A person convicted under this section, when the value of
property so obtained, in a single transaction, or in separate transactions
within any 90 day period, exceeds $150 shall be guilty of a Class 4 felony.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 17, § 1)



§ 13.5/17-2  IMPERSONATING MEMBER OF POLICE, FRATERNAL OR VETERAN'S
ORGANIZATION OR REPRESENTATIVE OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION—USE OF WORDS
"CHANNAHON POLICE" ETC.—SENTENCE.



   (A)   A person commits a false personation when he falsely
represents himself to be a member of any police, fraternal or veterans'
organization, including the Illinois Police Association, or a representative
of any charitable organization, or when any person exhibits or uses in any
manner any decal, badge or insignia of any police organization when not
authorized to do so by such police organization.



   (B)   No person shall use the words "Channahon Police," "Channahon
Police Department," "Channahon Patrolman," "Channahon Sergeant," "Channahon
Lieutenant," "Channahon Peace Officer" or any other words to the same effect
in the title of any organization, magazine, or other publication without the
express approval of the Channahon Police Board.



   (C)   No person may solicit advertisements to appear in any
firefighters', law enforcement or police officers' magazine, journal or other
publication without first having obtained a current certificate of
qualification from the Illinois Attorney General.  Upon the presentation of
proof that the applicant does in fact represent a legitimate and bona fide
firefighters', law enforcement or police officers' publication, the Attorney
General may issue to the applicant a certificate of qualification to solicit
advertisements on behalf of such a publication.  The Attorney General shall
prescribe forms and promulgate rules governing the making of applications and
the certification of persons under this division.



   (D)   Sentence.  False personation, unapproved use of name or
title, or solicitation in violation of divisions (A) and (B) of this section
is a Class C misdemeanor.  Solicitation in violation of division (C) of this
section is a Class A misdemeanor.  A second or subsequent conviction for a
violation of division (C) of this section committed after the first
conviction is a Class 4 felony and punishable according to appropriate state
law.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 17, § 2)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY



§ 13.5/21-1  CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   (A)   A person commits criminal damage to property when he or she:



      (1)   Knowingly damages any property of another;



      (2)   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages
property of another;



      (3)   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another;



      (4)   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without
his or her consent;



      (5)   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of
another, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building;



      (6)   Damages any property, other than as described in
division (A)(2) above, with intent to defraud an insurer;



      (7)   Knowingly shoots a firearm at any portion of a railroad
train;



      (8)   Knowingly, without proper authorization, cuts, injures,
damages, defaces, destroys, or tampers with any fire hydrant or any public or
private fire fighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to fire
fighting equipment; or



      (9)   Intentionally, without proper authorization, opens any
fire hydrant.



   (B)   When the charge of criminal damage to the property exceeding a
specified value is brought, the extent of the damage is an element of the
offense to be resolved by the trier of fact as either exceeding or not
exceeding the specified value.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of divisions
(A)(1), (3), and (5) of this section that the owner of the property or land
damaged consented to the damage.



   (D)   Sentence.



      (1)   A violation of division (A) shall have the following
penalties:



         (a)   A violation of division (A)(8) or (9) is a Class B
misdemeanor.



         (b)   A violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3), (5) or
(6) is a Class A misdemeanor when the damage to the property does not exceed
$500.



         (c)   A violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3), (5) or
(6) is a Class 4 felony when the damage to property does not exceed $500 and
the damage occurs to property of a school or place or worship or to farm
equipment or immovable items of agricultural production, including but not
limited to grain elevators, grain bins, and barns or property which
memorializes or honors and individual or group of police officers, fire
fighters, members of the United States Armed Forces, National Guard, or
veterans.



         (d)   A violation of division (A)(4) is a Class 4 felony
when the damage to property does not exceed $10,000.



         (e)   A violation of division (A)(7) is a Class 4 felony.



         (f)   A violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3), (5) or
(6) is a Class 4 felony when the damage to property exceeds $500 but does not
exceed $10,000.



         (g)   A violation of division (A)(1) through (6) is a
Class 3 felony when the damage to property exceeds $500 but does not exceed
$10,000 and the damage occurs to property of a school or place or worship or
to farm equipment or immovable items of agricultural production, including
but not limited to grain elevators, grain bins and barns or property which
memorializes or honors an individual or group of police officers, fire
fighters, members of the United States Armed Forces, National Guard, or
veterans.



         (h)   A violation of division (A)(1) through (6) is a
Class 3 felony when the damage to property exceeds $10,000 but does not
exceed $100,000.



         (I)   A violation of division (A)(1) through (6) is a
Class 2 felony when the damage to property exceeds $10,000 but does not
exceed $100,000 and the damage occurs to property of a school or place of
worship or to farm equipment or immovable items of agricultural production,
including but not limited to grain elevators, grain bins and barns or
property which memorializes or honors an individual or group of police
officers, fire fighters, members of the United States Armed Forces, National
Guard, or veterans.



         (j)   A violation of division (A)(1) through (6) is a
Class 2 felony when the damage to property exceeds $100,000.  A violation of
division (A)(1) through (6) is a Class 1 felony when the damage to property
exceeds $100,000 and the damage occurs to property of a school or place of
worship or to farm equipment or immovable items of agricultural production,
including but not limited to grain elevators, grain bins and barns or
property which memorializes or honors an individual or group of police
officers, fire fighters, members of the United States Armed Forces, National
Guard, or veterans.



      (2)   When the damage to property exceeds $10,000, the court
shall impose upon the offender a fine equal to the value of the damages to
the property.



   (E)   (1)   In addition to any other sentence that may be
imposed, a court shall order any person convicted of criminal damage to
property to perform community service for not less than 30 and not more than
120 hours, if community service is available in the jurisdiction and is
funded and approved by the county board of the county where the offense was
committed.  In addition, whenever any person is placed on supervision for an
alleged offense under this section, the supervision shall be conditioned upon
the performance of the community service.



      (2)   The community service requirement does not apply when
the court imposes a sentence of incarceration.



   (F)   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed for a violation
of this section, if a person is convicted of or placed on supervision for
knowingly damaging or destroying crops of another, including crops intended
for personal, commercial, research, or developmental purposes, the person is
liable in a civil action to the owner of any crops damaged or destroyed for
money damages up to twice the market value of the crops damaged or destroyed.



   (G)   For the purposes of this section, FARM EQUIPMENT means
machinery or other equipment used in farming.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/21-2  CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLES.



   A person commits criminal trespass to vehicles when he or she knowingly
and without authority enters any part of or operates any vehicle, aircraft,
watercraft or snowmobile.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-2(a))  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/21-3  CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO REAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   A person commits criminal trespass to real property when he or
she:



      (1)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains
within or on a building;



      (2)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving, prior
to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;



      (3)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice
from the owner or occupant to depart;



      (4)   Presents false documents of falsely represents his or
her identity orally to the owner or occupant of a building or land in order
to obtain permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the
building or on the land;



      (5)   Intentionally removes a notice posted on residential
real estate as required by ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1505.8(l) before the
date and time set forth in the notice; or



      (6)   Enters a field used or capable of being used for growing
crops, an enclosed area containing livestock, and agricultural building
containing livestock, or an orchard in or on a motor vehicle (including an
off-road vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other powered two-wheel vehicle)
after receiving, prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that
the entry is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice
from the owner or occupant to depart.



      (6)   For purposes of division (A)(1), this section shall not
apply to being in a building which is open to the public while the building
is open to the public during its normal hours of operation; nor shall this
section apply to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable
belief that the building is still open to the public.



   (B)   (1)   A person has received notice from the owner or
occupant within the meaning of division (A)  if he or she has been notified
personally, either orally or in writing including a valid court order as
defined by ILCS Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-3(7) granting remedy (2) of ILCS Ch.
725, Act 5, § 112A-14, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such
entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
land or the forbidden part thereof.



      (2)   Subject to the provisions of division (B)(3), as an
alternative to the posting of real property as set forth in division (B)(1),
the owner or lessee of any real property may post the property by placing
identifying purple marks on trees or posts around the area to be posted. Each
purple mark shall be:



         (a)   A vertical line of at least eight inches in length
and the bottom of the mark shall be no less than three feet nor more than
five feet high. Such marks shall be placed no more than 100 feet apart and
shall be readily visible to any person approaching the property; or



         (b)   A post capped or otherwise marked on at least its
top two inches. The bottom of the cap or mark shall be not less than three
feet but not more than five feet six inches high. Posts so marked shall be
placed not more than 36 feet apart and shall be readily visible to any person
approaching the property. Prior to applying a cap or mark which is visible
from both aides of a fence shared by different property owners or lessees,
all such owners or lessees shall concur in the decision to post their own
property.



         (c)   Nothing in this division (B)(2) shall be construed
to authorize the owner or lessee of any real property to place any purple
marks on any tree or post or to install any post or fence if doing so would
violate any applicable law, rule, ordinance, order, covenant, bylaw,
declaration, regulation, restriction, contract, or instrument.



      (3)   Any owner or lessee who marks his or her real property
using the method described in division (B)(2) must also provide notice as
described in division (B)(1). The public of this state shall be informed of
the provisions of division (B)(2) by the Illinois Department of Agriculture
and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources. These Departments shall
conduct an information campaign for the general public concerning the
interpretation and implementation of division (B)(2). The information shall
inform the public about the marking requirements and the applicability of
division (B)(2) including information regarding the size requirements of the
markings as well as the manner in which the markings shall be displayed. The
Departments shall also include information regarding the requirement that,
until the date this division (B) becomes inoperative, any owner or lessee who
chooses to mark his or her property using paint, must also comply with one of
the notice requirements listed in division (B)(1). The Departments may
prepare a brochure or may disseminate the information through agency
websites. Non-governmental organizations including, but not limited to, the
Illinois Forestry Association, Illinois Tree Farm and the Walnut Council may
help to disseminate the information regarding the requirements and
applicability of division (B)(2) based on materials provided by the
Departments. This division (B)(3) is inoperative on and after January 1, 2013.



   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant
worker or otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of
his or her agent having apparent authority to hire workers on this land and
assign them living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon,
nor to anyone living on the land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing
or other arrangement or arrangement with the owner or his or her agent, nor
to anyone invited by the migrant worker or other person so living on the land
to visit him or her at the place he or she is so living upon the land.



   (D)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section
if he or she beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
properties located within any municipality.  For the purposes of this
division, UNOCCUPIED AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means
any real estate (1) in which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at
least two years; and (2) which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a
period of at least one year; and BEAUTIFIES means to landscape, clean up
litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on or to board up windows and
doors.



   (E)   (1)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for
money damages to the owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and
industrial property which that person beautifies pursuant to division (D) of
this section.



      (2)   Mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee exceptions.



         (a)   A mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee shall be
exempt from prosecution for criminal trespass for entering, securing, or
maintaining an abandoned residential property.



         (b)   No mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee shall be
liable to the mortgagor or other owner of an abandoned residential property
in any civil action for negligence or civil trespass in connection with
entering, securing, or maintaining the abandoned residential property.



         (c)   For the purposes of this division (D)(2) only,
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means mortgaged real estate that the mortgagee
or agent of the mortgagee determines in good faith meets the definition of
abandoned residential property set forth in ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1200.5.



   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a
building or upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of
this division (F), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an
individual is or is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent
danger of serious bodily harm or in which property is or is reasonably
believed to be in imminent danger of damage or destruction.



   (G)   Division (A)(1)(d) does not apply to a peace officer or other
official of a unit of government who enters a building or land in the
performance of his or her official duties.



   (H)   A violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3) or (4) is a Class B
misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(6) is a Class A misdemeanor.



   (I)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages
to the owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as
prohibited under division (A)(6). A person may also be liable to the owner
for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees. The measure of damages
shall be:



      (1)   The actual damages, but not less than $250, if the
vehicle is operated in a nature preserve or registered area as defined in
Sections 3.11 and 3.14 of the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act;



      (2)   Twice the actual damages if the owner has previously
notified the person to cease trespassing; or



      (3)   In any other case, the actual damages, but not less than
$50. If the person operating the vehicle is under the age of 16, the owner of
the vehicle and the parent or legal guardian of the minor are jointly and
severally liable. For the purposes of this division (I):



         LAND includes, but is not limited to, land used for crop
land, fallow land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land,
mine spoil nature preserves and registered areas.  LAND does not include
driveways or private roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.



         OWNER means the person who has the right to possession of
the land, including the owner, operator or tenant.



         VEHICLE has the same meaning as provided under ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 1-217.



   (J)   This section does not apply to the following persons while
serving process:



      (1)   A person authorized to service process under ILCS Ch.
735, Act 5, § 2-202; or



      (2)   A special process server appointed by the circuit court.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



DEADLY WEAPONS



§ 13.5/24-1  UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.



   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he
knowingly:



   (A)   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses, or carries any
bludgeon, black-jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles,
throwing star, or any knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade knife,
which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a
button, spring, or other device in the handle of the knife, or a ballistic
knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by
means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed gas;



   (B)   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully
against another, a dagger, dirk,billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto,
broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser, or any other
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;



   (C)   Carries on or about his person or in any vehicle, a tear gas
gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or
substance, other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or
substance designed for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age
or older;



   (D)   Carries or possesses in any vehicle or concealed on or about
his person, except when on his land or in his own abode, legal dwelling, or
fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling of another
person as an invitee with that person's permission, any pistol, revolver,
stun gun, taser, or other firearm, except that this subsection (D) does not
apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the following
conditions:



      (1)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;



      (2)   Are not immediately accessible; or



      (3)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying
box, shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a
currently valid Firearm Owner's Identification Card;



   (E)   Set a spring gun;



   (F)   Possesses any device or attachment of any kind designed, used
or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm;



   (G)   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries:



      (1)   A machine gun, which shall be defined for the purposes
of this subsection as any weapon,  which shoots, is designed to shoot, or
can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one shot without
manually reloading by a single function of the trigger, including the frame
or receiver of any such weapon, or sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses,
or carries any combination of parts designed or intended for use in
converting any weapon into a machine gun, or any combination or parts from
which a machine gun can be assembled if such parts are in the possession or
under the control of a person;



      (2)   Any rifle having one or more barrels less than 16 inches
in length or a shotgun having one or more barrels less than 18 inches in
length or any weapon made from a rifle or shotgun, whether by alteration,
modification, or otherwise, if such a weapon as modified has an overall
length of less than 26 inches; 



      (3)   Any bomb, bomb-shell, grenade, bottle or other container
containing an explosive substance of over one-quarter ounce for like
purposes, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov
cocktails or artillery projectiles; 



   (H)   Carries or possesses any firearm, stun gun or taser or other
deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages,
or at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any
governmental body or any public gathering at which an admission is charged,
excluding a place where a showing, demonstration, or lecture involving the
exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted.  This subsection (H) does not
apply to any auction or raffle of a firearm held pursuant to a license or
permit issued by a governmental body, nor does it apply to persons engaged in
firearm safety training courses;



   (I)   Carries or possesses in a vehicle or on or about his person
any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or firearm or ballistic knife, when
he is hooded, robed or masked in such manner as to conceal his identity; or



   (J)   (1)   Carries or possesses on or about his person on any
public street, alley, or other public lands within this village, except when
an invitee thereon or therein for the purpose of display of the weapon or the
lawful commerce in weapons, or except when on his land or in his own abode,
legal dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal
dwelling of another person as an inviteee with that person's permission, any
pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser, or other firearm, except that this
division (J) does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet
one of the following conditions:



         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state; or



         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or



         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm
carrying box, shipping box, or other container by a person who has been
issued a currently valid Firearm Owner's Identification Card.



      (2)   A STUN GUN or TASER , as used in division, means:



         (a)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a
length of wireand which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable
of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render him
incapable of normal functioning; or



         (b)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging
units, such as batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing
worn by a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting the person's
nervous system in such a manner as to render him incapable of normal
functioning;



   (K)   Sells, manufactures, or purchases any explosive bullet.
EXPLOSIVE BULLET shall mean the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge
which contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon contact
with the flesh of a human or an animal.  CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal
case having a projectile affixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at
the rear end thereof, with the propellant contained in the tube between the
projectile and the cap;



   (L)   [Reserved]; or



   (M)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person while in a
building occupied by a unit of government, a billy club or other weapon of
like character; or other instrument of like character intended for use as a
weapon.  For purposes of this section, BILLY CLUB means a short stick or
club commonly carried by police officers which is either telescopic or
constructed of a solid piece of wood or other man-made material.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a))  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/24-2  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Sections 13.5/24-1(C), (D), (J) and (M) do not apply to or
affect any of the following:



      (1)   Peace officers or any person summoned by a peace officer
to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in
assisting the officer.



      (2)   Wardens, superintendents, and keepers of prisons,
penitentiaries, jails, and other institutions for the detention of persons
accused or convicted of an offense, while in the performance of their
official duty, or while commuting between their homes and place of employment.



      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the
United States or the Illinois National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training
Corps, while in the performance of their official duty.



      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public
utility to perform police functions or guards of armored car companies while
actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or
commuting between their homes and places of employment; watchmen while
actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment.



      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors,
private detectives or private alarm contractors or employed by an agency
certified by the Department of Professional Regulation if their duties
include the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act
445, §§ 1 et seq., while actually engaged in the performance of the duties
of their employment or commuting between their homes and places of
employment, provided that the commuting is accomplished within one hour from
departure from home or place of employment, as the case may be.  Persons
exempted under this division shall be required to have completed a course of
study in firearms handling and training approved and supervised by the
Department of Professional Regulation as prescribed by ILCS Ch. 225, Act 445,
§ 28 prior to becoming eligible for this exemption.  The Department of
Professional Regulation shall provide suitable documentation demonstrating
the successful completion of the prescribed firearms training. Such
documentation shall be carried at all times when such persons are in
possession of a concealable weapon.



      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or
industrial operation as a security guard for the protection of persons
employed and private property related to that commercial or industrial
operation while actually engaged in the performance of their duty or
traveling between sites or properties belonging to the employer, and who, as
a security guard, is a member of a security force of at least five persons
registered with the Department of Professional Regulation; provided, that the
security guard has successfully completed a course of study, approved by and
supervised by the state Department of Professional Regulation consisting of
not less than 40 hours of training which shall include theory of law
enforcement, liability for acts, and the handling of weapons.  A person
shall be considered to be in compliance with  this section who has completed
the required 20 hours of training for a security officer and 20 hours of
required firearm training and who has been issued a firearm control card by
the state Department of Professional Regulation.  Conditions for the renewal
of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this section shall be
the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act
445, §§ 1 et seq.  Such firearm control card shall be carried by the
security guard at all times when he or she is in possession of a concealable
weapon.



      (7)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative
Investigating Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons
specified in § 13.5/24-1(A)(3) and (4) while on duty in the course of any
investigation for the Commission.



      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution for the
protection of other employees and property related to that financial
institution, while actually engaged in the performance of their duties,
commuting between their homes and places of employment, or traveling between
sites or properties owned or operated by the financial institution, provided
that any person so employed has successfully completed a course of study,
approved by and supervised by the state Department of Professional
Regulation, consisting of not less than 40 hours of training which includes
theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the handling of weapons. 
A person shall be considered to be eligible for this exemption if he or she
has completed the required 20 hours of training for a security officer and 20
hours of required firearm training and has been issued a firearm control card
by the state Department of Professional Regulation.  Conditions for renewal
of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this section shall be
the same as for those issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 445,
§§ 1 et seq. Such firearm control card shall be carried by the person so
trained at all times when such person is in possession of a concealable
weapon. For purposes of this division, FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank,
savings and loan association, credit union, or company providing armored car
services.



      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive
an armored car while actually engaged in the performance of his duties.



      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.



      (11)   Investigators of the Office of the State's Attorneys
Appellate Prosecutor authorized by the board of governors of the Office of
the State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to ILCS
Ch. 725, Act 210, §§ 1 et seq.



      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State's Attorney
under ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005.



      (13)   Court Security Officers while in the performance of
their official duties, or while commuting between their homes and places of
employment, with the consent of the Sheriff.



      (14)   A person employed as an armed guard at a nuclear
energy, storage, weapons or development site or facility regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and
training mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.



      (15)  Manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under (A)(1) through (13) of this section to possess those weapons.



   (B)   Section 13.5/24-1(A)(4) and (7) do not apply to or affect any
of the following:



      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the
purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges,
whether public or private, or patrons of the ranges while the members or
patrons are using their firearms on those target ranges;



      (2)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while
parading with the special permission of the Governor;



      (3)   Hunters, trappers, or fishermen with a license or permit
while engaged in hunting, trapping, or fishing;



      (4)   Transportation of weapons broken down in a
non-functioning state or not immediately accessible.



      (5)   Carrying or possessing any pistol, revolver, stun gun or
taser or other firearm on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person
as an invitee with that person's permission.



   (C)   Section 13.5/24-1(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase,
possession, or carrying of a black-jack or slung-shot by a police officer.



   (D)   Section 13.5/24-1(A)(6) does not apply to any owner, manager,
or authorized employee of any place specified in that division or to any law
enforcement officer.



   (E)   Sections 13.5/24-1(A)(4) and (A)(7) do not apply to members of
any club or organization organized for the purpose of practicing shooting at
targets upon established target ranges, whether public or private, while
using their firearms on those target ranges.



   (F)   Section 13.5/24-1(A)(8) does not apply to:



      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the
United States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of
their official duty.



      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military
ordinance.



      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics,
or specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance.



      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly, or possession of
explosive bullets by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal
government, in connection with the supply of those organizations and persons
exempted by division (F)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside
this state, or the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or
person exempted in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or
leased by an exempted manufacturer.



   (G)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any
provision of this subchapter need not negative any exemptions contained in
this subchapter.  The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an
exemption.



   (H)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or affect
the transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol or revolver, stun
gun, taser, or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under
license with the state or the federal government where such transportation,
carrying, or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which the
common carrier is engaged.  Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply
to, or affect the transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol,
revolver, stun gun, taser, or other firearm not the subject of and regulated
by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7) or division (C) of this section above,
which is unloaded and enclosed  in  a case,  firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by the possessor of a valid firearm owner's
identification card.



   (I)   Nothing in this code shall prohibit, apply to or affect the
transportation, carrying or possession of a firearm when done in conformance
with the Illinois Firearm Concealed Carry Act.



(Am. Ord. 1773, passed 1-6-14)



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions under state law, see ILCS Ch.720, Act 5, § 24-2



§ 13.5/24-3  UNLAWFUL SALE OR DELIVERY OF FIREARMS.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful sale of firearms when
he or she knowingly does any of the following:



      (1)   Sells or gives any firearm of a size which may be
concealed upon the person to any person under 18 years of age.



      (2)   Sells or gives any firearm to a person under 21 years of
age who has been convicted of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or
adjudged delinquent.



      (3)   Sells or gives any firearm to any narcotic addict.



      (4)   Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been
convicted of a felony under the laws of this or any other jurisdiction.



      (5)   Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been a
patient in a mental institution within the past 5 years. In this division
(A)(5):



         (a)   MENTAL INSTITUTION means any hospital,
institution, clinic, evaluation facility, mental health center, or part
thereof, which is used primarily for the care or treatment of persons with
mental illness.



         (b)   PATIENT IN A MENTAL INSTITUTION means the person
was admitted, either voluntarily or involuntarily, to a mental institution
for mental health treatment, unless the treatment was voluntary and solely
for an alcohol abuse disorder and no other secondary substance abuse disorder
or mental illness.



      (6)   Sells or gives any firearms to any person with an
intellectual disability.



      (7)   Delivers any firearm of a size which may be concealed
upon the person, incidental to a sale, without withholding delivery of such
firearm for at least 72 hours after application for its purchase has been
made, or delivers any rifle, shotgun or other long gun, or a stun gun or
taser, incidental to a sale, without withholding delivery of such rifle,
shotgun, or other long gun, or a stun gun or taser for at least 24 hours
after application for its purchase has been made.  However, this division
(7) does not apply to:



         (a)   The sale of a firearm to a law enforcement officer
if the seller of the firearm knows that the person to whom he or she is
selling the firearm is a law enforcement officer or the sale of the firearm
to a person who desires to purchase a firearm for use in promoting the public
interest incident to his or her employment as a bank guard, armed truck
guard, or other similar employment; or



         (b)   A mail order sale of a firearm from a federally
licensed firearms dealer to a nonresident of Illinois under which the firearm
is mailed to a federally licensed firearms dealer outside the boundaries of
Illinois; or



         (c)   The sale of a firearm to a nonresident of Illinois
while at a firearm showing or display recognized by the Illinois Department
of State Police; or



         (d)   The sale of a firearm to a dealer licensed as a
federal firearms dealer under Section 923 of the federal Gun Control Act of
1968 (18 U.S.C. 923); or



         (e)   The transfer or sale of any rifle, shotgun or
other long gun to a resident registered competitor or attendee or
non-resident registered competitor or attendee by any dealer licensed as a
federal firearms dealer under Section 923 of the federal Gun Control Act of
1968 at competitive shooting events held at the World Shooting Complex
sanctioned by a national governing body. For purposes of transfers or sales
under this division, the Department of Natural Resources shall give notice to
the Department of State Police at least 30 calendar days prior to any
competitive shooting events at the World Shooting Complex sanctioned by a
national governing body.  The notification shall be made on a form
prescribed by the Department of State Police.  The sanctioning body shall
provide a list of all registered competitors and attendees at least 24 hours
before the events to the Department of State Police.  Any changes to the
list of registered competitors and attendees shall be forwarded to the
Department of State Police as soon as practicable.  The Department of State
Police must destroy the list of registered competitors and attendees no later
than 30 days after the date of the event.  Nothing in this division relieves
a federally licensed firearm dealer from the requirement of conducting a NICS
background check through the Illinois Point of Contact under 18 U.S.C. 922(t).



         (f)   For purposes of this division, APPLICATION means
when the buyer and seller reach an agreement to purchase a firearm and
NATIONAL GOVERNING BODY means a group of persons who adopt rules and
formulate policy on behalf of a national firearm supporting organization.



      (8)   While holding any license as a dealer, importer,
manufacturer or pawnbroker under the federal Gun Control Act of 1968,
manufactures, sells or delivers to any unlicensed person a handgun having a
barrel, slide, frame or receiver which is a die casting of zinc alloy or any
other nonhomogeneous metal which will melt or deform at temperatures of less
than 800 degrees Fahrenheit.  For purposes of this paragraph, (1) FIREARM is
defined as in the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act; and (2) HANDGUN is
defined as a firearm designed to be held and fired by the use of a single
hand, and includes a combination of parts from which such a firearm can be
assembled.



      (9)   Sells or gives a firearm of any size to any person under
18 years of age who does not possess a valid Firearm Owner's Identification
Card.



      (10)   Sells or gives a firearm while engaged in the business
of selling firearms at wholesale or retail without being licensed as a
federal firearms dealer under the federal Gun Control Act of 1968 (18 U.S.C.
923).  In this division (10):



         (a)   A person “engaged in the business” means a
person who devotes time, attention, and labor to engaging in the activity as
a regular course of trade or business with the principal objective of
livelihood and profit, but does not include a person who makes occasional
repairs of firearms or who occasionally fits special barrels, stocks, or
trigger mechanisms to firearms.



         (b)   “With the principal objective of livelihood and
profit” means that the intent underlying the sale or disposition of
firearms is predominantly one of obtaining livelihood and pecuniary gain, as
opposed to other intents, such as improving or liquidating a personal
firearms collection; however, proof of profit shall not be required as to a
person who engages in the regular and repetitive purchase and disposition of
firearms for criminal purposes or terrorism.



      (11)   Sells or transfers ownership of a firearm to a person
who does not display to the seller or transferor of the firearm a currently
valid Firearm Owner's Identification Card that has previously been issued in
the transferee's name by the Department of State Police under the provisions
of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act.  This division does not apply
to the transfer of a firearm to a person who is exempt from the requirement
of possessing a Firearm Owners Identification Card under Section 2 of the
Firearm Owners Identification Card Act.  For purposes of this section, a
currently valid Firearm Owners Identification Card means:



         (a)   A Firearm Owners Identification Card that has not
expired, or



         (b)   An approval number issued in accordance with
subsection (a-10) of Section 3 or Section 3.1 of the Firearm Owners
Identification Card Act shall be proof that the Firearm Owners Identification
card was valid.



            1.   In addition to the other requirements of this
division (A)(11), all persons who are not federally licensed firearms dealers
must also have complied with subsection (a-10) of Section 3 of the Firearm
Owners Identification Card Act by determining the validity of a purchaser’s
Firearm Owner’s Identification Card.



            2.   All sellers or transferors who have complied
with the requirements of division (A)(11)(b)1. above shall not be liable for
damages in any civil action arising from the use or misuse by the transferee
of the firearm transferred, except for willful or wanton misconduct on the
part of the seller or transferor.



      (12)   Not being entitled to the possession of a firearm,
delivers the firearm, knowing it to have been stolen or converted.  It may
be inferred that a person who possesses a firearm with knowledge that its
serial number has been removed or altered has knowledge that the firearm is
stolen or converted.



   (B)   Division (A)(8) of this section shall not include firearms
sold within 6 months after enactment of Public Act 78-355 (approved August
21, 1973, effective October 1, 1973) nor is any firearm legally owned or
possessed by any citizen or purchased by any citizen within six months after
the enactment of Public Act 78-355 subject to confiscation or seizure under
the provisions of that Public Act.  Nothing in Public Act 78-355 shall be
construed to prohibit the gift or trade of any firearm if that firearm was
legally held or acquired within six months after the enactment of that Public
Act.



   (C)   Sentence.



      (1)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of any of divisions (A)(3), (5), (6), (7) or (8)
commits a Class 4 felony.



      (2)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of Division (A)(2) or (9) commits a Class 3 felony.



      (3)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of division (A)(1) commits a Class 2 felony.



      (4)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of Division (A)(1), (2), or (9) in any school, on the
real property comprising a school, within 1,000 feet of the real property
comprising a school, at a school related activity, or on or within 1,000 feet
of any conveyance owned, leased, or contracted by a school or school district
to transport students to or from school or a school related activity
regardless of the time of day or time of year at which the offense was
committed commits a Class 1 felony. Any person convicted of a second or
subsequent violation of unlawful sale or delivery of firearms in violation of
divisions (A)(1), (2), or (9) in any school, on the real property comprising
a school, within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a school, at a
school related activity, or on or within 1,000 feet of any conveyance owned,
leased, or contracted by a school or school district to transport students to
or from school or a school related activity regardless of the time of day or
time of year at which the offense was committed commits a Class 1 felony for
which the sentence shall be a term of imprisonment of no less than five years
and no more than 15 years.



      (5)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of divisions (A)(1) or (9) in residential property
owned, operated, or managed by a public housing agency, in public park, in a
courthouse, on residential property owned, operated, or managed by a public
housing agency, on the real property comprising any public park, on the real
property comprising any courthouse, or on any public way within 1,000 feet of
the real property comprising any public park, courthouse, or residential
property owned, operated, or managed by a public housing agency commits a
Class 2 felony.



      (6)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of division (A)(10) commits a Class A misdemeanor. A
second or subsequent violation is a Class 4 felony.



      (7)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of division (A)(11) commits a Class 4 felony, except
that a violation of division (A)(11)(b)1. shall not be punishable as a crime
or petty offense.  A third and subsequent conviction for a violation of
division (A)(11) is a Class 1 felony.



      (8)   A person 18 years of age or older convicted of unlawful
sale or delivery of firearms in violation of division (A)(1) or (9) when the
firearm that was sold or given to another person under 18 years of age was
used in the commission of or attempt to commit a forcible felony, shall be
fined or imprisoned, or both, not to exceed the maximum provided for the most
serious forcible felony so committed or attempted by the person under 18
years of age who was sold or given the firearm.



      (9)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of division (A)(4) commits a Class 3 felony.



      (10)   Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of division (A)(12) commits a Class 2 felony if the
delivery is of one firearm. Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery
of firearms in violation of division (A)(12) commits a Class 1 felony if the
delivery is of not less than two and not more than five firearms at the same
time or within a one-year period. Any person convicted of unlawful sale or
delivery of firearms in violation of division (A)(12) commits a Class X
felony for which he or she shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not less than six years and not more than 30 years if the delivery is of not
less than six and not more than ten firearms at the same time or within a
two-year period. Any person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of
firearms in violation of division (A)(12) commits a Class X felony for which
he or she shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than six
years and not more than 40 years if the delivery is of not less than 11 and
not more than 20 firearms at the same time or within a three-year period. Any
person convicted of unlawful sale or delivery of firearms in violation of
division (A)(12) commits a Class X felony for which he or she shall be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than six years and not more
than 50 years if the delivery is of not less than 21 and not more than 30
firearms at the same time or within a four-year period. Any person convicted
of unlawful sale or delivery of firearms in violation of division (A)(12)
commits a Class X felony for which he or she shall be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not less than six years and not more than 60 years if the
delivery is of 31 or more firearms at the same time or within a five-year
period. 



   (D)   For purposes of this section:



      SCHOOL.  A public or private elementary or secondary school,
community college, college, or university.



      SCHOOL RELATED ACTIVITY.  Any sporting, social, academic, or
other activity for which students' attendance or participation is sponsored,
organized, or funded in whole or in part by a school or school district.



    (E)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A)(11) may be
commenced within six years of the commission of the offense.  A prosecution
for a violation of this section other than division (A)(7) may be commenced
within five years after the commission of the offense defined in that
division.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3)



§ 13.5/24-3.1  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of
firearms or firearm ammunition when:



      (1)   He or she is under 18 years of age and has in his or her
possession any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person; or



      (2)   He or she is under 21 years of age, has been convicted
of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent, and has
any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession; or 



      (3)   He or she is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or
firearm ammunition in his or her possession; or



      (4)   He has been a patient in a mental institution within the
past five years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her
possession. For the purposes of this division (A)(4):



         (a)   MENTAL INSTITUTION means any hospital,
institution, clinic, evaluation facility, mental health center, or part
thereof, which is used primarily for the care or treatment of persons with
mental illness.



         (b)   PATIENT IN A MENTAL INSTITUTION means the person
was admitted, either voluntarily or involuntarily, to a mental institution
for mental health treatment, unless the treatment was voluntary and solely
for an alcohol abuse disorder and no other secondary substance abuse disorder
or mental illness; or



      (5)   He or she is a person with an intellectual disability
and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his  or her possession; or



      (6)   He or she has in his or her possession any explosive
bullet.  For the purposes of this section, EXPLOSIVE BULLET   means the
projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an
explosive charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or
an animal.  CARTRIDGE   means a tubular metal case having a projectile
fixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof with
the propellent contained in the tube between the projectile and the cap.



   (B)   Unlawful possession of firearms, other than handguns, and
firearm ammunition is a Class A misdemeanor. Unlawful possession of handguns
is a Class 4 felony.  The possession of each firearm or firearm ammunition
in violation of this section constitutes a single and separate violation.



   (C)   Nothing in division (A)(1) of this section prohibits a person
under 18 years of age from participating in any lawful recreational activity
with a firearm such as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon
established public or private target ranges or hunting, trapping, or fishing
in accordance with the Wildlife Code or the Fish and Aquatic Life Code.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/24-6  CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.



   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed
by the offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for
further disposition consistent with state law.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6)



§ 13.5/24-7  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS WITHIN VILLAGE LIMITS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm within the corporate limits
of the village, except:



   (A)   Peace officers who are participating in target shooting and
firearms-related training at the Channahon Police Department Firearms
Training Facility;



   (B)   Persons engaged in wildlife hunting in conformance with all
applicable local, state and county laws provided that such hunting occurs
west of Tabler Road;



   (C)   Peace officers in the performance of public duty; and



   (D)   Persons in defense of their person or property as otherwise
provided by law.



(Ord. 1404, passed 11-21-05)



DISORDERLY CONDUCT



§ 13.5/26-1  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or
disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace;



      (2)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to
the Fire Department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a
false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no
reasonable ground for believing that the fire exists;



      (3)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to
another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any
nature or a container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical
contaminant, or radioactive substance is concealed in a place where its
explosion or release would endanger human life, knowing at the time of the
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that the bomb,
explosive or a container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical
contaminant, or radioactive substance is concealed in the place;



      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a threat of
destruction of a school building or school property, or a threat of violence,
death, or bodily harm directed against persons at a school, school function,
or school event, whether or not school is in session;



      (5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to
any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect
that an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed,
knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that the offense will be committed, is being committed, or has
been committed;



      (6)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to
any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting the report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public; or



      (7)   Calls the number “911” for the purpose of making or
transmitting a false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at
the time the call or transmission is made, the person knows there is no
reasonable ground for making the call or transmission and further knows that
the call or transmission could result in the emergency response of any public
safety agency;



      (8)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to
the Department of Children and Family Services under Section 4 of the
“Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act”;



      (9)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to
the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, the
Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of 2013, the ID/DD Community
Care Act, or the MC/DD Act;



      (10)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to
the Police Department or Fire Department of any municipality or fire
protection district, or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a
false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or
emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no
reasonable ground for believing that the assistance is required;



      (11)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report
under Article II of Public Act 83-1432;



      (12)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or
unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through
any window or other opening in it; or



      (13)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the
Collection Agency Act or as an employee of the collection agency, and while
attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged
debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor.



   (B)   Sentence.



      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
Class C misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(6) or (A)(12) of this
section is a Class A misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(9) or (A)(11)
of this section is a Class B misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(2),
(A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(7), (A)(8), or (A)(10) of this section is a Class 4
felony. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a Class 3 felony,
for which a fine of not less than $3,000 and no more than $10,000 shall be
assessed in addition to any other penalty imposed.



      (2)   A violation of division (A)(13) of this section is a
business offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $3,000. A
second or subsequent violation of division (A)(8) or (A)(6) of this section
is a Class 4 felony. A third or subsequent violation of division (A)(12) of
this section is a Class 4 felony.



   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sentence that may be
imposed, a court shall order any person convicted of disorderly conduct to
perform community service for not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours,
if community service is available in the jurisdiction and is funded and
approved by the county board of the county where the offense was committed.
In addition, whenever any person is placed on supervision for an alleged
offense under this section, the supervision shall be conditioned upon the
performance of the community service.



      (2)   This division (C) does not apply when the court imposes
a sentence of incarceration.



   (D)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, the
court shall order any person convicted of disorderly conduct under division
(A)(3) involving a false alarm of a threat that a bomb or explosive device
has been placed in a school to reimburse the unit of government that employs
the emergency response officer or officers that were dispatched to the school
for the cost of the search for a bomb or explosive device.



   (E)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, the
court shall order any person convicted of disorderly conduct under division
(A)(6) to reimburse the public agency for reasonable costs of the emergency
response by the public agency up to $10,000.  If the court determines that
the person convicted of disorderly conduct under division (A)(6) is indigent,
the provisions of this division do not apply.



   (F)   For the purposes of this section, EMERGENCY RESPONSE means any
condition that results in, or could result in, the response of a public
official in an authorized emergency vehicle, any condition that jeopardizes
or could jeopardize public safety and results in, or could result in, the
evacuation of any area, building, structure, vehicle or any other place that
any person may enter, or any incident requiring a response by a police
officer, a firefighter, a State Fire Marshal employee, or an ambulance.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1)



§ 13.5/26-2  INTERFERENCE WITH EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION.



   (A)   A person commits interference with emergency communication
when he or she knowingly, intentionally and without lawful justification
interrupts, disrupts, impedes, or otherwise interferes with the transmission
of a communication over a citizens band radio channel, the purpose of which
communication is to inform or inquire about an emergency.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, EMERGENCY means a condition
or circumstance in which an individual is or is reasonably believed by the
person transmitting the communication to be in imminent danger of serious
bodily injury or in which property is or is reasonable believed by the person
transmitting the communication to be in imminent danger of damage or
destruction.



   (C)   Sentence.



      (1)   Interference with emergency communication is a Class B
misdemeanor, except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2).



      (2)   Interference with emergency communication, where serious
bodily injury or property loss in excess of $1,000 results, is a Class A
misdemeanor.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-2)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/26-3  USE OF A FACSIMILE MACHINE IN UNSOLICITED ADVERTISING OR FUND-
RAISING.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   FACSIMILE MACHINE means a device which is capable of sending or
receiving facsimiles of documents through connection with a
telecommunications network.



   PERSON means an individual, public or private corporation, unit of
government, partnership or unincorporated association.



   (B)   A person commits use of a facsimile machine in unsolicited
advertising or fund-raising when he or she knowingly uses a facsimile machine
to send or cause to be sent to another person a facsimile of a document
containing unsolicited advertising or fund-raising material, except to a
person which the sender knows or under all of the circumstances reasonable
believes has given the sender permission, either on a case by case or
continuing basis, for the sending of the  material.



   (C)   Sentence.  Any person who violates division (B) is guilty of
a petty offense and shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-3)



§ 13.5/26-4  UNAUTHORIZED VIDEO RECORDING AND LIVE VIDEO TRANSMISSION.



   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make a
video record or transmit live video of another person without that person's
consent in a restroom, tanning bed, tanning salon, locker room, changing
room, or hotel bedroom. 



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make a video
record or transmit live video of another person in that other person's
residence without that person's consent.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make a video
record or transmit live video of another person in that other person's
residence without that person's consent when the recording or transmission is
made outside that person's residence by use of an audio or video device that
records or transmits from a remote location.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make a video
record or transmit live video of another person under or through the clothing
worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body of or the
undergarments worn by that other person without that person’s consent.



      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be
placed a device that makes a video record or transmits a live video in a
restroom, tanning bed, tanning salon, locker room, changing room, or hotel
bedroom with the intent to make a video record or transmit live video of
another person without that person's consent.



      (6)   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be
placed a device that makes a video record or transmits a live video with the
intent to make a video record or transmit live video of another person in
that other person's residence without that person's consent.



      (7)   It is unlawful for any person to, by any means,
knowingly disseminate, or permit to be disseminated, a video record or live
video that he or she knows to have been made or transmitted in violation of
divisions (A)(2), (3), (4) or (5).



   (B)   Exemptions.  The following activities shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section:



      (1)   The making of a video record or transmission of live
video by law enforcement officers pursuant to a criminal investigation, which
is otherwise lawful;



      (2)   The making of a video record or transmission of live
video by correctional officials for security reasons or for investigation of
alleged misconduct involving a person committed to the Department of
Corrections; and



      (3)   The making of a video record or transmission of live
video in a locker room by a reporter or news medium, as those terms are
defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 8-902, where
the reporter or news medium has been granted access to the locker room by an
appropriate authority for the purpose of conducting interviews.



   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to any sound
recording or transmission of an oral conversation made as the result of the
making of a video record or transmission of live video , and to which ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 14-1 et seq. applies.



   (D)   Sentence.



      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or
(A)(4) is a Class A misdemeanor.



      (2)   A violation of divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) is a
Class 3 felony if the victim is a person under 18 years of age or if the
violation is committed by an individual who is required to register as a sex
offender under the Sex Offender Registration Act.



      (1)   RESIDENCE includes a rental dwelling, but does not
include stairwells, corridors, laundry facilities, or additional areas in
which the general public has access.



      (2)   VIDEO RECORD means and includes any videotape,
photograph, film, or other electronic or digital recording of a still or
moving visual image; and LIVE VIDEO means and includes any real-time or
contemporaneous electronic or digital transmission of a still or moving
visual image.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-4)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OFFICERS



§ 13.5/31-1  RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER OR
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.



   (A)   A person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by
one known to the person to be a peace officer, firefighter, or correctional
institution employee of any authorized act within his or her official
capacity commits a Class A misdemeanor.



      (1)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, a
court shall order any person convicted of resisting or obstructing a peace
officer, firefighter, or correctional institution employee to be sentenced to
a minimum of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment or ordered to perform
community service for not less than 100 hours as may be determined by the
court. The person shall not be eligible for probation in order to reduce the
sentence of imprisonment or community service.



      (2)   A person convicted of a violation of this section whose
violation was the proximate cause of an injury to a peace officer,
firefighter, or correctional institution employee is guilty of a Class 4
felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE shall mean any person employed to supervise and control
inmates incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm, reformatory, prison,
jail, house of correction, police detention area, half-way house, or other
institution or place for the incarceration or custody of persons under
sentence for offenses or awaiting trial or sentence for offenses, under
arrest for an offense, a violation of probation, a violation of parole, a
violation of aftercare release, a violation of mandatory supervised release,
or awaiting a bail setting hearing or preliminary hearing, or who are
sexually dangerous persons or who are sexually violent persons; and
FIREFIGHTER means any individual, either as an employee or volunteer, of a
regularly constituted fire department of a municipality or fire protection
district who performs fire fighting duties, including, but not limited to,
the fire chief, assistant fire chief, captain, engineer, driver, ladder
person, hose person, pipe person, and any other member of a regularly
constituted fire department. FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the
Office of the State Fire Marshal to conduct arson investigations.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if
a person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to
be a firefighter returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence,
building, or other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/31-3  OBSTRUCTING SERVICE OF PROCESS.



   Whoever knowingly resists or obstructs the authorized service or
execution of any civil or criminal process or order of any court commits a
Class B misdemeanor.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-3)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



FIREWORKS



§ 13.5/35-1  FIREWORKS DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person who distributes, offers for sale,
sells, or exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois to
another distributor or directly to any retailer or person for resale.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS.  Those fireworks that must comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S.
Consumer Products Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. Parts 1500 and
1507, and classified as fireworks UNO336 or UNO337 by the United States
Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.CONSUMER FIREWORKS shall
not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers
known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches",
"cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy
canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing
twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used,
provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with
the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps
that contain less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture; the
sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY or CONSUMER DISPLAY.  The detonation,
ignition, or deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or
audible effect.



   CONSUMER OPERATOR.   An adult individual who is responsible for the
safety, setup, and discharge of the consumer fireworks display and who has
completed the training required in Section 22 of this Act.



   CONSUMER RETAILER.  Any person who offers for sale, sells, or
exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois directly to any
person with a consumer display permit.



   DISPLAY FIREWORKS.  1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further
defined in the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.



   FIREWORKS. Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UNO333, UNO334, or UNO335 by the United States
Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101.



   FLAME EFFECT.  The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable
gases, liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual,
or audible effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection
Association 160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic
Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.



   LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR. An individual who is responsible for the
safety, setup, and discharge of the pyrotechnic display or pyrotechnic
service and who is licensed pursuant to the Pyrotechnic Distributor and
Operator Licensing Act.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
company, consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, state, municipality or
political subdivision of a state or any agency or department, or
instrumentality of the United States, and any officer, agent or employee of
these entities.



   PRODUCTION COMPANY.   Any person in the film, digital and video media,
television, commercial, music, or theatrical stage industry who provides
pyrotechnic services or pyrotechnic display services as part of a film,
digital and video media, television, commercial, music or theatrical
production in the State of Illinois and is licensed by the Office pursuant to
the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.



   PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY.  The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of
display fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the
Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.



   PYROTECHNIC DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person who distributes display fireworks
for sale in the State of Illinois or provides them as part of a pyrotechnic
display service in the State of Illinois or provides only pyrotechnic
services and is licensed by the Office pursuant to the Pyrotechnic
Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.



   PYROTECHNIC SERVICE.  The detonation, ignition or deflagration of
display fireworks, special effects or flame effects to produce a visual or
audible effect.



   SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS.   Pyrotechnic devices used for special
effects by professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with
theatrical, musical, or other productions that are similar to consumer
fireworks in chemical compositions and construction, but are not intended for
consumer use and are not labeled as such or identified as "intended for
indoor use".  SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS are classified as fireworks UN0431
or UN0432 by the United States Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R.
172.101.



(ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, § 1)



§ 13.5/35-2  POSSESSION, SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for
sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any display
fireworks, flame effects, or consumer fireworks; provided that the President
and Board of Trustees shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for the granting of permits for pyrotechnic and consumer displays.



(ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, §2)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/35-2.1 PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS OR PYROTECHNIC SERVICE.



   (A)   Each pyrotechnic display or pyrotechnic service shall be
conducted by a licensed lead pyrotechnic operator employed by a licensed
pyrotechnic distributor or a licensed production company, or insured as an
additional named insured on the pyrotechnic distributor's product liability
and general liability insurance, as required under the Pyrotechnic
Distribution and Operating Licensing Act, or insured as an additional named
insured on the production company's general liability insurance, as required
under the Pyrotechnic Distribution and Operating Licensing Act. Applications
for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be made in writing at least 15 days in
advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display or pyrotechnic service, unless
agreed to otherwise by the local jurisdiction issuing the permit and the Fire
Chief of the jurisdiction in which the display or pyrotechnic service will
occur. After a permit has been granted, sales, possession, use, and
distribution of display fireworks for the display or pyrotechnic service
shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.



   (B)   Pyrotechnic display permits may be granted hereunder to any
adult individual applying therefor. No permit shall be required under the
provisions of this Act for supervised public displays by State or County fair
associations.



   (C)   The applicant seeking the pyrotechnic display permit must
provide proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than $1,000,000 to the
local governmental entity issuing the permit.



   (D)   A permit shall be issued only after the Chief of the Fire
Department providing fire protection coverage to the area of display or
pyrotechnic service, or his or her designee, has inspected the site and
determined that the display or pyrotechnic service can be performed in full
compliance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal and that the
display or pyrotechnic service shall not be hazardous to property or endanger
any person or persons. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuer of a
permit from adopting more stringent rules.



   (E)   All indoor pyrotechnic displays and pyrotechnic services shall
be conducted in buildings protected by automatic sprinkler systems and
meeting the requirements of rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to this Act.  At the time an individual applies for an indoor pyrotechnic
display permit from the local jurisdiction, written notice of the permit
application and the indoor display or pyrotechnic service information shall
be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of the pyrotechnic
display or pyrotechnic service to the Office, unless agreed to otherwise by
the Office.



   (F)   Permits shall be signed by the Chief of the Fire Department
providing fire protection to the area of display or pyrotechnic service, or
his or her designee, and must identify the licensed pyrotechnic distributor
or licensed production company and the lead pyrotechnic operator.



(ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, § 2.1)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/35-2.2 CONSUMER DISPLAYS.



   (A)   Each consumer display shall be handled by a competent
individual who has received training from a consumer fireworks training class
approved by the Office of the State Fire Marshal. Applications for consumer
display permits shall be made in writing at least 15 days in advance of the
date of the display, unless agreed to otherwise by the local jurisdiction
issuing the permit and the Fire Chief of the jurisdiction in which the
display will occur. After a permit has been granted, sales, possession, use,
and distribution of consumer fireworks for display shall be lawful for that
purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.



   (B)   Permits may be granted hereunder to any adult individual
applying for a permit who provides proof that he or she has received the
requisite training. The local jurisdiction issuing the permit is authorized
to conduct a criminal background check of the applicant as a condition of
issuing a permit.



   (C)   A permit shall be issued only after inspection of the display
site by the Fire Chief providing fire protection coverage to the area of
display, or his or her designee, to determine that the display is in full
compliance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal.  Nothing in
this section shall prohibit the issuer of a permit from adopting more
stringent rules.



(ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, §2.2)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/35-2.3 CONSUMER DISTRIBUTORS AND RETAILERS.



   No person may act as a consumer distributor or retailer or advertise or
use any title implying that the person is a consumer distributor or retailer
unless registered with the Office of the State Fire Marshal. No consumer
fireworks may be distributed, sold, transferred, or provided free of charge
to an individual who has not been issued a permit in accordance with §
13.5/35-2.2 or has not registered with the Office of the State Fire Marshal
in accordance with this section. No person may sell to a single individual a
quantity of consumer fireworks exceeding 499 pounds without prior approval by
the Office of the State Fire Marshal. The State Fire Marshal, in the name of
the People, through the Attorney General, the State's Attorney of any county,
any resident of the state, or any legal entity within the state may apply for
injunctive relief in any court to enjoin any person who has not registered
from distributing or selling consumer fireworks. Upon filing a verified
petition in court, the court, if satisfied by affidavit, or otherwise, that
the person is or has been distributing in violation of this Act, may enter a
temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction, without bond,
enjoining the defendant from further activity. A copy of the verified
complaint shall be served upon the defendant and the proceedings are to be
conducted as in other civil cases. The court may enter a judgment permanently
enjoining a defendant from further unregistered activity if it is established
that the defendant has been or is distributing in violation of this Act. In
case of violation of any injunctive order or judgment entered under this
section, the court may summarily try and punish the offender for contempt of
court. Injunctive proceedings are in addition to all penalties and other
remedies in this Act.



(ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, §2.3)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



LITTER CONTROL ACT



§ 13.5/105-1  SHORT TITLE.



   This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Litter Control Act."



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 1)



§ 13.5/105-2  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND DETERMINATION.



   The General Assembly finds and determines that:



   (A)   Rapid population growth, the ever increasing mobility of the
population and improper and abusive discard habits cause the existence,
proliferation and accumulation of litter upon public and private property in
this state;



   (B)   Litter is detrimental to the welfare of the people of this
state; and



   (C)   While there has been a collective failure by government,
industry and the public to develop and accomplish effective litter control,
there is a need to educate the public with respect to the problem of litter
and to provided for strict enforcement of litter control measures.



   This Act is, therefore, necessary to provide for uniform prohibition
throughout the state of any and all littering on public or private property
so as to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of this state.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 2)



§ 13.5/105-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LITTER.   Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. 
LITTER may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse,
cigarettes, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste,
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other
packaging construction material, abandoned vehicle (as defined in ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.), motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass
of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, any object
likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard, potentially
infectious medical waste as defined in the Environmental Protection Act, ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary
nature, which has been discarded, abandoned or otherwise disposed of
improperly.



   MOTOR VEHICLE has the meaning ascribed to that term in ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 1-146.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any other
legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3)



§ 13.5/105-4  DUMPING, DEPOSIT, ETC. OF LITTER PROHIBITED--EXCEPTIONS.



   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or
permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of
litter upon any public or private property in this state, or upon or into any
river, lake, pond or other stream or body of water in this state, unless:



   (A)   The property has been designated by the state or any of its
agencies, political subdivisions, units of local government or school
districts for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that
property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the
Pollution Control Board;



   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container
intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the
deposit of litter;



   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the
owner or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a
public nuisance, or a fire hazard;



   (D)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public
officials during special cleanup days; or



   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of such litter, including, but not limited to, potentially
infectious medical waste as defined in Section 3.360 of the Environmental
Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360) when the emergency situation
no longer exists.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 4)



§ 13.5/105-5  DUMPING, DEPOSIT, ETC. FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED--DEPOSIT
OF GARBAGE OR REFUSE IN RECEPTACLES ALONG PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   No person shall dump, deposit, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or
private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or body of
water in this state except as permitted under any of divisions (a) through
(e) of § 13.5/105-4.  Nor shall any person transport by any means garbage
or refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site
to and deposit such material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other
receptacles placed along public highways.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 5)



§ 13.5/105-6  ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.



   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which
the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown
or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of
another person.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 6)



§ 13.5/105-7  ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE--PRESUMPTION.



   No person shall abandon a motor vehicle on any highway, on any public
property or on any private property of which he is not the owner or tenant in
lawful possession in this state.  The person to whom last was issued the
certificate of title to the vehicle by the Secretary of State is presumed to
be the person to have abandoned that vehicle, but such presumption may be
rebutted.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 7)



§ 13.5/105-8  VIOLATIONS--PENALTY.



   Persons who violate any of §§ 13.5/105-4 through 13.5/105-7  are
subject to the penalties set out in this section.



   (A)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§ 13.5/105-4,
13.5/105-5, 13.5/105-6 or 13.5/105-7 is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.  A
second conviction for an offense committed after the first conviction is a
Class A misdemeanor.  A third or subsequent violation, committed after a
second conviction is a Class 4 felony and shall be prosecuted according to
appropriate state law.



   (B)   In addition to any other fine imposed under this  Act, the
court may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and
properly dispose of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such
removal and disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs
against the person so convicted.



   (C)   The penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities
otherwise imposed or conferred by law.



   (D)   An individual convicted of violating §§ 13.5/105-4 or
13.5/105-5 by disposing of litterupon a public highway may, in addition to
any other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the
agency having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, the site
where the offense occurred, as provided in Section 50 of the Illinois
Adopt-A-Highway Act.



   (E)   A mandatory minimum fine of $50 must be imposed against any
person who is convicted of violating § 13.5/105-5.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8)



§ 13.5/105-9  PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR--THROWING, DEPOSIT,
ETC., OF LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE.



   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated § 13.5/105-5, but that
presumption may be rebutted.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 9)



§ 13.5/105-10  PLACE FOR PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGE, TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS,
ETC.--PLACING AND MAINTAINING RECEPTACLES FOR LITTER--TYPES OF RECEPTACLES
FOR DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION AND CONSERVATION.



   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this Act, the
owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the public as
a place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation or as a
public way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the
deposit of litter, of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the
needs of the numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, "property held out to he public
for the transaction of business" includes, but is not limited to,
commercially-operated parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile
service stations, business parking lots, car washes, shopping centers,
marinas, boat launching areas, industrial parking lots, boat moorage and
fueling stations, piers, beaches and bathing areas, airports, roadside rest
stops, drive-in movies, and shopping malls; and "property held out to the
public for assemblage, recreation or as a public way" includes, but is not
limited to, any property that is publicly owned or operated for any of the
purposes stated in the definition in this paragraph for "property held out to
the public for the transaction of business" but excludes state highway
rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.



   (C)   The Secretary of Transportation and the Director of
Conservation shall prescribe the type or types of litter receptacle to be
placed on property under the jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation
and of the Department of Conservation, respectively.  The Secretary of
Transportation shall also promulgate rules and regulations governing the
placement of receptacles on property under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Transportation.



   (D)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in
this section, the owner or person in control of the property may be convicted
of a petty offense and fined $100 for violating this section.  If the owner
or person in control of such property has placed litter receptacles on his
property but the number or size of such receptacles has proved inadequate to
meet the needs of the numbers of people coming on or using his property as
indicated by the condition and appearance of that property, and the owner or
person in control has failed to provide sufficient or adequate receptacles
within 10 days after being made aware of that fact by written notice from the
appropriate law enforcement agency, he may be convicted of a petty offense
and fined $25 for each receptacle not so provided and maintained.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 10)



§ 13.5/105-11  ENFORCEMENT OF ACT— PROSECUTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS.



   This Act shall be enforced by all law enforcement officers in their
respective jurisdictions, whether employed by the state or by any unit of
local government.  Prosecutions for violation of this Act shall be conducted
by the State's Attorneys of the several counties and by the Attorney General
of this state.



(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 11)



SALE OF IMMORAL PUBLICATIONS TO CHILDREN



§ 13.5/670-0.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This Act may be cited as the Sale of Immoral Publications to Children
Act.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 670, § 0.01)



§ 13.5/670-1  SALE OF CERTAIN PUBLICATIONS TO MINORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lend, give away or show,
or have in his possession with intent to sell or give away, or to show or
advertise, or otherwise offer for loan, gift or distribution to any minor
child any book, pamphlet, magazine, newspaper, story paper or other printed
paper devoted to the publication or principally made up of criminal news,
police reports, or accounts of criminal news, police reports, or accounts of
criminal deeds, or pictures and stories of deeds of bloodshed, lust or crime.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 670, § 1)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/670-2  EXHIBITION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to exhibit upon any street or highway, or in any
place within the view, or which may be within the view or any minor child,
any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, story paper or other paper or
publication coming within the description of matters mentioned in the first
section of this act, or any of them.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 670, § 2)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/670-3  EMPLOYING MINOR CHILD TO SELL SUCH PUBLICATIONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to hire, use or employ any minor child to sell or
give away, or in any manner to distribute, or who, having the care, custody
or control of any minor child, to permit such child to sell, give away, or in
any manner to distribute any book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper
or publication coming within the description of matters mentioned in the
first sections of this act, and any person violating any of the provisions of
this act shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 670, § 3)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



USE OF INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS



§ 13.5/690-0.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This Act may be cited as the use of Intoxicating Compounds Act.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 690, § 0.01)



§ 13.5/690-1  USE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall ingest, breathe, inhale or drink any compound, liquid
or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene,
ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl
isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, the alkaloids cyclohexanone,
atropine, hyoscyamine, or scopolamine, or any other substance for the purpose
of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness,
paralysis or irrational behavior, or in any manner changing, distorting or
disturbing the auditory, visual or mental processes.  For the purposes of
this Act, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated
condition.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 690, § 1)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/690-2  SALE OR DELIVERY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or
give to any person under 17 years of age, unless upon written order or such
person's parent or guardians, any compound liquid or chemical containing
toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl
ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl
cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance which will induce
an intoxicated condition, as defined herein, when the seller, offeror or
deliverer knows or has reason to know that such compound is intended for use
to induce such condition.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly sell of offer for sale, deliver, or
give to any person any compound, liquid, or chemical containing the alkaloids
atropine, hyoscyamine, or scopolamine when the seller, offeror, or deliver
knows or has reason to know that the compound, liquid, or chemical is
intended for use to induce an intoxicated condition.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 690, § 2)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/690-3  DIRECTION OR PRESCRIPTION OF PRACTITIONER.



   This Act shall not apply to any person who commits any act described
herein pursuant to the direction or prescription of a practitioner authorized
to so direct or prescribe.  For purposes of this section, practitioner shall
mean any person authorized by law to practice medicine in all its branches in
this state, to practice dentistry in this state, to practice veterinary
medicine in this state, or to practice chiropody in this state.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 690, § 3)



§ 13.5/690-4  SENTENCE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
violation of this act is a Class C misdemeanor.



   (B)   (1)   The knowing ingestion of any compound, liquid, or
chemical containing the alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine, or scopolamine is a
Class A misdemeanor.



      (2)   The sale, offer for sale, delivery, or giving to any
person of a compound, liquid, or chemical containing the alkaloids atropine,
hyoscyamine, or scopolamine is a Class 4 felony.



   (C)   This division (C) does not prohibit the sale, offer for sale,
delivery, giving, or ingestion of a compound, liquid, or chemical containing
the alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine, or scopolamine under the direction or
prescription of a practitioner authorized to so direct or prescribe as
provided in § 13.5/690-3.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 690, § 4)



§ 13.5/690-4.5  EXEMPTION.



   This Act does not apply to the sale, delivery, or giving of any
compound, liquid, or chemical containing the alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine,
or scopolamine by a retail merchant.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 690, § 4.5)



SUPPRESSION OF GANG ACTIVITY



§ 13.5/700-1  GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, GRAFFITI shall be defined as:
any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch,
picture or letter placed, without the express, written permission of the
owner, upon the real or personal property of said owner.



   (B)   Graffiti in public view is hereby declared to be a nuisance as
set forth in the ordinances of the village and subject to the provisions of
village ordinances regarding nuisances and abatement thereof.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the
real or personal, public or private property of another.



   (D)    It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of fixed
real or personal property which is in public view to place or give permission
for the placement of any graffiti on such property without having first
obtained a properly issued sign permit.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, while in any
public building or public facility or while on private property, a spray
paint container, paint, ink, marking pen which contains a non-water soluble
fluid, brush, applicator, or any other material for marking, scratching or
etching with the intent to use such material in violation of division (C) and
or (D) hereinabove.



   (F)   Penalties.



      (1)   The penalty  for violation of division (C) hereinabove
shall be a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.  In addition to the
fine, the offender may be ordered by the Court to pay restitution to the
property owner for the costs of restoring the property to its state prior to
the application of graffiti.



      (2)   The penalty for violation of division (D) hereinabove
shall be a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.



      (3)   The penalty  for violation  of division (E)
hereinabove shall be a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.



   (G)   Any person convicted of a violation of division (C), (D) or
(E) hereinabove, who is found to have been a member of a gang as defined by
§ 13.5/700-6(A)(1) or candidate for membership in a gang at the time the
offense was committed and who is found to have violated the division in
conjunction with gang-related activities, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $250 nor more than $500 in addition to other penalties provided in
this section.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-12  CURFEW.



   Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in existing village
ordinances the following shall apply with respect to curfew:



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person more than 15 years of age but less
than 18 years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building,
place, street or highway at the following times unless accompanied and
supervised by a parent or legal guardian unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than 18 years
of age to perform:



      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;



      (2)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday;



      (3)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and
6:00 a.m. on the following day.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a person less than 16 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at
the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent or legal
guardian unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this
state authorize a person less than 16 years of age to perform or unless in
attendance at, or while traveling directly home from, a school, church or a
not-for-profit community organization sponsored activity:



   Between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, seven days a
week.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate this
section.



   (D)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-3  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified have the meaning ascribed to them:



      (1)   LEGAL GUARDIAN.  A person appointed guardian, or given
custody, of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a
person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor under the Illinois
Juvenile Court Act of 1987.



      (2)   MINOR.  A person who is above the age of 11 years, but
not yet 19 years of age.



   (B)   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who
resides with such parent or legal guardian is liable for actual damages for
the wilful or malicious acts of such minor which cause injury to a person or
property.



   (C)   No recovery under this section may exceed $1,000 actual 
damages  for each person or legal entity for each occurrence of such wilful
or malicious acts by the minor causing injury, in addition to taxable court
costs. In determining the damages to be allowed in an action under this
subchapter for personal injury, only medical, dental and hospital expenses
and expenses for treatment by Christian Science practitioners and nursing
care appropriate thereto may be considered.



   (D)   This subchapter shall not affect the recovery of damages in
any other cause of action where the liability of the parent or legal guardian
is predicated on a common law or statutory basis.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-4  TEMPORARY QUESTIONING WITHOUT ARREST.



   (A)   A peace officer, after having identified himself as a peace
officer, may stop any person in a public place for a reasonable period of
time when the person is wearing known gang colors, emblems or other gang
insignia, or appears to be engaged in communicating gang-related messages
through the use of hand signals or other means of communication, and the
officer reasonably infers from the circumstances that the person is
committing, is about to commit, or has committed any offense. Once stopped,
the officer may demand the name and address of the person and an explanation
of his actions. Such detention and temporary questioning will be conducted in
the vicinity of where the person was stopped.



   (B)   When a peace officer has stopped a person for temporary
questioning pursuant to division (A) and the officer reasonably suspects that
he or another officer is in danger of attack, he may search the person for
weapons. If an officer discovers a weapon, he may take it until the
completion of the questioning, at which time he shall return the weapon, if
lawfully possessed, or arrest the person so questioned.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-5  GANG SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to
display, demonstrate, or "throw" a gang sign in any public place within the
village.



   (B)   Any person found to have violated this section shall be fined
not less than $150 and not more than $500.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-6  LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF CAUSING STREET GANG ACTIVITY OR
RECRUITMENT IS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions:



      (1)   GANG or STREET GANG.  Any combination, confederation,
alliance, or understanding in law or in fact, that through its members or
through the agency of any member and at the direction, order or request of
any member who is a leader or other authority, engages in a course or pattern
of criminal activity.



      (2)   COURSE OR PATTERN OF CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  Two or more
gang-related criminal offenses when:



         (a)   One or more of the offenses was committed after
the effective date of this Ordinance; and



         (b)   The offenses were committed within five years of
each other; and



         (c)   At least one offense involved the solicitation to
commit, conspiracy to commit, or commission of any offense defined as a
felony  or forcible felony under the Illinois Criminal Code.



      (3)   GANG-RELATED ACTIVITIES.  Those activities which are
conducted with the intent to increase the gang's size or dominance, or with
the intent to provide the gang with an advantage in the criminal market
sector, or with the intent to obstruct justice, or with the intent to
otherwise directly or indirectly cause any benefit or gain to or for the gang.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander,
stand, or remain idle whether alone and/or in consort with others in a public
place with the purpose of recruiting others for membership in a street gang
or for participation in gang-related activities.



   (C)   The penalty for violation of this section hereinabove shall be
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-7  MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Any building or dwelling used in the commission of offenses
prohibited by Sections 9-1, 10-1, 10-2, 11-14, 11-15, 11-16, 11-17, 11-20.1,
11-21, 11-22,12-5.1, 16-1, 20-2, 23-1, 23-1(a)(1), 24-1(a)(7), 24-3, 28-1,
28-3, 31-5 or 39 A-I of the "Criminal Code of  1961," or prohibited by the
"Illinois Controlled Substances Act," or the "Cannabis Control Act," or used
in the Commission of an inchoate offense relative to any of the aforesaid
principal offenses, or used to engage in gang related activities within the
meaning of § 13.5/700-6 is a public nuisance.



   (B)   Penalty.  Any person violating this section hereinabove shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500. Furthermore, if the person is
not the owner of the building being used for gang-related activity, the Court
may order the offender to pay restitution to the owner for the costs of any
damage caused by such gang-related activity, unless the owner knew or should
have known that such activity was taking place and negligently or willfully
failed to notify the village of the occurrence of such activities.



   (C)   Abatement.



      (1)   The village may after 30 days and within 90 days of
giving the Attorney General and the State's Attorney of Will County written
notice by certified or registered mail of the fact that a public nuisance as
described in this section exists, commence an action to abate the nuisance in
accordance with the procedures delineated below provided that the Attorney
General or the State's Attorney of Will County has not already commenced a
similar action.



      (2)   The village may commence an action to abate the public
nuisance in the Circuit Court of Will County.  Upon being satisfied by
affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged public nuisance exists the
Court may without notice or bond enter a temporary restraining order or
preliminary injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance
and may enter an order restraining any defendant from removing or interfering
with all property used in connection with the public nuisance. If during the
proceedings or hearings upon the merits, which shall be in the manner of the
"Controlled Substance and Cannabis Nuisance Act" (ILCS Ch. 740, Act 40 §§
0.01 et seq., 1992) the existence of the nuisance is established and it is
found that such nuisance was maintained with the intentional, knowing, or
reckless permission of the owner or agent of the owner managing the building,
the Court shall enter an order restraining all persons from maintaining or
allowing such nuisance for a period six months thereafter, except that an
owner, lessee or other occupant thereof may use such place if the owner shall
give bond with sufficient security or surety approved by the court, in an
amount between $1,000 and $5,000 inclusive, payable to the village, and
including a condition that no offense specified in division (A) above shall
be committed at, in or upon the property described and a condition that the
principal obligor and surety assume responsibility for any fine, costs or
damages resulting from such an offense thereafter.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-8  LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ILLEGALLY USING, POSSESSING OR
SELLING CANNABIS OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a person to
loiter in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the
purpose of illegally using, possessing, transferring or selling any cannabis
or controlled substance. Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such a purpose is manifested are:



      (1)   The person is a known illegal user, possessor, or seller
of cannabis or controlled substance, or the person is loitering in a place
frequented by persons who are known to illegally use, possess, transfer, or
sell cannabis or controlled substances; and



      (2)   The person repeatedly attempts to stop or engage in
conversation with passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor
vehicle or other form  of transportation,  for  the purposes  of
inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to illegally possess,
transfer, or buy any cannabis or controlled substances; or



      (3)   The person repeatedly passes to or receives from
passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle or other
form of transportation, money, objects or written material for the purposes
of inducing,  enticing,  soliciting  or procuring another to illegally
possess, transfer or buy any cannabis or a controlled substance.



   (B)   A person shall not have violated this subchapter unless he
demonstrates expressly or implicitly a specific intent to induce, entice,
solicit, or procure another to illegally possess, transfer or buy cannabis or
a controlled substance.



   (C)   A peace officer may not arrest a person for violation of this
subchapter unless the peace officer first offers the person an opportunity to
explain his conduct.



   (D)   For the purposes of this section, a KNOWN ILLEGAL USER,
POSSESSOR, OR SELLER OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES is a person who, within one
year previous to the date of arrest for violation of the section, has within
the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of illegally
manufacturing, using, possessing, selling, purchasing, or delivering any
controlled substance.



   (E)   Any person found to have violated any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



§ 13.5/700-9  TRUANCY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person
under the age of 18 who is enrolled in a public, private, or parochial school
to absent himself from attendance at such school without the permission of
his legal guardians or parents. Any person who shall so absent himself shall
be guilty of the offense of truancy and be subject to the penalties set forth
below. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other reasonable
cause beyond the control of the person so absenting himself from school
without the permission of his parents or legal guardians shall not constitute
truancy if such permission is obtained from the parents or legal guardians
and submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within 24 hours of
such absence.



   (B)   Procedure:  Initial contact and documentation.  Upon
encountering a school-aged individual outside of school during school hours,
a police officer or truant officer shall:



      (1)   Question such individual in order to determine whether
the individual has violated this subchapter and verify truancy with the
school via radio, telephone, or personal visit; and



      (2)   Upon reasonably ascertaining that such individual has
violated this subchapter, seize the individual and return him to the proper
authority at the school; and



      (3)   Complete a truancy report containing the following
information:  full name, date of birth, address, telephone number, parent or
guardian's name, work place telephone number, and school attended; and



      (4)   Forward a copy of the report to juvenile investigations
and the truant officer of Will County. A juvenile officer shall renew the
report and complete or update an applicable juvenile contact card.  Further,
a school representative or county truant officer may file a report of truancy
directly with a juvenile officer in cases of frequent truancy that is not
documented by police reports.



   (C)   Procedure: Chronic Truants.  A chronic truant, hereinafter
defined as an individual who has violated this subchapter three times in one
year or has otherwise been shown to have absented himself from school three
times in one year, shall submit to a student and parent conference with
either a juvenile officer, county truant officer or school representative at
the request of same. The following disposition or "staffing" may result:



      (1)   Station adjustment.



      (2)   Station adjustment with supervision by a juvenile
officer, if applicable.



      (3)   Referral of chronic truant to counseling and/or
appropriate agency to deal with the specialized problem.



      (4)   Referral to the Court.



   (D)   Recommended Dispositions in Juvenile or Adult Court.  The
Court shall consider the following as possible dispositions of a chronic
truancy case:



      (1)   Adult supervision for one year or for the balance of the
school year in which the offense was committed.



      (2)   Suspension of driver's license where applicable.



      (3)   Community service work.



      (4)   Fines of $150 to $500, which may be waived upon the
successful completion of the school year without unexplained absence.



      (5)   Referral to specific agencies available to address
specific problems.



(Ord. 767, passed 7-19-93)



SALE AND POSSESSION OF SMOKING MATERIALS WITH RESPECT TO MINORS



§ 13.5/705-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MINOR.  A person who has not yet attained the age of 18 years of age.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint venture or any employee or agent thereof.



   SMOKING MATERIALS.  Any substance containing either smoking herbs or
tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, loose tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-served
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses smoking materials.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-2  PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
give away or deliver smoking materials to any person under the age of 18
years.



   (B)   If any person contemplating the sale or furnishing of smoking
materials believes or has reason to believe the sale or delivery of smoking
materials is prohibited because of the non-age of the prospective recipient,
he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some
form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public
officer in the performance of his official duties.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-3  WARNING SIGNS.



   (A)   Every person engaged in the business of selling smoking
materials shall at all times display signs informing the public of the age
restrictions provided for herein.  The sign shall be posted by every
licensee at or near every display of smoking materials and on or upon every
vending machine which offers smoking materials for sale.  Each such sign
shall be plainly visible and shall state:



   "THE SALE OF SMOKING MATERIALS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE
IS PROHIBITED BY LAW"



   (B)   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white
background, the letters to be at least one inch high.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-4  MINIMUM AGE TO SELL SMOKING MATERIALS.



   It shall be unlawful to engage, employ or permit any person under 18
years of age to sell smoking materials.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-5  PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
purchase smoking materials, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to
use a false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing smoking
materials.  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification
card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-6  POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
possess any smoking materials; provided that the possession by a person under
the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of
the person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be
prohibited.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-7  CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the business of selling or
otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising smoking materials, or any
employee or agent of any such person, in the course of the person's
business,  to distribute,  give away or deliver smoking materials free of
charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property
owned by the village, any school district, any park district or any public
library.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-8  VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, give away,
deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering
smoking materials by use of a vending machine, unless the vending machine is
equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device so as to
prevent its operation by persons under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of 18 years
is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not permitted
and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of business
located on the premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of division
(A) above.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-9  RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any person possessing a village business license
shall be deemed and held to be the act of the licensee; and such licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been
done or omitted by the licensee personally.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-10  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Violation of this subchapter shall constitute grounds for revocation
and/or suspension of any and all village licenses issued to the
persons/premises where the violations occur.  The revocation or suspension
shall be provided for in the ordinance granting the license.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94)



§ 13.5/705-11  SMOKING MATERIALS.



   (A)   Sale of loose smoking material.  The sale or distribution by
any person of a tobacco product listed above, including but not limited to a
single or loose cigarette, that is not contained within a sealed container,
pack, or package as provided by the manufacturer, which container, pack, or
package bears the health warning required by federal law, is prohibited.



   (B)   Sting operations. It is not a violation of this Act for a
person under 18 years of age to purchase or possess a cigar, cigarette,
smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms if the person under the age
of 18 purchases or is given the cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco or
tobacco in any of its forms from a retail seller of tobacco products or an
employee of the retail seller pursuant to a plan or action to investigate,
patrol, or otherwise conduct a “sting operation” or enforcement action
against a retail seller of tobacco products or a person employed by the
retail seller of tobacco products or on any premises authorized to sell
tobacco products to determine if tobacco products are being sold or given to
persons under 18 years of age if the “sting operation” or enforcement
action is approved by the Department of State Police, the county sheriff, a
municipal police department, the Department of Public Health, or a local
health department.



(Ord. 1874, passed 11-21-16)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



GENERAL OFFENSES



§ 13.5/800-1  PUBLIC PLACE DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does
not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public.  It
shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds,
sidewalks, highways and streets or parks.



(Ord. 225, passed 8-22-79)



§ 13.5/800-2  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   It shall be unlawful for three or more persons to gather in a public
place for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace.



(Ord. 225, passed 8-22-79)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/800-3  PUBLIC INTOXICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, drink, consume or have in
his possession open alcoholic liquor or be under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics or other drug not therapeutically
administered, in any public place within the village.



(Ord. 225, passed 8-22-79; Am. Ord. 247, passed 11-3-80)  Penalty, see §
13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/800-4  POLICE ORDER TO DISPERSE.



   When any person, according to exercise by a peace officer of reasonable
judgment, causes or commits any or the conditions enumerated in §§ 132.05,
132.06, or 132.07, that peace officer or any other law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to
move on or disperse.  Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders
shall violate this section.



(Ord. 225, passed 8-22-79)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/800-5  LOUD OR UNNECESSARY NOISES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noises or any noise
which knowingly disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.



   (B)   The following acts are examples of noises prohibited by this
section but is not intended as an inclusive list thereof:



      (1)   The throwing or propelling of any firecrackers, roman
candles or rockets of any type or any articles of any explosive nature
intended to be used as firecrackers.



      (2)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any
automobile, motorcycle, motorbus or any other vehicle on any street or public
place of the village except as a danger warning or the creation, by means of
any such signaling device, of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or
sounding of any horn or signaling of any device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time or the use of any signaling device, except one
operated by hand or electricity or the use of any horn, whistle or other
device operated by engine exhaust, and the use of any such signaling device
when traffic is for any reason held up.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see § 13.5/999-1



§ 13.5/999-1  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 and/or
sentenced to perform some reasonable public service work. 



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75; Am. Ord. 575, passed 4-2-90)



   (B)   (1)   Any person found to have violated any provisions of
§§ 13.5/705-5 and 13.5/705-6 shall be fined in the following amounts:



         First violation:  Not less than $25 nor more than $500.



         Second violation:  Not less than $50 nor more than $500.



         Third and subsequent violations:  Not less than $100 nor
more than $500.



   (B)   Any person found to have violated any other provisions of §§
13.5/705-1 through 13.5/705-10 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $500 for each violation.  Each day upon which a violation of any
provision of §§ 13.5/705-1 through 13.5/705-10 occurs is deemed a separate
violation.



(Ord. 825, passed 11-7-94; Am. Ord. 834, passed 12-19-94)



CHAPTER 131:  DRUG AND RELATED OFFENSES



Section



Glue and Related Substances



   131.01   Definition



   131.02   Inhalation of glue



   131.03   Sale or possession of glue



   131.04   Sale to or possession of glue by a minor



   131.05   Records of sale and transfer of glue to a minor



Cannabis Control Act



   131.550/1   Legislative declaration



   131.550/2   Short title



   131.550/3   Definitions



   130.550/4   Possession of cannabis; violations - punishment



   131.550/5   Manufacture or deliver of cannabis; violations -
punishment



Drug Paraphernalia



   131.600-1   Short title



   131.600-2   Definitions



   131.600-3   Sale or delivery - penalty - public nuisance



   131.600-4   Exception



 



   131.99   Penalty



GLUE AND RELATED SUBSTANCES



§ 131.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GLUE.  Any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of
model airplanes, boats and automobiles,  containing  toluene, acetone or
other solvent or chemical having the property or releasing toxic vapors.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)



§ 131.02  INHALATION OF GLUE.



   No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of
intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of
the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from
any glue; however, this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any
anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.03  SALE OR POSSESSION OF GLUE.



   No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to
violate any provisions of this chapter, intentionally possess, buy, sell,
transfer possession or receive possession of any glue.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04  SALE TO OR POSSESSION OF GLUE BY A MINOR.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person under
18 years of age shall possess or buy any glue.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall
sell or transfer possession of any glue to another person under 18 years of
age.



   (C)   A person may sell or transfer possession of glue to a person
under 18 years of age for building or other lawful use where the minor has in
his possession and exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  RECORDS OF SALE AND TRANSFER OF GLUE TO A MINOR.



   (A)   A person making a sale or transfer of possession of glue to a
person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his parent
or guardian, shall record the name, address, sex and age of the minor and the
name and address of the consenting parent or guardian.  All data required by
this section shall be kept in a permanent type register available for
inspection by the Village Police Department.



   (B)   Any person above the age of 18 years of age making a purchase
of glue must produce identification as to his age and must sign his name and
address on the record of sale.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see § 131.99



CANNABIS CONTROL ACT



§ 131.550/1  LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION.



   The General Assembly recognized that (1) the current state of
scientific and medical knowledge concerning the effects of cannabis makes it
necessary to acknowledge the physical, psychological and sociological damage
which is incumbent upon its use; and (2) the use of cannabis occupies the
unusual position of being widely used and pervasive among the citizens of
Illinois despite its harmful effects; and (3) previous legislation enacted to
control or forbid the use of cannabis has often unnecessarily and
unrealistically drawn a large segment of our population within the criminal
justice system without succeeding in deterring the expansion of cannabis
use.  It is, therefore, the intent of the General Assembly, in the interest
of the health and welfare of the citizens of Illinois, to establish a
reasonable penalty system which is responsive to the current state of
knowledge concerning cannabis and which directs the greatest efforts of law
enforcement agencies toward the commercial traffickers and large-scale
purveyors of cannabis.  To this end, this Act provides wide latitude in the
sentencing discretion of the courts and established penalties in a sharply
rising progression based on the amount of substances containing cannabis
involved in each case.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 1)



§ 131.550/2  SHORT TITLE.



   This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Cannabis Control Act".



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 2)



§ 131.550/3  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANNABIS includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such
plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including
its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether
produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis;
but shall not include the mature stalks made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or
cake, or the sterilized seeds of such plant which is incapable of germination.



   CASUAL DELIVERY.  The delivery of not more than 10 grams of any
substance containing cannabis without consideration.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Illinois Department of Human Services (as successor
to the Department of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse or its successor agency).



   DELIVER or DELIVERY.  The actual, constructive or attempted transfer
of possession of cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not
there is an agency relationship.



   DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE.  The Department of State Police of the
State of Illinois or its successor agency.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Department of State Police or his
designated agent.



   LOCAL AUTHORITIES.  A duly organized state, county or municipal peace
unit or police force.



   MANUFACTURE.  The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of cannabis, either directly of indirectly, by
extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis,
and includes any packaging or repackaging of cannabis or labeling of its
container, except that this term does not include the preparation,
compounding, packaging, or labeling of cannabis as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, partnership or association, or any
other entity.



   PRODUCE or PRODUCTION.  Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting.



   STATE.  Includes the State of Illinois and any state, district,
commonwealth, territory, insular possession thereof, and any area subject to
the legal authority of the United States of America.



   SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE.  An offense under this Act, the offender of which,
prior to his conviction of the offense, has at any time been convicted under
this Act or under any laws of the United States or of any state relating to
cannabis, or any controlled substance as defined in the Illinois Controlled
Substance Act.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 3)



§ 131.550/4  POSSESSION OF CANNABIS; VIOLATIONS—PUNISHMENT.



   (A)   Possession of cannabis prohibited. It is unlawful for any
person knowingly to possess cannabis.



   (B)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate this provision shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $750.



   (C)   Exempt persons.  All persons who may, under the Illinois
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, lawfully sell, offer
for sale, deliver, dispense, distribute, and possess cannabis, are exempt
from this section.



(Ord. 1867, passed 9-6-16)



§ 131.550/5  MANUFACTURE OR DELIVER OF CANNABIS; VIOLATIONS - PUNISHMENT.



   Except in conformance with the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act,  it is unlawful for any person knowingly to
manufacture, deliver, or possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture,
cannabis.  Any person who violates this section with respect to:



   (A)   Not more than 2.5 grams of any substance containing cannabis
is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor;



   (B)   More than 2.5 grams but not more than 10 grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor;



   (C)   More than 10 grams but not more than 30 grams of any substance
containing cannabis is guilty of a Class A felony;



   (D)   More than 30 grams but nor more than 500 grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 3 felony and shall be
prosecuted according to appropriate state law;



   (E)   More than 500 grams but not more than 2,000 grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 2 felony and shall be
prosecuted according to appropriate state law.



   (F)   More than 2,000 grams but not more than 5,000 grams of any
substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class 1 felony and shall be
prosecuted according to appropriate state law.



   (G)   More than 5,000 grams of any substance containing cannabis is
guilty of a Class X felony and shall be prosecuted according to appropriate
state law.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5) (Am. Ord. 1773, passed 1-6-14)



DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



§ 131.600-1  SHORT TITLE.



   This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Drug Paraphernalia
Control Act".



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600, § 1)



§ 131.600-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANNABIS.  Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in Section 102
of the "Cannabis Control Act", as if that definition were incorporated herein.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section
102 of the "Illinois Controlled Substances Act", as if that definition were
incorporated herein.



   DELIVER or DELIVERY.  The actual, construction or attempted transfer
of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an
agency relationship.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.   All equipment, products and materials of any
kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in
Section of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, which
are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing,compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in
violation of the Cannabis Control Act,  the Illinois Controlled Substances
Act or the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act or a
synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act.  It includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance;



      (2)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a
controlled substance;



      (3)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a
private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of cannabis or controlled substance;



      (4)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully
for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;



      (5)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil,
or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois
food, Drug and Cosmetic Act into the human body including, where applicable,
the following items:



         (a)   Water pipes;



         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;



         (c)   Smoking and carburetion masks;



         (d)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



         (e)   Carburetor pipes;



         (f)   Electric pipes;



         (g)   Air-driven pipes;



         (h)   Chillums;



         (i)   Bongs;



         (j)   Ice pipes or chillers;



      (6)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the
seller, is for use in violation of this Act.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600, § 2)



§ 131.600-3  SALE OR DELIVERY--PENALTY--PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or
delivers for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia
commits a Class 4 felony for which a minimum fine of $1,000 for each such
item shall be imposed.  Any person 18 years of age or older who sells or
delivers for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia to a
person under 18 years of age is guilty of a Class 3 felony and shall be
prosecuted according to appropriate state law.



   (B)   Any person who sells or delivers for a commercial
consideration any item of drug paraphernalia to a woman he knows to be
pregnant is guilty of a Class 2 felony and shall be prosecuted according to
appropriate state law.



   (C)   (1)   Any store, place, or premises from which or in which
any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or
delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public
nuisance.



      (2)   The state's attorney of the county may commence an
action in the circuit court, in the name of the People of the State of
Illinois, to abate the public nuisance as described in this division (C).



      (3)   Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn
evidence that an alleged public nuisance exists, the court may, without bond,
enter a temporary restraining order to enjoin any defendant from maintaining
the nuisance and may, without bond, enter a preliminary injunction
restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with any property used
in connection with the public nuisance.



      (4)   If during the proceedings and hearings upon the merits
the existence of the nuisance is established, and it is established that the
nuisance was maintained with the intentional, knowing or reckless permission
of the owner, or an agent of the owner managing the premises, the court shall
enter an order restraining all persons from maintaining or permitting the
nuisance and from using the premises for a period of one year thereafter. 
However, an owner, lessee, or other occupant thereof may use the premises if
the owner gives bond with sufficient security or surety, in an amount between
$5,000 and $10,000 approved by the court, payable to the People of the State
of Illinois.  The bond shall include a condition that no offense specified
in this Act shall be committed at, in, or upon the property described, and a
condition that the principal obligation and surety assume responsibility for
any fine, costs, or damages incurred by any person resulting from such an
offense.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600, § 3)



§ 131.600-4  EXCEPTION.



   It shall not be a violation of this subchapter if the sale or delivery
prohibited by § 131.600-3 is permitted by the Illinois Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.



(Ord. 1773, passed 1-6-14)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this Title shall be fined in an amount not less than $25 nor
more than $750. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense. A penalty for each offense may include a requirement that
the offending party perform some reasonable public service. A violation
hereof may be established by a preponderance of the evidence.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75; Am. Ord. 575, passed 4-2-90; Am. Ord. 1256, passed
9-16-02)



CHAPTER 132:  GAMBLING OFFENSES



Section



   132.01   Definitions



   132.02   Gambling prohibited; exceptions



   132.03   Keeping a gambling place



   132.04   Seizure of gambling devices



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GAMBLING DEVICE.  Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other
machines or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on
chance or skill or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is
staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost;  or any mechanism, fixture, equipment or
other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place.  A GAMBLING
DEVICE does not include:



      (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for
amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical
device, which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of
the operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which
returns to the player thereof no money or property or right to receive money
or property.



      (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is
made for the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or
hazard.



   LOTTERY.  Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration
for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.



   POLICY GAME.  Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other
device that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in
the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser
or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)



§ 132.02  GAMBLING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of gambling when he:



      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B) of this section; or



      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or
any political nomination, appointment or election; or



      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any
gambling device; or



      (4)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or
apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or
registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the
course of a bet or wager; or



      (5)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election; or



      (6)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery; or



      (7)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or other similar device; or



      (8)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or
drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy
ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, or any advertisement of any
lottery or policy game; or



      (9)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting
odds, or changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or
similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the
transmission or receipt of such information; except that nothing in this
division (A)(9) prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use
in news reporting of sporting events or contests.



   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling:



      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the
happening of chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or
guarantee and life or health or accident insurance; and



      (2)   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual
contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed,
strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest; and



      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of the
State of Illinois; and



      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the
acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for
transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside the
state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable state or
federal law; and



      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted
in accordance with “An Act making lawful the conducting of bingo by certain
non-profit organizations, requiring licensing and prescribing regulations
therefor.”  ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, § 1 et seq.



      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in
accordance with the “Illinois Lottery Law,” enacted by the 78th General
Assembly. ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, § 1 et seq.



      (7)   Other gambling specifically authorized by and carried
out in accordance with state statutes.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.



   (A)   A GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate, vehicle, boat or any
other property whatsoever used for the purpose of gambling.  Any person who
knowingly permits any premises or property owned or occupied by him or under
his control to be used as a gambling place commits the offense of keeping a
gambling place.



   (B)   When any premises is determined by a court having jurisdiction
to be a gambling place:



      (1)   Such premises is a public nuisance and may be proceeded
against as such, and



      (2)   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the
village authorizing the serving of food or liquor on such premises shall be
void; and no license, permit or certificate so cancelled shall be reissued
for such premises for a period of 60 days thereafter, nor shall any person
convicted of keeping a gambling place be reissued such license for one year
from his conviction.



      (3)   Such premises of any person who knowingly permits
thereon a violation of any provision of this section shall be held liable
for, and may be sold to pay any unsatisfied fine that may be levied under any
section of this chapter.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES.



   (A)   Every gambling device which is incapable of lawful use is
contraband and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction by
the village.  As used in this chapter, a GAMBLING DEVICE which is incapable
of lawful use, includes any slot machine and any machine or device
constructed or intended to be used for the reception of money or other thing
of value and so constructed or intended to return on chance to the player
thereof money, property or a right to receive money or property.



   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the village.  Any money or other thing of value integrally
related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the village.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75)



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 and/or sentenced to
perform some reasonable public service work.



(Ord. 149, passed 7-7-75; Am. Ord. 575, passed 4-2-90)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



         150.   GENERAL LAND USE POLICIES



         151.   BUILDING CODE



         152.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND MAP



         153.   FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION



         154.   SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



         155.   SWIMMING POOLS



         156.   ZONING REGULATIONS



         157.   SOIL EROSION REGULATIONS



         158.   LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE



         159.   SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 150:  GENERAL LAND USE POLICIES



Section



Developer Disclosure



   150.01   Disclosure required



   150.02   Record of covenants or restrictions



Fees



   150.10   Petition and application fees



   150.11   Special fees



   150.12   Notification of amount of fees



   150.13   [Reserved.]



   150.14   Plan review fees



   150.15   Inspection fees



   150.16   [Reserved]



   150.17   [Reserved]



   150.18   [Reserved]



   150.19   [Reserved]



   150.20   Ordinance fees



   150.21   Payment



   150.22   Collector



   150.23   Refunds



Registration of Contractors



   150.35   Definitions



   150.36   Application to be filed; Certificate of Registration



   150.37   Annual fee amount



   150.38   [Reserved]



   150.39   Proof of insurance



   150.40   Revocation



   150.41   Fee schedule



Developer Professional Fees



   150.50   Professional Fee Agreement



 



   150.99   Penalty



DEVELOPER DISCLOSURE



§ 150.01  DISCLOSURE REQUIRED



     Any owner of real estate or developer in the village shall provide
on any contract of sale entered into for the purchase of any real estate from
said owner or developer disclosure of all of the necessary fees to be paid by
the purchaser of said real estate that are due the village at any time prior
to the issuance of the occupancy permit.



(Ord. 458, passed 6-20-88) Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.02  RECORD OF COVENANTS OR RESTRICTIONS.



   Any owners of said real estate or developers in the village shall
provide the Village Clerk with a true and correct copy of any recorded
covenants or restrictions for any subdivision.



(Ord. 458, passed 6-20-88)



FEES



§ 150.10  PETITION AND APPLICATION FEES.



   The following shall be the fees for planning and zoning matters in the
village:



   (A)   Application for annexation of property to the village; no fee.



   (B)   Application for disconnection of property from the village; 
$500.



   (C)   Consideration of an annexation agreement, pre-annexation
agreement or amendment to an annexation agreement; no fee.



   (D)   Application for zoning reclassification or zoning map
amendment; $250.



   (E)   Application for variation of zoning ordinance;  $200.



   (F)   Application for special use permit; $250.



   (G)   Application for vacation of public right-of-way; $200.



   (H)   Application for a planned unit development;  $500.



   (I)   Application for preliminary plat or preliminary site plan
review shall be according to the following schedule:



 


Proposed Subdivision (in acres)

 

Preliminary fee



5 or less
 

$100



More than 5 but not more than 10
 

$150



More than 10 but not more than 20
 

$200



More than 20
 

$250




 



   (J)   Application for final plat or final site plan review shall be
$200 plus $10 for each lot exceeding ten lots.



   (K)   Appeal of a decision from the Building Inspector; $250.



(Ord. 175, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 329, passed 10-3-83; Am. Ord. 453, passed
6-6-88)



§ 150.11  SPECIAL FEES.



   (A)   In addition to the fees enumerated in § 150.10, an applicant
shall also pay the fees set forth in this section:



   (B)   Any special meeting of the  Village Board or Planning and
Zoning Commission (PZC) shall be $250.



   (C)   The fees of any court reporter attending any meeting or public
hearing on behalf of the applicant or the village.



   (D)   The fees of the Village Engineer, the Village Attorney and any
other person engaged by the Village Board in reviewing and processing any
application.  Said fees shall be paid by the applicant upon the presentation
of statements to the village.



(Ord. 175, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 329, passed 10-3-83)



§ 150.12  NOTIFICATION OF AMOUNT OF FEES.



   The Village Clerk shall notify the applicant prior to the final hearing
on any application of the amount of fees to be paid pursuant to § 150.11. 
These fees shall be paid prior to final consideration of any application by
the Corporate Authorities.



(Ord. 329, passed 10-3-83)



§ 150.13  [RESERVED].



§ 150.14  PLAN REVIEW FEES.



   A plan review fee equal to 10% of the building permit fee shall be
charged.  In addition, the village shall be reimbursed by the individual,
group or business entity requesting a permit, for all reasonable costs
incurred for professional services/assistance required for review and
evaluation of submitted plans and specifications and/or on site professional
assistance.



(Ord. 713, passed 6-1-92; Am. Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94)



§ 150.15  INSPECTION FEES.



Cross-reference:



   Building inspection fees, see §§ 151.25 through 151.38



§ 150.16  [RESERVED].



§ 150.17  [RESERVED].



§ 150.18  [RESERVED].



§ 150.19  [RESERVED].



§ 150.20  ORDINANCE FEES.



   The Building Code (Ch. 151) and Zoning Code (Ch. 156) shall be
available from the Village Clerk at a cost of $20 per copy, each plus the
cost to the village of any codes adopted therein by reference.



(Ord. 713, passed 6-1-92; Am. Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94)



§ 150.21  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this
subchapter shall have been paid in full.



   (B)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all
inspection or other required fees have been paid.



(Ord. 713, passed 6-1-92; Am. Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94)



§ 150.22  COLLECTOR.



   The Village Clerk or designee shall act as the collector of all fees
for permit applications and inspections as provided herein.



(Ord. 713, passed 6-1-92; Am. Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94)



§ 150.23  REFUNDS.



   No refunds shall be made of any of the above fees.



(Ord. 713, passed 6-1-92; Am. Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94)



REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS



§ 150.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR.  Any person engaged in the business of constructing,
altering or repairing buildings or other structures or sidewalks or street
pavements,  including but not limited to, general building contractors;
cement or concrete contractors; masonry contractors; carpentry contractors;
acoustical contractors; electrical contractors; dry wall contractors;
excavating contractors; fencing contractors; flooring contractors; garage
contractors; glazing contractors; heating, air conditioning and refrigeration
contractors; lawn chemical and fertilizer applicators; painting contractors;
plastering contractors; plumbing contractors; porch, deck contractors;
roofing contractors; sewer and drain layers; sheet metal contractors;
tuckpointing and cleaning contractors; window contractors; wrecking
contractors; blacktop sealer contractors; landscape contractors; swimming
pool contractors; insulation contractors; water and damp proofing
contractors; siding contractors; sign contractors, but does not include any
person performing as a contractor for or on behalf of a governmental entity.



      (1)   An owner of property may perform work on property that
he will occupy or has occupied continuously for a period of at least six
months and shall not be considered a contractor.  However, any person hired
by such owner to perform work on such property shall be considered a
contractor.



   PERSON.  Any person or individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, trust or other legal entity.



(Ord. 717, passed 6-15-92; Am. Ord. 738, passed 11-16-92)



§ 150.36  APPLICATION TO BE FILED; CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring to engage in the business of contractor
within the village shall file an application for registration with the
Building and Zoning Officer.  Upon the applicant filing of such application
in proper form and providing all necessary insurance certificates, along with
payment of the registration fee set out in § 150.41, the Building and Zoning
Officer shall register the applicant as a contractor and classify the
applicant into the proper category as outlined in § 150.41.



   (B)   Upon verification of the applicant's application, references,
and insurance, the Building and Zoning Officer shall issue a Certificate of
Registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in such business
for the fiscal year (May 1 to April 31) in which it is issued.



(Ord. 717, passed 6-15-92; Am. Ord. 1274, passed 2-17-03)



§ 150.37  ANNUAL FEE AMOUNT.



   The fee for the registration of contractors shall be as set forth in §
150.41 and shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
The fee shall be an annual fee which shall be paid by the applicant upon
filing the application.



(Ord. 717, passed 6-15-92; Am. Ord. 738, passed 11-16-92; Am. Ord. 1274,
passed 2-17-03)



§ 150.38  [RESERVED].



§ 150.39  PROOF OF INSURANCE.



   (A)   Every person registered as a contractor in the village shall
show proof of insurance to the Building and Zoning Officer in the amounts set
forth in this section.



   (B)   Bodily injury liability - $300,000.



   (C)   Property damage liability - $100,000.



   (D)   Workman's Compensation - as required by the Industrial
Commission of Illinois.



   (E)   Business auto:



      (1)   Bodily injury liability - $300,000.



      (2)   Property damage liability, $50,000.



(Ord. 717, passed 6-15-92)



§ 150.40  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Building and Zoning Officer may revoke a contractor's
registration if the contractor violates the Building Code or other applicable
ordinances of the village.  The contractor must be notified of the intent to
revoke the contractor registration and of the alleged violations, and the
contractor will have ten days from the date notice is given to correct the
violations, to show cause why there is no violation, or to file an appeal
with the Village Administrator who shall conduct a hearing on such revocation.



   (B)   Notice shall be given by any of the following manners:



      (1)   Certified mail at the address provided on the
contractor's registration.



      (2)   Personal delivery.



      (3)   Posting on the site in which the contractor is working.



§ 150.41  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The annual fee amount shall be as set forth in this section. 
Contractors licensed as businesses in the village as required by Ch. 110
shall have the registration fee set forth herein reduced by the amount of the
fee for such business license.



 

Class
 
Fee




General contractor
 
$150


Electrical contractor
 
100


HVAC contractor
 
100


Plumbing contractor
 
100


Concrete contractor
 
100


Carpentry contractor
 
100


Drywall/plaster contractor
 
100


Excavation contractor
 
100


Glazing contractor
 
100


Insulation contractor
 
100


Landscaping contractor
 
100


Masonry contractor
 
100


Roofing contractor
 
100


Sewer contractor
 
100


Swimming pool/hot tub contractor
 
100


Steel erection contractor
 
100


Waterproofing contractor
 
100


Floor covering contractor
 
100


Siding and gutter contractor
 
100


Wrecking contractor
 
100


Sign contractor
 
100


Satellite/Antenna contractor
 
100


Fence contractor
 
100


Paving contractor
 
100


All other contractor
 
100




 



(Ord. 717, passed 6-15-92; Am. Ord. 1274, passed 2-17-03)



DEVELOPER PROFESSIONAL FEES



§ 150.50  PROFESSIONAL FEE AGREEMENT.



   (A)   Execution of Agreement.



      (1)   Initial request. Any developer, person, entity,
corporation, association or group (hereinafter referred to as the
"developer"),  requesting, seeking or applying for a zoning change,
annexation, subdivision, re-subdivision, development, redevelopment 
initiation of said request execute a Professional Fee Agreement with the
village, substantially in the form as in division (C) of this section.



      (2)   Deposit.  Upon delivery of an executed Professional Fee
Agreement, the developer shall pay the village a deposit of $5,000 for all
residential developments and $3,000 for any non-residential development as
security for the developer's payment of such professional fees, costs and
expenses.  The village may apply this security in payment of such fees,
costs and expenses in the event the developer fails to make timely payments
to the village as required under the executed Professional Fee Agreement.



      (3)   Payment of fees.  The developer shall pay or reimburse
the village for any and all expenses the village incurs for the utilization
of professional and administrative staff to review and inspect the
developer's project.  Professional and administrative staff includes, but is
not limited to, village employees, private contractors or consultants,
attorneys, engineers, land planners, traffic analysts and financial advisors,
etc.



      (4)   Maintaining deposit.  The amount of the deposit set
forth in this section shall be continuously maintained by the developer.  In
the event that the amount of the deposit is not maintained as required and
the village should extend payment for related fees, costs and expenses in
excess of the deposit, it shall not be a waiver of the developer's liability
to reimburse the village for the fees, costs and expenses paid and developer
shall provide full and complete reimbursement to the village immediately upon
demand.



   (B)   Issuance/renewal. Prior to the consideration, issuance,
granting or renewal of any license, permit, approval or inspection required
under any provision of this code, the village department or employee charged
with the duty to issue or renew such license or permit, or conduct
inspections, shall contact the Finance Department to determine whether any
monies are due and owing in excess of 60 days to the village from the
applicant in relation to the project in regard to which the license or permit
is intended to be used.  If monies are found to be due and owing the village
in excess of 60 days, said license, permit approval or inspection shall not
be issued, renewed, or approved until all monies due and owing the village
have been paid in full, and the Finance Department so certifies.



   (C)   Professional Fee Agreement.



   This Professional Fee Agreement entered into this           day of
                                  , 20  , between the
Village of Channahon, an Illinois Municipal Corporation (hereinafter referred
to as "VILLAGE") and (hereinafter individually and collectively referred to
as "DEVELOPER").



   WHEREAS, DEVELOPER proposes to                          
                                                 
commonly known as                                        
          (hereinafter referred to as "PROJECT"); and



   WHEREAS, as a result of the DEVELOPER'S PROJECT, the VILLAGE must have
its professional and administrative staff analyze, review and comment upon
and perform other services solely on the VILLAGE'S behalf from the time of
the inception of the PROJECT through its completion; and



   WHEREAS, the DEVELOPER acknowledges it should pay the VILLAGE costs and
expenses for professional staff services rather than impose the costs upon
the VILLAGE residents.



   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained
herein and other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency
of which is expressly acknowledged by the parties by the execution hereof, it
is hereby agreed as follows:



   SECTION ONE. PROFESSIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.  The DEVELOPER
shall pay the VILLAGE any and all reasonable professional and administrative
staff fees, costs and expenses incurred by the VILLAGE as a result of or in
conjunction with the DEVELOPER'S PROJECT from this date through the PROJECT'S
completion as determined by the VILLAGE and/or VILLAGE acceptance of all
public improvements associated with the PROJECT, whichever occurs last.



   The VILLAGE'S professional and administrative staff includes, but is
not limited to, VILLAGE employees, private contractors or consultants,
attorneys, engineers, land planners, traffic analysts and financial advisors.



   Professional and administrative fees shall include, but not be limited
to, all time associated with reviews, analysis, discussions, meetings,
inspections, reports, comments, planning and other work or services performed
on behalf of the VILLAGE in conjunction with the PROJECT.



   The VILLAGE'S professional and administrative staff fees shall be
billed to the DEVELOPER in the amount of fees authorized by the VILLAGE to be
paid for such services.



   SECTION TWO.  SECURITY.  Concurrent with the execution of this
Agreement, the DEVELOPER shall post with the VILLAGE the sum of $5,000 for
all residential developments and $3,000 for any non-residential development
as security for the DEVELOPER'S payment of such professional and
administrative fees, costs and expenses. The VILLAGE is specifically
authorized to apply this security in payment of such fees, costs and expenses
in the event the DEVELOPER fails to make timely payments to the VILLAGE as
required under this Agreement. The DEVELOPER is obligated to continuously
maintain this amount on deposit with the VILLAGE until the PROJECT'S
completion.



   SECTION THREE.  PAYMENT.  The VILLAGE shall provide the DEVELOPER
with an itemized statement of fees. The DEVELOPER shall pay the VILLAGE
within thirty (30) days of the date of a statement from the VILLAGE. If the
DEVELOPER does not pay the statement within the thirty (30) day period,
interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate of 18 percent (18%)
per annum. If the DEVELOPER does not pay the statement within the 60 (sixty)
day period, the VILLAGE will also, following written notification to the
DEVELOPER, direct that all professional staff cease work on the PROJECT and
no permits, approvals or inspections shall take place until the statement is
paid in full.



   SECTION FOUR. COOPERATION. The DEVELOPER shall fully cooperate with the
VILLAGE, its officials and professional staff with respect to its PROJECT.



   SECTION FIVE.  REPRESENTATION OF VILLAGE ONLY. The DEVELOPER
acknowledges that the VILLAGE'S professional and administrative staff solely
represent the VILLAGE and the VILLAGE'S interest and do not represent the
DEVELOPER.



   SECTION SIX. CONFLICT. If the terms and provisions of this Agreement
conflict with any ordinance of the VILLAGE or agreement between the parties,
the terms and provisions of this Village Reimbursement Agreement shall
supersede, set and control any other terms and provisions.



   SECTION SEVEN. COSTS AND ATTORNEY'S FEES.  In the event that the
Village must take action to enforce any of the terms of this agreement, the
DEVELOPER shall be liable for any and all costs, including court costs,
reasonable attorney's fees, expert witness or consulting fees, and any and
all other associated costs and expenses incurred by the VILLAGE.



   SECTION EIGHT.  VENUE.  The parties agree that the venue for any
dispute or action related to, or arising out of, this agreement, or which
affects the terms of this agreement, shall be the Circuit Court of Will
County, Illinois.



   SECTION NINE.  SEVERABILITY.  The invalidity of any paragraph or
subparagraph of this Village Reimbursement Agreement shall not impair the
validity of any other paragraph or subparagraph. If any provision of this
Agreement is determined to be unenforceable, such provision shall be
determined severable and the Agreement may be enforced with such provision
severed or as modified by such Court.



   SECTION TEN. ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This Agreement embodies the entire
agreement and understanding between the parties and there are no other
agreements, representations or understandings, oral or written, between the
parties with respect to the subject matter of this Agreement. No alteration,
modification, amendment or change of this Agreement shall be valid unless by
like instrument.



   Dated at                                          
      , Will County, Illinois on the date written above.



VILLAGE OF CHANNAHON, an Illinois Municipal Corporation



            BY:                                 
                   



               Village President



            DEVELOPER



            BY:                                
                   



               Its duly authorized agent



                                              
                   



               Billing Address



                                              
                   



               City, State, Zip



   (D)   Any developer who presently has any pending matter with the
village shall execute an agreement in the form attached hereto and pay the
appropriate deposit for security before the village will proceed further in
any respects with the development.



(Ord. 618, passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord. 1552, passed 10-6-08)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter, in
which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be subject to fines
of not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which a violation
occurs or continues.



   (B)   A failure to secure a permit or the failure to have proper
inspections will subject the applicant to fines not less than $50 nor more
than $500 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during and on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 713, passed 6-1-92)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING CODE



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Short title



   151.02   Construction start/stop times



   151.03   Permits and scope of regulations



   151.04   Rules adopted by reference



   151.05   Enforcement



   151.06   Relief from responsibility



   151.07   Fees



   151.08   Regulation for administration of building ordinance



   151.09   Foundation and final grading survey



   151.10   Required notice for inspection



   151.11   List of inspections



   151.12   Inspection of pre-fabricated structures



   151.13   Alternate materials




Fees




   151.25   Building permit fees



   151.26   Plan review fees



   151.27   Inspection fees



   151.28   Demolition or wrecking fees



   151.29   Moving, shoring or raising buildings



   151.30   Sign permit fees



   151.31   Swimming pool permit fees



   151.32   Ordinance fees



   151.33   Payment



   151.34   Fire protection district fees



   151.35   Collector



   151.36   Refunds



   151.37   Library district fee



   151.38   Waiver of certain fees




Minimum Building Requirements




   151.50   Adoption of codes



   151.51   Building Code adopted by reference; amendment and
additional requirements



   151.52   Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code



   151.53   Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code



   151.54   Amendments to the International Mechanical Code



   151.55   Amendments to the International Property and Maintenance
Code



   151.56   One and Two Family Dwelling Code adopted by reference;
amendments and additional requirements



   151.57   Amendment to the International Residential Code



   151.58   Additional requirements to the International Residential
Code



   151.59   Additional construction requirements



   151.60   Minimum heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
requirements



   151.61   Additional requirements



   151.62   Minimum plumbing requirements



   151.63   Minimum Electric Code requirements



   151.64   License



   151.65   Permits



   151.66   Additional regulations



 



   151.97   Violations



   151.98   Means of appeal



   151.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter, including the rules and regulations it adopts by
reference, is entitled the “Building Code Ordinance”. The designations
used to set off or identify its various parts refer to articles/ sections,
sub-sections, paragraphs, rules, regulations or other divisions as the text
or arrangement may indicate. Reference to anyone of these parts may be such a
designation alone.



(Ord. 309, passed 1-17-83; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.02  CONSTRUCTION START/STOP TIMES.



   (A)   All construction activities within 1,000 feet of any occupied
residential structure shall be allowed only between the following hours:



      (1)   Monday - Friday: 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.



      (2)   Weekends: 7:30 a.m. - 9:00 p.m.



      (3)   Roofing work may begin one hour earlier.



   (B)   Exempt construction activities include those associated with
emergency construction or maintenance activities or those associated with
public works construction projects undertaken by the state or any political
subdivision thereof.



(Ord. 1370, passed 12-20-04; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.03  PERMITS AND SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   A permit must be obtained in advance and all other requirements of the
Building Ordinance must be complied with whenever a building or parts of
appurtenance thereof, such as water supply, sewage disposal, plumbing
installation, electrical installation and heating equipment regulated by the
Building Ordinance, is erected, installed, altered, converted, remodeled,
re-roofed, structurally repaired, moved or changed, except as provided
hereafter.



   (A)   These rules and regulations set forth requirements considered
reasonable and are in every instance to by the minimum to safeguard life or
limb, health and public welfare.



   (B)   No building permit as required by this chapter shall be issued
for a building to be constructed on any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land
that does not conform with provisions of ILCS Chapter 765 and requirements of
the Will and/or Grundy County Health Department or other applicable agencies
concerning sewage disposal and water supply and other applicable ordinances.



      (1)   In manufacturing facilities, building permits shall be
required only for occupied buildings. Construction of “process
components” (piping, vessels, equipment, and the like) shall not require a
building permit and shall be the sole responsibility of the owner and shall
conform to the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) and/or Nuclear
Regulatory Commission Regulations and/or other applicable industry codes and
standards.



      (2)   All occupiable buildings in a manufacturing facility
shall require a building permit and are subject to the requirements of the
Village of Channahon Building Ordinance and applicable fee schedule.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.04  RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The regulations and standards contained in the previously published
books or pamphlets referred to in this chapter are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this Building Ordinance. In the event of a
conflict between this chapter, or any part thereof, and such regulations and
standards adopted by reference, the provisions of this chapter shall govern
and prevail.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Office of Chief Building Official is hereby created and vested with
the power and duty to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter
and such related regulations as are assigned to that office by the Village of
Channahon Board.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.06  RELIEF FROM RESPONSIBILITY.



   The Chief Building Official charged with the enforcement of this code,
while acting for the Village of Channahon, shall not thereby render himself
personally liable and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required
or permitted in the discharge of his/her official duties. Any suit instituted
against any officer because of an act performed by him/her in the lawful
discharge of his/her duties and under the provisions of the Village of
Channahon Building Ordinance shall be defended by the legal representative of
the Village of Channahon until the final termination of the proceedings. In
no cases shall the Chief Building Official or any of his/her subordinates be
liable for costs in any action, suit, or proceedings that may be instituted
in pursuance of the provisions of the Village of Channahon ordinances and
resolutions, and any officer of the Community Development Department, acting
in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of his/her official duties in connection thereto.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.07  FEES.



   All fees established by resolution of the Village of Channahon shall be
collected by the Chief Building Official or designated representatives and
deposited regularly with the Finance Department.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.08  REGULATION FOR ADMINISTRATION OF BUILDING ORDINANCE.



   The following requirements apply to the administration and enforcement
of this Building Ordinance, other pertinent ordinances and laws applicable to
any regulated building, structure, part, or appurtenance thereof.



   (A)   Application for a permit.



      (1)   Building permit application, signed by owner or
authorized agent shall be in writing on forms provided by the Building
Official.



      (2)   May only be amended during course of work as authorized
by the Building Official.



      (3)   Alterations and additions after completion require
another permit.



   (B)   Application requirements. All permit applications shall
include:



      (1)   Structures, water supply systems, sewage disposal
system, plumbing, electrical installations and exterior window schedule as
required by the Building Official to assure compliance with the rules and
regulations.



      (2)   For construction, alterations, and other work: three
copies of construction plans (more, if required by the Building Official),
specifications (if needed), to show compliance with regulations. Scale of
plans not less than 1/8 inch to the foot.



      (3)   Plans may be waived for minor alterations not involving
structural changes.



      (4)   If trusses are used, a truss diagram must be stamped by
an Illinois registered architect or structural engineer.



      (5)   Provide energy performance analysis for new
construction. This compliance report will include proposed designs and
standard reference designs as per IECC. R405.4.2 Compliance Report.



      (6)   All documents and plans submitted for permit(s) shall be
signed and sealed by a registered design professional or as required and
approved by the Chief Building Official.



      (7)   Where construction is to occur near a designated flood
plain area. (See Village of Channahon Ordinance Chapter 153 Flood Hazard
Prevention).



      (8)   All contractors shall comply with the contractor
licensing, registration, and bonding requirements as required by the Building
Official and Village of Channahon. Plumbers need not present insurance and
bonding information but shall comply with ail other requirements.



      (9)   All contractors listed shall be registered and approved
prior to the permit issuance.



      (10)   Soil report shall be required for new
residential/commercial/industrial applications unless waived by the Building
Official.



   (C)   Fees. Submit minimum $100 plan review payment at the time of
application with ail other fees due at time of issuance as required in
schedule of fees adopted by ordinance, for new home construction.



   (D)   Examination of application and plan. Initial review shall be
made within a maximum of 15 business days or under direction of the Chief
Building Official.



   (E)   Action on permit after filing and examination of application.



      (1)   Permit shall be denied if plans or proposed work does
not conform to requirements of this Building Ordinance, or other pertinent
laws and ordinances. Plan review comments shall be forwarded to the contact
person upon completion of the building and plumbing plan reviews.



      (2)   If proposed work conforms to requirements of this
Building Ordinance and other pertinent laws and ordinances, a permit shall be
issued in writing allowing work to proceed. One approved set of plans and/or
specifications shall remain in Building Division file. One approved set of
plans and/or specifications shall be given to the appropriate township
assessor’s office, and one approved set of plans and/or specifications
shall be returned to the applicant and made available to Village of Channahon
inspectors on site.



      (3)   A completed, approved list of registered contractors
shall be required prior to permit issuance.



      (4)   Foundation only permits are available upon request,
provided all fees are paid.



      (5)   Permit placard is to be furnished with permit or as the
permit itself, which is to remain conspicuously posted on site, visible from
the road right-of-way.



      (6)   Permit lapses:



         (a)   Permit application shall be void after six months
if responses to plan review comments and communications are not received.



         (b)   When a project has not started in six months, the
permit lapses, and must be renewed.



Permits expire one year after the date of issuance and shall be renewed or
extended prior to work continuing.



         (c)   Permits expire one year after the date of issuance
and shall be renewed or extended prior to work continuing.



      (7)   Permits issued for demolition shall lapse if not
completed within 60 days from the date of issuance.



      (8)   The Building Official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy following final inspection approval indicating compliance with
adopted codes and ordinances. Approval letters from the local fire protection
district. Will and/or Grundy County Health Department shall be required, if
applicable.



      (9)   Temporary occupancy permit may be issued under the
direction of the authority having jurisdiction for a building or portion
thereof if it is found that the condition of the building (lighting, heating,
water supply, sewage disposal, other sanitary facilities, and the like) is
available to the occupant and there are no health or safety violations
existing. Evidence or assurance of reasonably prompt completion shall be
furnished. Permit may be revoked and occupancy discontinued if work is not
completed in the allotted time.



      (10)   When a temporary occupancy is requested posting of a
bond shall be required. The bond will be for the balance of non- life safety
items. Amount of bond to be determined at final inspection.



      (11)   Permit that has expired after one year shall require
re-application at 100% of the initial fee. The discretion of the Building
Official may allow a prorated fee commensurate with completed work.



   (F)   Non-conforming building or structure.



      (1)   Definition. An existing building or structure or part of
appurtenance thereof not in conformance with this Building Ordinance.



      (2)   Repair work requires a written application and permit.
Work limited to necessary repairs only unless building or part is made to
conform in whole or in part with the requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Altering or enlarging shall be done in a manner
conforming with the Zoning, Engineering and Building Ordinances.



   (G)   Duties and authority of Building Official.



      (1)   The administration of this code and other applicable
ordinances and state laws as herein referred to.



      (2)   Keep careful, systematic records of business and work of
office, including permit applications, survey plats and building plot plans,
all construction plans and specifications, copies of permits and certificates
issued, affidavits and certificates received, a record of inspections, copies
of notices and orders issued, reports of tests made.



      (3)   Keep plans and specifications of residential structures,
commercial and industrial structures, and accessory structures in accordance
with State of Illinois retention of public record statues. Survey plats and
building plot plans, and those parts of plans for other buildings which may
be useful for future periodic inspections shall be kept in accordance with
State of Illinois retention of public record statutes.



      (4)   Make inspections, and for that purpose may enter
building structures, and premises.



      (5)   Stop, by written order, work being done contrary to the
building permit or this chapter. Such written order posted on premises
involved shall not be removed except by order of the Building Official.
Removal without such order shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



      (6)   A permit shall be revoked on approvals issued contrary
to this chapter or based upon a false statement or misrepresentation in the
application.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.09  FOUNDATION AND FINAL GRADING SURVEY.



   (A)   Foundation survey.



      (1)   Immediately after the installation of a foundation and
footings for new buildings and prior to requesting an inspection of the same,
the person who applied for, or obtained the building permit (or his or her
designee), shall submit to the Chief Building Official two copies of a plat
of survey of the property (herein referred to as “foundation survey”) for
which the permit was issued bearing the certificate of a registered surveyor.



      (2)   The foundation survey shall include the exact location
and elevations of the foundation and footings in relation to the lot lines,
and bear the registered surveyor’s certificate that the foundation and
footings are in compliance with all village ordinances and regulations
applicable hereto. These elevations shall be referenced to benchmark datum
established on village approved for construction site plans which include the
lot.



      (3)   Construction activity shall not proceed until the
foundation survey has been received and approved by the Chief Building
Official, and deemed to be in substantial conformance with the plans approved
as part of the building permit, and, if applicable, in substantial
conformance with plans approved by action of the Village Board for
development of the property. The Chief Building Official shall mark both
copies of the foundation survey as approved, and return one copy to the
person who applied for, or obtained the building permit (or his or her
designee) to keep available for inspection at the construction site. The
other copy shall become part of the building permit records. If this survey
indicates an error in setback requirements for said parcel or top of
foundation elevation, all work on the building shall be halted until such
time as said error is corrected. A tolerance of four inches plus or two
inches minus shall be allowed on the foundation elevation.



      (4)   The survey shall provide a note stating “ALL SURVEY
ELEVATIONS ARE REFERENCED TO BENCHMARK DATUM (insert site plan benchmarks
with elevations) ESTABLISHED ON VILLAGE APPROVED FOR CONSTRUCTION SITE PLANS
FOR (insert site plan title)”. In the absence of such benchmarks, a note
stating “ALL SURVEY ELEVATIONS ARE REFERENCED TO NAVD88 DATUM” must be
provided.



   (B)   Grading survey.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit, the
person who applied for, or obtained the building permit, shall submit to the
Chief Building Official two copies of a plat of survey of the property
(herein referred to as “final grading survey”) for which the permit was
issued bearing the certificate of a registered surveyor.



      (2)   The survey shall be required after the lot has been
final graded and topsoil is in place. This survey shall be a topographic
survey by a registered land surveyor of the state depicting final grade spot
elevations at all lot corners and at all high and low points of each lot line
between corners of the lot and at all locations of spot elevations shown on
the approved grading plan and at all rim elevations of storm, water, or
sanitary sewer structures located on the property. These elevations shall be
referenced to benchmark datum established on village Approved for
Construction site plans which include the lot.



      (3)   The survey shall be accompanied by a final grading
survey certification completed by the surveyor certifying that the elevations
were taken on topsoil, are true and accurate results of said survey, and
conform to the approved grading plan. Forms for this certification are
available from the Building Department.



      (4)   The survey shall provide a call out for overland flood
routes located on the lot.



      (5)   The survey shall provide a note stating “ALL SURVEY
ELEVATIONS ARE REFERENCED TO BENCHMARK DATUM (insertsite plan benchmarks with
elevations) ESTABLISHED ON VILLAGE APPROVED FOR CONSTRUCTION SITE PLANS FOR
(insert site plan title)”. In the absence of such benchmarks, a note
stating “ALL SURVEY ELEVATIONS ARE REFERENCED TO NAVDS8 DATUM” must be
provided.



(Ord. 1466, passed 2-19-07; Am. Ord, 1588, passed 8-3-09; Am. Ord. 1885,
passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.10  REQUIRED NOTICE FOR INSPECTION.



   The following listed inspections are required to be made. The owner or
the contractor shall request the designated inspection prior to 3:00 p.m. the
day before when such inspection is to be made, (Phone: (815) 476-6644) and
safe access (ladder or temporary stairs) shall be provided as per OSHA rules
and regulations. An individual over the age of 18 shall be present for the
inspection. Approved plans shall be on site.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.11  LIST OF INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Footing: inspection of the footings or piers shall be made
including required reinforcing steel is in place prior to placing of concrete.



   (B)   Slabs: concrete slab inspection for all residential,
commercial, industrial and multi-family structures; garage and basement
slabs, interior slabs, patios, shed slabs, private walkways and public
sidewalks shall be inspected prior to the placement of concrete, with
required reinforcing steel and vapor barrier in place and underground
plumbing and/or electrical has been inspected and approved.



   (C)   Foundations: inspection of the foundation shall be made prior
to the concrete placement with all forms and reinforcements in place.



   (D)   Electric service: inspection includes the meter socket panel
board, temporary power, temporary receptacle (must be GFI) and grounding.



   (E)   Backfill: inspection shall be made after drain tile with silt
sock fabric is properly installed adjacent to footing, covered with stone
prior to placing any backfill adjacent to the foundation. Insulation, damp
proofing and/or waterproofing (if applicable) of foundation shall be checked
at the time of the backfill inspection. Spot survey approval required before
backfill inspection. See Section



   (F)   Rough building: inspection shall be made after mechanical,
electrical and plumbing rough-in work has been completed prior to the
application of any interior finish or the installation of any insulation
material.



   (G)   Rough E.I.F.S. and masonry stucco inspections shall be made
before the base coat installation {drainage plane), after the framing
inspection has been approved or at the discretion of the building inspector.
Third party inspection or certified installer E.I.F.S. inspection shall be
conducted and reports submitted to the Building Official.



   (H)   Firebox shall be inspected prior to setting of first flue.



   (I)   Special third party inspection of bolted and/or welded
connections shall be conducted, if required by the Village of Channahon.
Sealed, signed, and dated reports shall be submitted to the Village of
Channahon.



   (J)   In addition to the above-stated inspections the Building
Department may make or require any other inspections necessary to ascertain
compliance with this Building Ordinance and other laws enforced by the
Building Department.



   (K)   Commercial structures that require fire and smoke damper
installations shall have periodic inspections; inspections shall be conducted
upon said units every four years. Inspections shall certify compliance with
2015 International Building Code, Section 17, Structural Test and Special
Inspections. Inspections shall be conducted by individual(s) certified by the
International Certification Board (ICB) and American National Standards
Institute (ANSI).



   (L)   Rough masonry/tie downs/narrow wall bracing: inspection shall
be made before masonry is installed for inspector verification of
installation.



   (M)   Air and thermal barrier inspection.



   (N)   Underground electrical and/or mechanical in concrete slab:
inspection shall be made prior to placing of concrete.



   (O)   Underground plumbing: inspections shall be made prior to
placing concrete.



   (P)   Insulation inspection is required prior to installation of
drywall or wall coverings are installed. Blown attic insulation will be
inspected on the final.



   (Q)   Progression of inspections: work shall not be done on any part
of the building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive
inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the Building
Official. Such written approval shall be given only after an inspection has
been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of
the inspections required above. This approval shall take the form of the
inspector’s sticker posted and signed on the premises.



   (R)   Fire suppression systems prior to closing of ceilings.



   (S)   Drop ceiling inspection before final, ex. finished basements.



   (T)   Final building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing inspections,
health department, and fire districts (if applicable) shall be made after
building is completed and ready prior to occupancy.



   (U)   Lawn grass.



      (1)   Lawn grass shall include all species of grass normally
grown as a permanent lawn in the area, whether sodded, plugged, sprigged or
seeded.



      (2)   Lawn grass shall be installed and properly maintained on
all property within nine months after an occupancy permit has been issued.
The lawn required shall cover all of the property not otherwise improved or
landscaped and included all areas owned by the village including, but not
limited to, parkways. (Ord. 591, passed 2-5-90).



      (3)   Residential developments shall have front yard,
including parkway and siding yard sodded, rear yard minimum seeded.



   (V)   Certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building
Official before a building can be permanently occupied when an inspection
following the completion of work shows the construction is in substantial
compliance with this chapter and the building permit which was issued.
Temporary certificate of occupancy per 111.3 IBC, 110.4 IRC.



   (W)   Each occupant of an industrial or commercial building shall
obtain an occupancy permit issued by the Village of Channahon. The commercial
or industrial occupancy permit is valid only with respect to the occupant to
whom it was issued. (Per ILCS Ch. 55, Act 5, § 1063).



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.12 INSPECTION OF PRE-FABRICATED STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Applicants for permits for construction shall state the name
of the general contractor or other individual who is wholly responsible for
the conduct of construction on the site.



   (B)   A “Master Plan” for each single or multi-family building,
commercial, or industrial building must be filed in this office incorporating
all off-site constructed aspects of the structure as well as its final site
assembly down to the foundation.



   (C)   The foundation plan shall include alt work proposed in the
basement or crawl space area and not be limited to only those items provided
by the modular home/office manufacturer. Additionally, this plan is not to be
a “typical” foundation plan, but rather one prepared for the particular
site to be occupied by the home/office.



   (D)   All sections of this chapter herein are applicable to
pre-fabricated construction.



   (E)   Provide each unit with a minimum of two frost-proof hose bibs
conveniently located on the front and rear exterior of house. The plans shall
contain a complete plumbing isometric riser diagram for supply, drain waste,
and vent lines. This diagram must indicate sizes and materials.



   (F)   The contractor or other individual obtaining the permit for
the transportation into the Village of Channahon and the erection and/or
installation of a re-fabricated unit will be held responsible once the unit
arrives in the village for its total disposition including the arrangement
for its immediate removal from the right-of-way once the unit arrives at the
site. It is incumbent upon this individual to make adequate arrangements with
the manufacturer and/or carrier to assure that roads and other property are
not damaged while the unit is in transit through the village to the site, and
further make arrangements for the immediate deposition of the unit at the
construction site.



   (G)   Every modular unit shall contain a State of Illinois
Certification affixed to the building. All modular homes must be properly
labeled. An Illinois Registered Design Professional shall seal, sign, and
date the document(s).



   (H)   All modular units shall comply with the Village of Channahon
Building Ordinance. The manufacturer of the modular unit shall provide
documentation of said compliance.



   (I)   Wrap on the underside of a modular home shall be removed on
basement situations unless a flame-spread rating of 25 or less is indicated.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.13  ALTERNATE MATERIALS.



   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of
any material or method of construction not specifically presented by this
chapter, provided any such alternate is approved prior to being used. The
Chief Building Official may approve any such alternate provided he/she finds
that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the accepted
design criteria. The Chief Building Official may require that substantial
evidence and/or testing be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be
made regarding its use.



(Ord 14-103 passed 5-15-14; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



FEES



§ 151.25  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The building permit fee for the construction, erection of, or
addition to, a residential use building or structure shall be determined by
multiplying the total square feet of usable area, using exterior dimensions
(excluding unfinished basements, cellars and attached garages) by $0.65.



   (B)   The building permit fee for the construction, erection of, or
addition to, a commercial or industrial building or structure shall be
determined by multiplying the total square feet of usable area by:



      (1)   Fifty cents per square foot, for the first 5,000 square
feet.



      (2)   Each additional square foot from 5,001 to 10,000 square
feet by $0.35 per square foot.



      (3)   Each additional square foot from 10,001 to 20,000 square
feet by $0.25 per square foot.



      (4)   Each additional square foot from 20,001 square feet and
up by $0.15 per square foot.



   (C)   The building permit fee for the construction or erection of an
accessory/ancillary structure in excess of 250 square feet in area shall be
determined by multiplying the number of square feet by $.40.



   (D)   The building permit fee for all other alterations to property
or structures including, but not limited to: accessory/ancillary structures
under 250 square feet in area, decks, gazebos, porches, soffit systems,
dormers, fences, re-roofs and siding, the fee shall be based upon an
estimated cost of the improvement, alteration or repair as follows:



      (1)   Construction value of $10,000 and under: $70.



      (2)   Construction value of $10,001 and over: $7 per $1,000.



      (3)   Decks attached to principal structure (minimum): $100.



   (E)   The term “estimated cost,” as used in this section, means
the reasonable value of all services, labor, materials and use of scaffolding
and other appliances or devices entering into and necessary to the
prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy.



   (F)   If the owner and occupant of a single-family residential
structure has attained the age of 65, the permit fee for re-roofs, siding,
soffit systems and gutters shall be $10.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1421, passed 4-16-06; Am. Ord. 1885,
passed 2-20-17)  Penalty, see § 151.99



Cross-reference:



   General land use fees, see §§ 150.10 through 150.23



§ 151.26  PLAN REVIEW FEES.



   A plan review fee equal to 15% of the building permit fee shall be
charged. In addition, the village shall be reimbursed by the individual,
group, or business entity requesting a permit, for all reasonable costs
incurred for professional services/assistance required for review and
evaluation of submitted plans and specifications and/or on-site professional
assistance. The minimum fee due with application is $100.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)  Penalty, see §
151.99



§ 151.27  INSPECTION FEES.



   The inspection fees for residential inspections conducted by village
inspectors are included in the permit fee. All fees and costs related to the
performance of any special professional services required shall be borne by
the permittee.



   (A)   (1)   Miscellaneous inspections other than normal required
inspections or if not covered by the permit fee (i.e., permit fees waived by
Corporate Authority):



   $75      Building Inspector per inspection



   $75      Electrical Inspector (if applicable) per inspection



   $75      Plumbing Inspector (if applicable) per inspection



   $75      Septic Inspector (if applicable) per inspection



   $75      Well Inspector (if applicable) per inspection



      (2)   Business, Institutional and Public Buildings:



   $125      Building Inspector (if applicable), per inspection



   $125      Electrical Inspector (if applicable), per inspection



   $125      Plumbing Inspector (is applicable), per inspection



   $125      Septic Inspector (if applicable), per inspection



   $125      Well Inspector (if applicable), per inspection



   (B)   Zoning certificate and certificate of occupancy: $50.



   (C)   Re-inspection fees: For each re-inspection passed the number
provided for in the Building Code Ordinance, a fee of $100 per inspection
shall be assessed against the applicant.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1421, passed 4-16-06; Am. Ord. 1885,
passed 2-20-17)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.28  DEMOLITION OR WRECKING FEES.



   The permit fee for demolition or wrecking of an existing building or
structure shall be at the rate of $25 for each ten feet in height of such
building or structure. The minimum fee is $100.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1588, passed 8-3-09; Am. Ord. 1885, passed
2-20-17)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.29  MOVING, SHORING OR RAISING BUILDINGS.



   The fee shall be $7 per $1,000 of the estimated cost of moving of new
foundations and of work necessary to put the building or structure in usable
condition in its new location. The minimum fee is $100.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1588, passed 8-3-09; Am. Ord. 1885, passed
2-20-17)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.30  SIGN PERMIT FEES.



   The sign permit fees shall be based upon the gross surface area of the
sign and shall be $.50 for each square foot of gross surface area of the
sign. Minimum fee of $50. Fees for temporary sign permit shall be $50 per
sign.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1588, passed 8-3-09; Am. Ord. 1885, passed
2-20-17)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.31  SWIMMING POOL PERMIT FEES.



   The permit fee for swimming pools shall be as follows, plus required
inspections:



   (A)   Above ground pools, 36" in depth and over: $100.



   (B)   In-ground private residential pools: $100.



   (C)   In-ground public or commercial: $200.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1421, passed 4-16-06; Am. Ord. 1885,
passed 2-20-17)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.32  ORDINANCE FEES.



   The Building Code Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance shall be available
from the Village Clerk at a cost of $20 per copy each, plus the cost to the
village of any codes adopted therein by reference.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.33  PAYMENT.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this
subchapter shall have been paid in full.



   (B)   No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all
inspection or other required fees have been paid.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.34  FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT FEES.



   (A)   As a condition to the issuance of a building permit for any
residential dwelling unit, the building permit applicant shall pay to the
village a fire protection district fee. Such fee shall be collected by the
village for the benefit of the fire protection district in whose jurisdiction
the property is situated. The actual amount of fees collected shall be paid
over to the applicable fire protection district annually.



   (B)   The amount of fees shall be determined as follows:



      (1)   All attached residential dwelling units - $250 per
dwelling unit;



      (2)   All detached residential dwelling units - $250 per
dwelling unit; and



      (3)   All other buildings or structures including, but not
limited to, commercial, industrial and non-residential $0.05 per square foot
of total building area.



   (C)   The village shall not collect funds under this chapter for any
taxing body which does not, prior to the effective date of this section,
enter into an Intergovernmental Agreement with the village which provides
that such taxing body will hold harmless, indemnify and release the village
upon such terms and conditions as are acceptable to the village.



   (D)   Each district receiving funds under this section shall
annually make a written report to the village detailing the amount of funds
received and how such funds were expended. This report shall be provided to
the village prior to December 31 of each year.



   (E)   The village shall review this section every three years to
determine whether the cash contribution herein set forth is consistent with
current criteria.



   (F)   All fees collected under this section shall only be expended
toward the purchase of capital improvements, including but not limited to,
property acquisition, construction of structures, additions and improvements
to existing structures, purchase of fire apparatus and purchase of ambulance
or other rescue equipment.



(Ord. 843, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1474, passed 3-5-07; Am. Ord. 1713, passed
11-5-12; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.35  COLLECTOR.



   The Village Clerk or designee shall act as the collector of all fees or
permit applications and inspections as provided herein.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.36  REFUNDS.



   No refunds shall be made of any of the above fees.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.37  LIBRARY DISTRICT FEE.



   (A)   Library district fee established. As a condition to the
issuance of a building permit for any residential dwelling unit, the building
permit applicant shall pay to the village a library district fee. Such fee
shall be collected by the village for the benefit of the library district in
whose jurisdiction the property is situated. The actual amount of fees
collected shall be paid over to the applicable library district annually.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee shall be $56 per dwelling
unit.



   (C)   Indemnification, hold harmless and release. The village shall
not collect funds under this section for any taxing body which does not,
prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 946, passed 6-16-1997, enter
into an intergovernmental agreement with the village which provides that such
taxing body will hold harmless, indemnify and release the village upon such
terms and conditions as are acceptable to the village.



   (D)   Accounting of funds. Each district receiving funds under this
section shall annually make a written report to the village detailing the
amount of funds received and how such funds were expended. This report shall
be provided to the village prior to December 31 of each year.



   (E)   Periodic review. The village shall review this chapter every
three years to determine whether the cash contribution herein set forth is
consistent with current criteria.



   (F)   Expenditure of funds. All fees collected under this chapter
shall only be expended toward the purchase of capital improvements, including
but not limited, to property acquisition, construction of structures,
additions and improvements to existing structures.



(Ord. 946, passed 6-16-97; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.38  WAIVER OF CERTAIN FEES.



   (A)   In the instance when a residential unit is destroyed either
through demolition, fire or natural disaster and a new single-family
residential unit is constructed on the same lot or parcel of land within six
months of such destruction, then in that event the following shall be waived:



      (1)   School land cash fee;



      (2)   Park land cash fee;



      (3)   Library fee;



      (4)   Fire district fee; and



      (5)   Village street equipment fee.



   (B)   This section shall apply to all building permits issued on or
after September 28, 2005.



(Ord. 1403, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



MINIMUM BUILDING REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.50  ADOPTION OF CODES.



   Following shall be adopted by reference with additional amendments
described throughout the remainder of this chapter:



   (A)   International Building Code 2015;



   (B)   International Residential Code 2015;



   (C)   International Fire Code 2015 with amendment (see Ord. 1872);



   (D)   International Mechanical Code 2015;



   (E)   International Property and Maintenance Code 2015;



   (F)   Illinois Energy Conservation Code 2015;



   (G)   International Fuel Gas Code 2015;



   (H)   National Electric Code 2014; and



   (I)   International Swimming Pool & Spa Code 2015.



(Ord. 1872, passed 11-7-16; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.51  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE: AMENDMENT AND ADDITIONAL
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk being marked and designated as “The 2015
International Building Code”, as published by International Code Council,
and as heretofore or hereafter amended, be and is hereby adopted as the
Building Code of the Village of Channahon in the State of Illinois; for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Building Code, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division C) of this section. In
the event of a conflict between the 2015 International Building Code, as
heretofore or hereafter amended, and any ordinance of the village, including
but not limited to any additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed in division (C) of this section, the ordinance shall prevail and
be given effect.



   (B)   Sections 151.002 through 151.046 of the Village of Channahon
Code, prior to the seventh supplement, entitled “Building Code Ordinance of
the Village of Channahon,” and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.



   (C)   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:



      (1)   Section 101.1 the Village of Channahon.



      (2)   Section 109.6 Refunds: Delete in its entirety and insert
the following in lieu thereof: Upon withdrawal of an application for a
building permit a portion of the permit fee will be refunded, provided that
no work has commenced. The village shall retain 50% of the permit fee to
cover any and al! administrative costs associated with the issuance and/or
termination of the original permit. A request for refund must be filed by the
applicant within sixty (60) days of the original application for a building
permit. No refunds shall be allowed after said sixty (60) day period.



      (3)   Section 114.4 Violation Penalties: Delete in its
entirety.



      (4)   Section 115.3 Unlawful Continuance: Delete in its
entirety.



      (5)   Chapter 29 (PLUMBING SYSTEMS): Delete in its entirety
and insert in lieu thereof: Chapter 29 (PLUMBING SYSTEMS): Section 2901.1
(PLUMBING SYSTEMS) SCOPE: The design and installation of plumbing systems,
including sanitary and storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies
and storm water and sewage disposal in buildings, shall comply with the
requirements of the Illinois State Plumbing Code.



      (6)   Delete the term “Fire Code Official” wherever it
appears in the 2015 International Building Code and replace with “Building
Code Official.”



      (7)   Section 113 BOARD OF APPEALS: Delete in its entirety.



      (8)   Section 101.1 to read: These regulations shall be known
as the Building Code of Village of Channahon, hereafter referred to as
“this code”.



   IBC Section 101.2.1 Appendices



      To read: Appendices A, B, C, D, F, G, H, J, and K are
specifically adopted by the Village of Channahon and shall apply.



   IBC Section 101.4.3 Plumbing



      Delete International Plumbing Code an insert to read: Illinois
Plumbing Code 2010.



      Delete International Private Sewage Disposal code and insert to
read: Will and Grundy County Health Department.



2017 S-21



   IBC Section 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit



      Delete Sections One, Two, Three and Five under “Building in its
entirety.”



   IBC Section 107 Submittal Documents



      To read: 107.1 General Delete entirely and shall read: All
two-family residences, multi-family, condominiums, town homes, apartments,
commercial and industrial documents shall be signed and sealed by a
registered design professional and as required by the Chief Building Official.



   IBC108 Temporary Structures



      Add: 108.1 General



      Temporary Structures shall be limited to one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days per year from date of issuance. Increments less than one
hundred eighty (180) days shall not be permitted to be accrued toward the one
hundred eighty (180) day period; following that period the temporary
structures shall be removed from site.



   IBC Section 109.6 Refunds



      Delete existing sentence in its entirety.



   IBC Section 201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes



      Delete International Plumbing Code and insert to read: Illinois
Plumbing Code 2010.



   IBC Section 406.4.1 Clear Height



      Delete ICC/A117.1 and insert to read: Latest Illinois
Accessibility Code 1997 Public Act 98-0224.



   IBC Section 412.3.5 Accessibility



      Delete Chapter Eleven and insert to read: Latest Illinois
Accessibility Code 1997 Public Act 98-0224.



   IBC Section 415.8.4 Dry Cleaning Plants



      Delete International Plumbing Code and insert to read: Illinois
Plumbing Code 2010.



   IBC Section 903.2.8 Group R Automatic Sprinkler System Requirement



      An Automatic Sprinkler System SHALL NOT be required. See IFC 2014
with Channahon Fire Code and Amendment.



   IBC Section 903.3.5 Water Supplies



      Delete international Plumbing Code and insert to read: Illinois
Plumbing Code 2010.



   IBC Section 1010.1



      Doors not used as means of egress shall be labeled “Not An
Exit.”



   IBC Section 1012



      Shall comply with Latest Illinois Accessibility Code 1997 Public
Act 98-0224.



   IBC Chapter Eleven - Accessibility



      Delete Chapter Eleven in its entirety and insert to read: All
accessibility issues refer to Latest Illinois Accessibility Code 1997 Public
Act 98-0224.



   IBC Section 1503.4 Roof Drainage



      Delete International Plumbing Code and insert to read: Illinois
Plumbing Code 2010.



   IBC Section 1805.4.3 Drainage Discharge



      Delete International Plumbing Code and insert to read: Illinois
Plumbing Code 2010



   IBC Chapter 29 - Plumbing Systems



      Delete Chapter Twenty-Nine in its entirety and insert to read:
all plumbing refer to Illinois Plumbing Code 2010.



   IBC Section 3003.2 Firefighter Emergency Operation



      All emergency elevator phones shall directly dial to the fire
protection districts emergency number and conform to the Latest Illinois
Accessibility Code 1997 Public Act 98-0224 and Village of Channahon 2014 Fire
Code.



   IBC Section 3305.1 Facilities Required



      Delete International Plumbing Code and insert to read: Illinois
Plumbing Code 2010.



   IBC Section 3409.2.5 Accessibility Requirements



      Delete Chapter Eleven and insert to read: Latest Illinois
Accessibility Code 1997 Public Act 98-0224.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.52  AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.



   IECC Section 101.1 Title



      To read: This code shall be known as the Illinois Energy
Conservation Code 2015.



   IECC Section 201.3 Terms Defined in Other Codes



      Delete any reference to the International Plumbing Code and
insert: to read “Illinois Plumbing Code 2010 and N.E.C. 2014.



   Table 302.1 Exterior Design Conditions



      Winter Design Dry Bulb (zero F)



      Summer Design Dry Bulb: 90 - 91



      Summer Design Wet Bulb (zero F): 74-76



       Degree Days Heating: 6,155



      Climate Zone: 5A



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.53  AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.



   IFGC Section 101.2 Title



      To read: These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of
Village of Channahon, hereafter referred to as “this code”.



   IFGC Section 101.3. Appendices



      To read: Appendix A, B, C, and D are specifically adopted by
Village of Channahon and shall apply.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.54  AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.



   IMC Section 101.1 Title



      To read: These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code
of Village of Channahon, hereinafter referred to as “this code”. Delete
International Plumbing Code and insert Illinois Plumbing Code.



   IMC Section 101.2.1 Appendices



      Appendix A is specifically adopted by Village of Channahon and
shall apply.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.55  AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY AND MAINTENANCE CODE.



   IPMC Section 101.1 Title



      To read: These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of Village of Channahon, hereinafter referred to as “this
code”.



   IPMC Section 102.3 Application of other codes



      (A)   Delete any reference to the International Plumbing Code.



      (B)   Delete any reference to the international Zoning Code.



      (C)   Insert: “To read Illinois Plumbing Code 2010 and
Village of Channahon Zoning Ordinance.”



      (D)   Delete the last sentence in its entirety.



   IPMC Section 103.5 Fees



      Add after the last sentence: See Village of Channahon Adopted Fee
Schedule.



   IPMC Section 201.3 Terms Defined in Other Codes



      (A)   Delete International Zoning Code.



      (B)   Delete International Plumbing Code.



      (C)   Insert: “To read Illinois Plumbing Code 2010 and
Village of Channahon Zoning Ordinance.”



   IPMC Section 304.14 Insect Screens



      Insert the dates “from March 15 to November 1".



   IPMC Section 502.5 Public Toilet Facilities



      Delete International Plumbing Code and insert Illinois Plumbing
Code 2010.



   IPMC Section 505.1 General



      In the last sentence delete, “In accordance with the
International Plumbing Code” and insert to read: “Illinois Plumbing Code
2010".



   IPMC Section 602.2 Residential Occupancies



      To read: “Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities
capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees F (20 C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor
design temperature of 6,155 heating degree days. Cooking appliances shall not
be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.”



   IPMC Section 602.3 Heat Supply



      Delete first sentence in its entirety and insert the following to
read: “Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets
one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitory or guest rooms on terms,
either expressed or implied, shall furnish heat to the occupants and maintain
a temperature of not less than 68 degrees F (20 C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms from October 1 to April 30th.



   IPMC Section 602.3 Heat Supply



      Exception: Delete the last sentence in its entirety.



   IPMC Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces



      To read: “Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with
heat during habitable working hours of not less than 65 degrees F (18 C).”



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.56  ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS
AND ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Channahon being marked and is
designated as ‘The 2015 International Residential Code,” as published by
International Code, is hereby adopted as the One- and Two-Family Building
Code of the Village of Channahon in the State of Illinois; for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in the Ordinance, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) of this
section. In the event of a conflict between the 2015 International
Residential Code, as heretofore or hereafter amended, and any ordinance of
the Village of Channahon, including but not limited to any additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in division (B) of this section,
the ordinance shall prevail and be given effect.



   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised as follows:



      (1)   Section R101.1: Insert “Village of Channahon”.



      (2)   Section R110.1: Delete #2 under “Exceptions”.



      (3)   Section R105.2: Delete #1, #2, #4, #5, and #10 under
“Building”.



      (4)   Section R113.4: Delete this section in its entirety.



      (4)   Section R114.2: Delete this section in its entirety.



      (6)   ****IRC Section 101: Delete the words “this code”
and add the 2010 State of Illinois Plumbing Code.



      (7)   Chapters 25, 26,27,28,29,30,31 and 32 of the 2015 ICC
Plumbing Code are to be deleted and the 2010 State of Illinois Plumbing Code
is to be added in its entirety.



      (8)   Section AJ301 “Repairs”, AJ301.1.2 “Plumbing
Materials and Supplies”: After the phrase “Shall not use,” add,
“unless in full compliance with the 2010 Illinois State Plumbing Code.”



      (9)   Section AJ301 “Repairs”, AJ301.2 Water Closets:
Delete the words “Section P2903.2 and add the 2010 State of Illinois
Plumbing Code.



      (10)   Section AJ301.4 Electrical Exceptions Numbers 1,2, and
3: And add the 2014 National Electric Code.



      (11)   Section AJ501 “Alterations”, AJ501.5.1 Electrical
Equipment and Wiring: And add the 2014 National Electric Code.



      (12)   Section AJ501 “Alterations”, AJ501.5.1 Electrical
Equipment and Wiring, Exception: And add the 2014 National Electric Code.



      (13)   Section AJ501 “Alterations”, AJ501.5.3.5 Clearance:
And add the 2014 National Electric Code.



      (14)   Section R301.(l): refer to this section in Code for
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA table.



      (15)   Section 903.4 ROOF DRAINAGE: Delete this section in its
entirety and insert the following in lieu thereof: “that will collect and
discharge all roof drainage to the ground surface at least 5 feet (1,524mm)
from foundation walls or to an approved drainage system.”



      (16)   Chapters 25 (PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION), 26 (GENERAL
PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS), 27 (PLUMBING FIXTURES), 28 (WATER HEATERS), 29 (WATER
SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION), 20 (SANITARY DRAINAGE), 31 (VENTS), AND 32 (TRAPS):
Delete these Chapters in their entirety and insert in lieu thereof: Chapter
25 (PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION}, Section 2501.1 SCOPE: the design and
installation of plumbing systems, including sanitary and storm drainage,
sanitary facilities, water supplies and storm water and sewage disposal in
buildings, shall comply with the requirements of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.57  AMENDMENT TO THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   R101.1 insert Village of Channahon



   R102.5 The following Appendices shall be adopted:



      (A)   Appendix A: Sizing and capacities of gas piping.



      (B)   Appendix B: Sizing of venting, systems serving
appliances equipped with draft hoods. Category I Appliances and appliances
listed for use and Type B vents.



      (C)   Appendix C: Exit terminals of mechanical drat and draft
vent venting systems.



      (D)   Appendix F: Radon



      (E)   Appendix G: Piping Standards for Various Applications



      (F)   Appendix H: Patio Covers



      (G)   Appendix J: Existing buildings and structures



      (H)   Appendix K: Sound Transmission.



   R106.1 Submittal Documents



      To read: Three sets of construction documents for all single
family and two family residences, multi-family, condominiums, townhomes, and
apartments. Documents shall be signed and sealed by a registered design
professional and/or as approved by the Chief Building Official.



   R108.5 Refunds



      Delete existing sentence in its entirety.



   R301.2(I) Village of Channahon Table 301.2(1)



      Snow Load 25 Pounds per Square Foot (no reductions considered)



      Wind Speed 90 (Uplift > 20 Lbs./Sq. Ft.)



      Seismic B



      Weathering Severe



      Frost Line 42"



      Termite Moderate to Heavy



      Decay Slight to Moderate



      Winter Design Temperature 6,155 Heating Degree Days



      Ice Barrier Underlayment Required.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.58  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   (A)   Delete minimum dwelling size as per 2015 IRC and insert
Chapter 156 of the Village of Channahon Zoning Code and/or Subdivision
Annexation agreements and covenants.



   (B)   All interior wall and ceiling surfaces shall be covered with a
minimum of one-half-inch gypsum wallboard or approved equal. Required fire
rated assemblies shall comply with U.L. or other approved testing agency
listing. No backup is required for one-inch nominal solid paneling.
Exception: Three-season room.



   (C)   Special conditions and tests. When special conditions exist or
arise during construction which necessitates additional precautions, the
Building Official may require work and testing in excess of these
requirements at the expense of the owner.



   (D)   Site preparation. No excavation, stripping of organic material
or removal of vegetable matter shall be done before drawings with elevations
are submitted and approved by the Village of Channahon Community Development.



   (E)   Dumpster and porta-john shall be placed on the job site to
insure public safety, health and welfare per the adopted Illinois State
Plumbing Code. If a builder has multiple job sites within a subdivision,
porta-john spacing of one unit per 500 lineal feet of roadway is permitted.
Builders sharing porta-john facilities shall provide the Village of Channahon
with a “letter of agreement to share such” for approval by the Village of
Channahon.



   (F)   When a knee wail is supporting two stories and a roof, the
knee wall shall be constructed with minimum 2x6 studs at 16-inch on center
with exterior sheathing, per code.



   (G)   Approved construction documents (plans) must be on site for
all inspections.



   (H)   Residential multi-tenant buildings: a minimum two-hour U.L.
fire barrier shall be provided between tenant spaces.



   (I)   Fire blocking compounds shall have a flame spread rating no
greater than 50 and comply with ASTM E-84. Approved fireplace caulk,
non-combustible mineral wool or rock wool is acceptable, but in no case shall
fiberglass insulation or drywall compound be used as a fire or draft stop.



   (J)  Gutters and downspouts must be provided on all buildings. Install
gutters and downspouts unless the building official specifically permits
omission. All exterior doors shall be protected from roof runoff by a
continuous gutter and downspout or as approved by the Building Official.



   (K)   All spaces between a chimney and floors or ceilings through
which the chimney passes must be fire blocked with non-combustible material
and installed as per Building Official.



   (L)   A mansard roof must be fire blocked at the corners to prevent
fire from engulfing the perimeter of the building sheathing, plus access
inspection panels shall be provided.



   (M)   Provide all crawl spaces with 6 mil Poly Vapor Barrier and 2"
slurry of concrete.



   (N)   All manufactured fireplace box shaft walls shall be covered
with 5/8" X type drywall and fire taped. Walls surrounding manufactured fire
boxes shall be provided with insulation with an R-value equal to exterior
wall insulation and fire blocked per manufacturer’s specifications.



   (O)   Effective erosion control practices shall be followed during
all earth moving, storage and placement operations so as to prevent sediments
from leaving the site and as required by the Building Official. In addition,
the construction process shall be so organized and conducted so as to prevent
equipment from dragging or carrying mud or dirt onto public streets. Where
this may accidentally occur, the builder or his/her responsible agent shall
immediately clean the road surface. Silt fence or other erosion control
materials when required, and shall be maintained until final site work is
installed.



   (P)   Address. Each structure to which a street number has been
assigned shall have a permanent number displayed directly on the structure in
a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. The
minimum size of the numerals shall be 4" by ½". Block numerals only, not
script.



   (Q)   In no case shall drywall or gypsum board be allowed to be
installed beneath exterior finished material unless specifically designed by
the manufacturer for that purpose. Exception: Where a fire-rated wall or
barrier is required or manufacturer’s specifications specifically require
the product.



   (R)   Where brick flashings are installed, the product shall be a
minimum of 20 mil thick.



   (S)   All load bearing wood-framed walls shall be provided with
double top plates.



   (T)   Rooms containing a tub and/or shower shall be provided with a
non-absorbent finish surface a minimum 12 inches above the shower head and
the entire shower enclosure installed with approved cement board or equal.



   (U)   Safety glazing shall be installed when adjacent to window
seats, ledges, seat boards, and all similar installations.



   (V)   Modular offices shall have a minimum 12" x 42" trench
foundation below grade and insulation shall meet the 2015 Illinois Energy
Code.



   (W)   Wood or composite decks shall be anchored to the building
structural framing peer approved design. Concrete or other piers shall not be
installed within the new foundation over dig unless extended to bearing soil.



   (X)   All exterior exposed lumber shall be pressure treated or
naturally decay resistant.



   (Y)   Concrete patios shall be anchored appropriately to the
building foundation.



   (Z)   Installation of a material, product, or method not required by
building code shall meet pertinent code sections.



   (AA)   Where I-Joists or Web truss are installed over a basement
and/or crawl space, the entire ceiling shall be covered with 1/2-inch drywall
or approved alternate method. Ex. Rated 1-Joist.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.59 ADDITIONAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Five-eighths-inch plywood/OSB roof sheathing for rafters or
trusses placed at 24 inches on center.



   (B)   Seven-sixteenths-inch minimum wall bracing when choosing that
option. R602.10.1.



   (C)   Seven-sixteenths-inch minimum roof sheathing for rafters or
trusses placed 16 inches on center.



   (D)   Three-quarter-inch tongue and groove floor sheathing.
Exception: match existing.



   (E)   Cement board or equal as barrier behind tubs and showers.



   (F)   Provide accessory structure ventilation per roofing
manufacturer’s specifications.



   (G)   Wood foundations below grade are prohibited.



   (H)   Eight-inch minimum foundation wall thickness, 12 inches for
trench foundation.



   It is the express intent of this code that 2015 IRC section R313 not be
adopted. Reference residential fire sprinklers.



   (I)   Drain tile shall be installed around the outside of the
foundation adjacent to the footings, connected to a sump pump, which shall
discharge into an approved drainage facility or to a point a minimum of ten
feet away from the structure. Said point to then positively drain away.
Drainage must be provided on the perimeter of interior of all basement and
crawl spaces when encompassing a habitable space. With the prior approval of
the Building Official, drain tile may be “day-lighted”.



   (J)   In no case shall footing drains and/or sump pumps be connected
to any sanitary sewer systems, or septic system.



   (K)   Footings for single-family and multi-family dwelling units
containing no basement or crawl space are permitted provided a minimum
12-inch width and a minimum of 42-inch depth below grade is specified. This
depth is to be measured below grade. Where the foundation wall extends
through the over dig, reinforcing bars shall be provided and shall extend
into the adjacent foundation.



   (L)   Bottom of footings shall be not less than three feet, six
inches below finished grade, except where placed on verified, solid bedrock.
Minimum size of footings shall be 20" x 10" with standard “keyway”, or as
approved by the Building Official.



   (M)   A foundation wall is required under all stoops, decks, and/or
landings supporting a roof.



   (N)   Piers that carry a roof load shall be a minimum 12-inch
diameter and shall extend a minimum of three feet, six inches below finished
grade. Do not install in the over dig. Must be on virgin soil.



   (O)   Foundation shall be backfilled with clean fill. Do not use
debris for backfilling.



   (P)   All columns supporting beams must bear centrally on a minimum
36" x 36" x 12" deep concrete pier footing. Rivet, weld, or bolt top of steel
column to steel girders (or lag screw to wood girders) and anchor bottom by
bolts or embed in concrete. Column footings shall be protected from frost.



   (Q)   R 407.3 Structural Requirements, Delete Exception: To read:
All columns in seismic design categories A, B, C shall provide bottom end
lateral displacement requirements.



   (R)   All structures and accessory structures shall be required to
provide a minimum of four-inch-thick floor slab. Floor slabs shall have a
minimum of four-inch compacted stone base.



   (S)   When concrete floor is installed in heated areas, a minimum 6
mil vapor barrier must be provided with a minimum 12-inch overlap.



   (T)   All residential driveways shall be of a 4,500psi concrete mix.



   (U)   All new detached structures 600 square feet area or less shall
have a minimum 18-inch (12 inches below and six inches above) deep by
12-inch-side trench footing. A minimum four-inch slab included in the 18-inch
thickness shall be placed over a compacted four-inch stone base. Detached
structures, having more than one level, may require a foundation design by a
licensed design professional.



   (V)   An attached garage shall be completely separated from the
residence and its attic by a minimum 5/8-inch drywall applied to the garage
side with joints property taped and cemented, or equivalent. Where the
separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure supporting the
separation shall also be protected by not less than 5/8-inch drywall. The
common wall and entry between the garage and house must be protected by a
minimum six-inch gas curb.



   (W)   All garages and accessory structures shall have an air barrier
installed prior to siding.



   (X)   Concrete shall be placed only on clean, compacted fill
(compacted to 95% Proctor density) stone fill or virgin clay free from any
vegetation, debris, or organic soils. Additions may be exempt per the
Building Official.



   (Y)   All wood decks, enclosed or otherwise after removal of organic
vegetation, shall have installed a minimum of two-inch stone base over six
mil Poly Vapor Barrier or as approved by the Building Official (exception to
the above where the entire space under the deck is accessible at a minimum
height of 42 inches).



   (Z)   Eight-inch foundation walls longer than 30 feet shall have
additional support to resist lateral loads or increase thickness.



   (AA)   All new residential homes shall be constructed with full
basements. Exception: High water table, Room addition or Restoration due to
fire or other needs to rebuild the home.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.60  MINIMUM HEATING, VENTILATION, AND AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC)
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Permits: a permit must be obtained for the installation of any
mechanical work. Exception: Any portable equipment, minor repairs, or
self-contained refrigeration systems.



   (B)   Licenses: all mechanical contractors engaged in the
performance of HVAC work shall be licensed per the Illinois Municipal Code
11-32-1.



   (C)   Alteration of equipment: it shall be unlawful for any person
to alter, disturb, or change any equipment or to permit any equipment to be
altered, disturbed, or changed unless done in conformity with the regulations
in this code.



   (D)   Exhaust systems:



      (1)   Every bath and toilet room shall be ventilated by a
mechanical ventilation system vented directly to the atmosphere. Bath exhaust
fans shall be vented to the exterior. All exhaust vent(s) shall terminate in
an approved fitting. All bathroom exhaust ductwork in an unconditioned space
shall be insulated per Illinois Energy Conservation Code.



      (2)   Clothes dryer vents shall be a minimum .016 inch thick
rigid metal duct and shall be sealed with approved metallic tape {no duct
tape or screws). Flexible vent not permitted in walls.



   (E)   Equipment installation: HVAC equipment shall not be installed
in an attic or crawl space area unless approved for installation in such
spaces. Such equipment shall be installed within a conditioned space. Smoke
and CO detectors shall be required in the room.



   (F)   Attic: where equipment is installed in an attic, a permanent
stairway or an approved pull-down stair assembly (500 lbs. rated or better)
shall be installed. All walkways to the equipment room shall be as minimum of
24 inches wide; do not compress the insulation. The wall/ceiling assembly
shall be provided with a minimum of 5/8" type X drywall and insulated per
2015 Illinois Energy Code.



   (G)   Crawl space: any equipment installed in a crawl space shall be
installed above a four-inch concrete slab extending a minimum of three feet
in width along the control side of the equipment. All equipment located in a
crawl space shall be raised at least eight inches above the slab.



   (H)   Interior installations: all interior installation shall be
raised a minimum of three inches above the adjoining floor.



   (I)   Exterior installation: all equipment shall be securely fasten
to wall brackets or concrete pads.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.61  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All buildings shall have a readily accessible, visible
external shutoff valve located at the building or tank for liquid or vapor
fuels.



   (B)   All vents for combustible fuel appliances shall terminate a
minimum of 35 inches above final grade.



   (C)   Flexible gas line connectors shall not be permitted for
furnace and water heater. Exception: Manufacturer requirements or hanging
units.



   (D)   Supply or return ducts shall be prohibited in an exterior wall
and shall be installed in a minimum 2X6 interior wall, soffit or chase.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.62  MINIMUM PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Follow 2010 Illinois State Plumbing Code or the latest edition
and the following amendments.



   (B)   Two-inch cleanout is acceptable under the kitchen sink or
below the floor: in the basement or crawl space.



   (C)   Crawl spaces may drain towards the basement floor drain
provided the depression in the foundation wall does not affect the structural
integrity of the wall.



   (D)   Plastic and fiberglass laundry tubs shall be fastened to a
wall and/or the floor in such a manner as to make them secure.



   (E)   All plumbing fixtures that are installed below grade shall be
discharged into a gas-tight overhead sewer (ejector pit).



   (F)   All water supply and distribution lines shall be sized and
installed per the State Plumbing Code section 890 Appendix A. minimum
one-inch water service.



   (G)   Schedule 40 PVC pipe only with the identification label
visible.



   (H)   The rough plumbing shall be fully tested and approved, in
writing, prior to the installation of any insulation. Provide a minimum 50
pounds are or water test and must be seen by a plumbing inspector.



   (I)   All future plumbing fixtures shall have waste and vent
installation completed for the rough inspection, with all waste openings
capped or plugged gas tight.



   (J)   A floor drain shall be required in a basement discharging into
an ejector pit and piped to the sanitary sewer or septic system.



   (K)   A boiler drain down fitting shall be installed on the house
side of the water meter. Anti-siphon device is required on the boiler drain
down (drain down valve shall be installed before the second shutoff valve).



   (L)   The water heater shall not be used to set water temperatures
at plumbing fixtures.



   (M)   Anti-scald/Posi-temperature valves in all shower and
tub/shower combinations must be set at 115 degrees Fahrenheit max. The water
temperature at the water heater shall be a minimum of 120 degrees Fahrenheit.



   (N)   All hand-held shower heads shall have a 1016 ANSI anti-siphon
device or dual check valve.



   (O)   Access panels for whirlpool motor repairs shall be a minimum
of 14 inches high by 20 inches wide or per manufacturer specifications. No
removal of fixtures or cabinetry shall be allowed to access motor.



   (P)   Stud guards are required on all water pipes and waste/vent
pipes with less than 1-1/2 inch clearance from the face of the stud from
either side.



   (Q)   There shall be no plumbing rough inspections until the HVAC
has been completed or at the discretion of the Building or Plumbing Inspector.



   (R)   All gas piping shall be sized, installed, and tested at a
minimum of 50 pounds as per adopted codes, rules, and regulations herein.



   (S)   Air chambers are required to be installed on all fixtures.



   (T)   A safe pan is require, washing machines, furnaces with air
conditioners, and others at the discretion of the plumbing inspector, used to
receive sanitary wastes or other fluids. Pans shall be connected to a
properly installed drainage system when installed over habitable or
occupiable space.



   (U)   All commercial establishments and institutions with kitchens.



      (1)   The minimum size of floor sinks shall be 12 inches by 12
inches.



      (2)   Kitchens shall have floor sinks for all open site drains.



      (3)   Any medical professional examination room that may
result in body contact is required to have a hand sink installed in
compliance with the Illinois Plumbing Code.



      (4)   Tankless or on-demand water heaters shall be adequate in
size to operate ail fixtures requiring hot water running simultaneously at a
constant temperature of 120 degrees Fahrenheit or above. The unit shall be
installed with flushing valves. Provide cut sheets indicating size of heater
and allowable fixture ratings.



      (5)   Provide grease traps per State Plumbing Code.



   (V)   All sewer and water contractors shall be licensed, bonded, and
registered, and must have a state plumbing license.



   (W)   No pressure water lines shall be installed into interior
walls, attics or ceilings above attached garages.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.63  MINIMUM ELECTRIC CODE REQUIREMENTS.



   The National Electrical Code 2014 edition has been adapted by the
Village of Channahon and apply to all electrical installations as though
fully written and set forth herein, except as specifically noted otherwise in
this code.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.64  LICENSE.



   All electrical contractors or individuals engaged in the performance of
electrical work shall be licensed per the Illinois Municipal Code 11-33-1.
The contractor or individual shall file with the Village of Channahon a copy
of a valid Electrical license and said license shall reflect the scope of the
work proposed.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.65  PERMITS.



   Permits are required for all electrical work. Permits for electrical
work shall be issued only when a duly licensed and bonded electrical
contractor or individual is listed on the permit application. Exception:
qualified homeowners who can demonstrate their ability to perform such work,
to the satisfaction of the Building Department, may work on their current
place of residence or on new construction of a home as long as they reside on
site for a period of at least six months after issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.66  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, disturb or
change any electrical wiring or equipment or to permit any electrical wiring
or equipment to be altered, disturbed, or changed unless done in conformity
with the requirements of the Village of Channahon adopted codes and
ordinances.



   (B)   Where re-work or re-wiring of any building or structure
exceeds 50%, all wiring in the entire structure shall be installed per the
currently adapted electrical code and ordinance. The 50% value is determined
by pre-inspection by the Building Official or the insurance analysis of the
damage.



   (C)   All electrical wiring on the load side of the service meter
shall be copper. Additional consideration may be given to aluminum service
conductor on a case-by-case basis along with a design from an electrical
engineer.



   (D)   All branch circuits exposed in basements, crawl spaces,
garages, and accessory structures shall be installed in EMT (Electrical
Metallic Tubing).



   (E)   210.12 Arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection shall read:
arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection shall be provided as required in
210.12(A), (B), and (C). The arc-fault circuit interrupter shall be installed
in readily accessible location provided the branch circuits are installed
with NMC (Non-Metallic Cable). EXCEPTION: when (EMT Electrical Metallic
Tubing) is used throughout the entire home, then only the bedrooms shall
require arc-fault circuit interrupters installed.



   (F)   All electrical services pipe shall be Rigid Metal Conduit, or
Intermediate Metal Conduit.



   (G)   All electrical services shall be installed with a main breaker
in the electrical service panel.



   (H)   Meter sockets shall be removed once concealed by an addition
or sunroom installation.



   (I)   NEC. 230.70 (A) Location to read: The service disconnecting
means shall be installed a maximum of five feet between the point of the
service entrance panel and meter socket (10 feet of service conductors max).



   (J)   Sizing of the electrical service for dwellings: All
measurements shall betaken from the exterior walls of the dwelling unit.



   (K)   Dwelling units under 2,500 square feet minimum 100 amp service.



   (L)   Dwelling units 2,500 square feet to 3,500 square feet shall
have a minimum-sized electrical service of 200 amperes or larger, based on
demand load.



   (M)   Dwelling units over 3,500 square feet shall have electrical
service rated at least 320 amperes or greater.



   (N)   Exception to (K), (L), and (M): Load calculations may be
presented to the Village of Channahon Building Department for review. The
Chief Building Official will determine the proper size electrical service
based on the load calculations submitted. At no time shall the total
calculated load exceed 80% of the service size.



   (O)   Delete: IRC E3902.16 AFCI in its entirety.



   (P)   Delete: IRC E3902.17 AFCI for branch circuit extensions or
modifications in its entirety.



   (Q)   Delete: NEC Article 320 Armored Cable.



   (R)   Delete: NEC Article 330 Metal-Clad Cable type MC.



   (S)   Delete: NEC Article 338 Service Entrance Cable type SE and USE.



   (T)   Delete: NEC Article 340 Underground Feeder and Branch circuit
cable type UF.



   (U)   Delete: NEC Article 352.10A PVC conduit shall be permitted in
walls, floors and ceilings.



   (V)   Delete: NEC Article 362 Electrical NonMetallic Tubing Type ENT.



   (W)   Delete: NEC Article 394 Concealed Knob and Tube Wiring.



   (X)   NEC Article 410 add: 410.7 Storage spaces five square feet or
more shall be illuminated.



   (Y)   All branch circuit conductors shall be installed in EMT by the
rough inspection.



   (Z)   All electrical components shall be listed and labeled for its
particular use.



   (AA)   All light fixtures shall have at least one lamp installed and
all receptacles intended to be used for switched lighting shall be labeled by
final inspection.



   (BB)   All garages attached or detached with power are required to
be on a dedicated 20 ampere circuit. More circuits may be added.



   (CC)   Every service panel must have the circuits labeled. All
service or feeder panels shall be located a minimum of three feet from a sump
or ejector pit, sink, and/or laundry sink.



   (DD)   NEC Article 210-5 C) (1) add new subsection as follows to
read:



      (C)   All three-phase 208y/120v services shall have phases
marked A) Black, B Red, and C) Blue.



      (D)   All three-phase 480y/277v services shall have phases
marked A) Brown, B) Orange, C) Yellow with the neutral being of grey.
Junction boxes shall be marked 480y/277v with permanent marker or approved
sticker-type product.



   (EE)   In Commercial and Industrial installation:



      (1)   All breakers for fire alarms and burglar alarms shall be
equipped with mechanical lockouts to prevent an accidental turn off of the
circuit.



      (2)   Emergency lighting shall be connected to a light
circuit, on the lighting phase, or equipment with a transfer gear connected
to generator power.



      (3)   Parking facilities having moderate to heavy traffic
shall require galvanized steel conduit (IMC), (RMC), or Schedule 80 PVC under
the paved areas for all power and lighting installations.



      (4)   All electrical work to be performed by a licensed
electrical contractor.



   (FF)   NEC 210.8 (A). Dwelling Unit Exceptions: Provide a single
dedicated circuit receptacle non-GFI protected for sump pumps, ejector pumps,
power vented water heaters and garage door openers.



   (GG)   All switching devices shall be bonded to the box; mounting
screws shall not be considered the bond.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.97  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any
building or structure or equipment regulated by this chapter or cause same to
be done, contrary to, or in conflict with, or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   When an inspector determines that a violation of this chapter
exists, he or she shall cause a notice of such violation to be posted in a
conspicuous place near the main entrance of such building. The notice shall
be at least nine inches in height and 14 inches in width and at the top
thereof in large letters shall state “NOTICE OF VIOLATION”. The text of
the notice shall contain a reference to the provision of this chapter
violated, direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or conditions and
the abatement of the violated and may contain such other information
respecting the nature of the violation as the inspector deems advisable. A
copy of said notice shall also be either personally served or sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressee only, to the person
responsible for said violation.



   (C)   If the notice of violation is not corrected within three days
of service, the inspector shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law
or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto.



   D)   A person, firm, or corporation licensed or registered by the
state or a subdivision thereof to do work regulated by this chapter or to
render professional architectural or engineering service in connection
therewith, who violates the law or ordinance under which licensed or
registered, or who violated this chapter while carrying out such work or
rendering service in connection therewith, shall be reported by the inspector
to the proper licensing authority.



   (E)   Upon removal of the cause of the violation for which the
notice is posted, the inspector shall forthwith remove the notice. Any other
person removing any such notice or defacing such notice is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined as provided in § 151.99.



(Ord. 309, passed 1-17-83; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17) Penalty, see §
151.99



§ 151.98  MEANS OF APPEAL.



   (A)   The owner of a building or structure or any other duly
authorized agent may appeal in writing any decision of an inspector to the
Village of Channahon within 30 days from the date of said decision by the
filing of a written notice with the Village Clerk. Failure to file a written
appeal within the time set forth shall cause the decision or order issued to
become final and shall preclude any right of appeal. Application for appeal
may be made when it is claimed that the true intent of this chapter or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted; that the
provisions of this chapter do not fully apply; or that an equally good or
better form of construction can be used.



   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
decision appealed from unless the inspector certifies to the Village of
Channahon, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a decision granted by the Village of Channahon or
by a restraining order issued by a court of record upon application following
notice to the inspector and upon de cause shown. The Village of Channahon
shall select a reasonable time and place for a public hearing on the appeal,
shall give due notice thereof to the parties having a known interest therein
and shall render a written decision within 60 days of the filing of the
notice of appeal. Upon the occurring vote of a majority of its members, the
Village of Channahon may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may
modify the decision from which the appeal was taken and to that end the
powers of the Building Inspector or the Septic, Plumbing, or Electrical
Inspectors with respect to such decision.



   (C)   All decisions and findings of the Village of Channahon on
appeals or upon applications for a variation, after a hearing shall, in all
instances, be final administrative decisions and shall be subject to judicial
review as the law may provide.



   (D) The Village of Channahon may adopt additional rules, regulations,
and procedures for the hearing of said appeals.



(Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any
of the provisions of this chapter, including provisions adopted by reference,
or who refuses to remedy a violation of any such provision or to remedy a
hazard of fire, explosion, collapse, contagion, or spread of infectious
disease found to exist and duly ordered eliminated, and where no other
penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not less than $25, nor more
than $500 for each offense, and each day upon which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.  (Ord. 309, passed 1-17-83)



   (B)   In addition to any remedy whether at law or in equity provided
by the IPMC Property Maintenance Code (former BOCA), every person found to
have violated any provision therein shall be fined not less than $100, nor
more than $500 for each violation. Every day upon which a violation occurs
shall be considered a direct and separate violation.  (Ord. 652, passed
6-3-91)



   (C)   Upon conviction, persons found to have violated §§ 151.11
through 151.28 shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500. Each day
upon which the condition exists shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation. This monetary penalty shall be in addition to and not in lieu of
any remedy available at law or in equity to enforce the provisions of chapter.



(Ord. 805, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1885, passed 2-20-17)



CHAPTER 152:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND MAP



Section



   152.01   Adopted by reference



§ 152.01  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Village of Channahon Comprehensive Land Use Plan, attached as
Exhibit A to Ordinance 1560 is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
as if fully set forth herein.



(Ord. 1560, passed 12-1-08)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   Interpretation of chapter



   153.04   Disclaimer of liability



   153.05   Abrogation and greater restrictions



Enforcement and Administration



   153.15   Duties of enforcement officials



   153.16   Determining flood plain designation



   153.17   Review by engineer



   153.18   Dam safety requirements



   153.19   Additional permits



   153.20   Plan review and issuance of permit



   153.21   Inspection review



   153.22   Elevation and flood proofing certificates



   153.23   Records for public inspection



   153.24   State permits



   153.25   Cooperation with other agencies



   153.26   Promulgation of regulations



Base Flood Elevation



   153.35   Designation of base flood elevation



Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas



   153.45   When occupation and use permitted



   153.46   Development permit required



   153.47   Application for permit



   153.48   Preventing increased damages



Occupation and Use of Identified Floodways



   153.55   Regulatory floodways



   153.56   Development permit requested



   153.57   Application for permit



   153.58   Preventing increased damages; appropriate uses



   153.59   Construction requirements and regulations for appropriate
uses



   153.60   State review



   153.61   Other permits



   153.62   Dam safety permits



   153.63   Activities that do not require engineer's review



Occupation and Use of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified



   153.70   When occupation and use permitted



   153.71   Development permit required



   153.72   Application for permit



   153.73   Comparison to base flood elevation



   153.74   Preventing increased damages



   153.75   Standards for riverine SFHA where floodway has not been
determined



   153.76   Compensatory storage



Permit Requirements Applicable to All Flood Plain Areas



   153.85   Applicability



   153.86   Public health standards



   153.87   Carrying capacity and notification



   153.88   Protecting buildings



Additional Development Requirements; Variances



   153.95   Additional development requirements



   153.96   Variances



 



   153.98   Violation



   153.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
village by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2 and 11-30-8. 
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this village's eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program, to minimize potential losses due to
periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve
economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and
related land resources.  This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the
following specific purposes:



   (A)   To meet the requirements of ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5 § 18g, “An
Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the
State of Illinois,” approved June 10, 1911, as amended.



   (B)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;



   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings
from flood damage;



   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;



   (E)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.



   (G)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended.



   (H)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of
land and water resources;



   (I)   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and flood plains and to protect water quality and aquatic
habitats;



   (J)   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in
order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce
soil erosion,  protect  aquatic  and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  An Act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and
streams of the State of Illinois, ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5 § 5 et seq.



   APPLICANT.  Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.



   APPROPRIATE USE.  Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are
permissible and will be considered for permit issuance.  The only uses that
will be allowed are as specified in § 153.59.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.  The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event.  Application of the base flood elevation at any
location is as defined in § 153.35 of this chapter.



   BUILDING.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof.  The term includes a gas or liquid storage
tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building.  This
term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed
on a site for more than 180 days.



   CHANNEL.  Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or
artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert,
gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite
bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows,
either perennially or intermittently.



   CHANNEL MODIFICATION.  Alteration of a channel by changing the
physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks.  Channel modification
includes damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody
vegetation.  Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or
dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel.  Channelization is a
severe form of channel modification typically involving relocation of the
existing channel (e.g. straightening).



   COMPENSATORY STORAGE.  An artificially excavated, hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of
natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed
within the flood plain. The uncompensated loss of natural flood plain storage
can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows.



   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. 
Preconstruction approval by DWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
of a proposed change to the floodway map.  This preconstruction approval,
pursuant to this section, gives assurances to the property owner that once an
appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map
can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built
plans.



   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR).  A letter which indicates
that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown
on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once
the as-built plans are submitted and approved.



   CONTROL STRUCTURE.  A structure designed to control the rate of flow
that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.



   DAM.  All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with
their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of
storing or diverting water or creating a pool.  Underground water storage
tanks are not included.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to real estate, including:



      1.   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a
building or any addition to a building.



      2.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for
more than 180 days.



      3.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of
roads, bridges, or similar projects.



      4.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.



      5.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.



      6.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams,
or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage
of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;



      7.   Any other activity of man that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive
vegetation removal.



   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no
increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.



   DWR.  Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water
Resources.



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.  A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building
has been elevated.



   EROSION.  The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water
or wave action.



   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS.  Organizations which are exempt from this
chapter per the Ill. Com. Stat. including state, federal or local units of
government.



   FEMA.  Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44
CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986.  This incorporation does not
include any later editions or amendments.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  A period of years, based on a statistical analysis,
during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the flood plain outside of the
regulatory floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM).  A map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and flood plains
and may or may not depict floodways.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  That land typically adjacent to a body of water with
ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation.  Flood plains may also include detached Special
Flood Hazard Area, ponding areas, and the like.  The flood plain is also
known as the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).  The flood plains are those
lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation
by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.  The SFHA's of the village
are generally identified as such on the Will County, County Wide Flood
Insurance Rate Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated September 6, 1995 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Grundy County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated July 18,
1985.  The SFHA's of those parts of unincorporated land that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared for Will County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
September 6, 1995.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed
and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE).  The elevation of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in
the SFHA.



   FREEBOARD.  An increment of elevation added to the base flood
elevation  to  provide a  factor of  safety for uncertainties in
calculations, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and  unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.



   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS.  Engineering analysis which
determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or FIRM.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  Letter that revises base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities.  The term MANUFACTURED HOMES also includes park trailers, travel
trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180
consecutive days.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MITIGATION.  Includes those measures necessary to minimize the
negative effects which flood plain development activities might have on the
public health, safety and welfare.  Examples of MITIGATION include
compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel
restoration.



   NGVD.  National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.  Reference surface
set by the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of
all existing adjustments in 1929.



   NATURAL.  When used in reference to channels means those channels
formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made
by man.  A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its flood plain
is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared,
mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials
typical of the area with no  substantial  alteration of the course or
cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating.  A modified
channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel
meanders and vegetation is re-established.  Similarly, a modified channel
may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and
revegetation.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM).  The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.



   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT.  A flood control project which will be
operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic
study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed.  Nothing in
this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or
financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or
parties who are not public agencies.



   PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS.  All streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR.  A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under The Illinois Land Surveyors Act (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330 §§
1-49).



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.  An engineer registered in the State
of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Act (ILCS Ch. 225,
Act 325 §§ 1-49).



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the flood plain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by DNR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated
future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more
than a 10% increase in velocities.  The regulatory floodways are
designated  for Des Plaines River, DuPage River and Rock Run Creek South on
the Will County, County Wide Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) prepared by FEMA
and dated September 6, 1995.  The regulatory floodways for those parts of
unincorporated Will County that are within the extraterritorial 
jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed in the village are designated
for the DuPage River and Rock Run South on the FIRM prepared by FEMA and
dated September 6, 1995 and for those parts of unincorporated Grundy County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be
annexed in the village are designated for the Illinois River, Des Plaines
River, Dresden Run, Collins run and Aux Sable Creek on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map prepared by FEMA and dated July 18, 1985.  To locate the
regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary
should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan,
using reference marks common to both maps.  Where interpretation is needed
to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the
Division should be contacted for the interpretation.



   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE.  Development activities which do
not result in any  increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.



   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY.  A RETENTION FACILITY stores stormwater
runoff without a gravity release.  A DETENTION FACILITYprovides for storage
of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.



   RIVERINE SFHA.  Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel.  This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.



   RUNOFF.  The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the
land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels
or conduits.



   SEDIMENTATION.  The processes that deposit soils, debris and other
materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  Any base flood area subject to
flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other
identified channel or ponding and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V,
M, or E.



   STRUCTURE.  The results of a man-made change to the land constructed
on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or
placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a
manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure either before the improvement or repair is started; or if the
structure has been damaged, before the damage occurred.  For the purposes of
this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.  The term does not, however, include either any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.



   TRANSITION SECTION.  Reaches of the stream or floodway where water
flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94; Am. Ord. 859, passed 8-21-95; Am. Ord. 919, passed 11-4-96)



§ 153.03  INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The Building and Zoning Officer shall be responsible for
fulfilling all of the duties listed in §§ 153.15 through 153.26.



   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the Building and Zoning Officer first
should use the criteria listed in § 153.35, Base Flood Elevations, to
determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once
it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the
Building and Zoning Officer must determine whether the development site is
within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain
on which no floodway has been identified.  If the site is within a flood
fringe, the village shall require  that the minimum requirements of §§
153.45 through 153.48 be met.  If the site is within a floodway, the
Building and Zoning Officer  shall require that the minimum requirements of
§§ 153.55 through 153.63 be met.  If the site is located within a SFHA or
flood plain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the
Building and Zoning Officer shall require that the minimum requirements of
§§ 153.70 through 153.76 be met.



   (C)   In addition, the general requirements of §§ 153.85 through
153.85 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of §§
153.45 through 153.76.  The Building and Zoning Officer shall assure that
all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of § 153.95.



   (D)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Building
and Zoning Officer shall review the requirements of § 153.96 to make sure
they are met.  In addition, the Building and Zoning Officer shall complete
all notification requirements.



   (E)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as
required in this chapter, the Building and Zoning Officer may take any and
all actions as outlined in § 153.98.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.04  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.  Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This
chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the
SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.  This chapter does not create
liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.05  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions.  Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.  This
chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was
adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not
intended to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to
establish initial eligibility for the program.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION



§ 153.15  DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the
following duties in this subchapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.16  DETERMINING FLOOD PLAIN DESIGNATION.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall check all new development sites
to determine whether they are in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).  If
they are in a SFHA, he or she shall determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been
conducted which drains more than one square mile.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.17  REVIEW BY ENGINEER.



   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on
which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one
square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional
engineer (P.E.) under the employ or contract of the village for review to
ensure that the development meets the requirements of §§ 153.55 through
153.63.  In the case of an appropriate use,  the P.E. shall state in
writing that the development meets the requirements of §§ 153.55 through
153.63.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.18  DAM SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall ensure that a DWR dam safety
permit has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is
required, if the proposed development activity includes construction of a dam
as defined in § 153.02.  Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.19  ADDITIONAL PERMITS.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall ensure that any and all required
federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a
flood plain development permit.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.20  PLAN REVIEW AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall ensure that all development
activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter and issue a flood plain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this
community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.21  INSPECTION REVIEW.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall inspect all development projects
before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the
structure and to ensure they comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.22  ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATES.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall maintain in the permit files an
elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to
which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing
certificate, for all buildings subject to §§ 153.85 through 153.88 of this
chapter for public inspection and provide copies of same.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.23  RECORDS FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall maintain for public inspection
and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps,
copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation,
conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map
amendment and “as built” elevation and floodproofing or elevation and
floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this
chapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.24  STATE PERMITS.



   (A)   Subject to division (B), the Building and Zoning Officer shall
ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois
Division of Water Resources, for all development projects subject to §§
153.55 through 153.76 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has
been delegated to the Building and Zoning Officer.  Upon acceptance of this
chapter by DWR and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as
per 92 Ill. Adm. Code 708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and
flood plain when floodways have not been defined in §§ 153.55 through
153.76 of this chapter.



   (B)   However, the following review approvals are not delegated to
the village and shall require review or permits from DWR:



      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per
the Illinois Compiled Statutes;



      (2)   Department of Transportation projects, dams or
impoundment structures as defined in § 153.02 and all other state, federal
or local unit of government projects, including projects of the village and
county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of § 153.63;



      (3)   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or
culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, per § 153.59(E);



      (4)   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to §
153.99(D);



      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in § 153.69(A), (B) and (H);



      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;



      (7)   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway
locations; and,



      (8)   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.25  COOPERATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall cooperate with state and federal
flood plain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
submit data to DWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency for proposed
revisions of a regulatory map; submit reports as required for the National
Flood Insurance Program; and notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency
of any proposed amendments to this chapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.26  PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The Building and Zoning Officer shall promulgate rules and regulations
as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, 
subject however to the review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any ordinance
changes.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



BASE FLOOD ELEVATION



§ 153.35  DESIGNATION OF BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   (A)   This chapter's protection standard is based on the Flood
Insurance Study for the village.  If a base flood elevation or 100-year
frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the
protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in
the Illinois State Water Survey's Flood Plain Information Repository.  When
a party disagrees with the best available data, that party may finance the
detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to DWR and FEMA.



   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of the Des Plaines River, DuPage River and Rock Run Creek South shall
be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Will County, County
Wide Flood Insurance Study of the village prepared by FEMA and dated
September 6, 1995, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation for the SFHAs of the Illinois River, Des Plaines River, Dresden
Run, Collins Run and Aux Sable Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year
flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Grundy County prepared by FEMA
and dated July 18, 1985, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.



   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of County prepared by FEMA and dated September 6, 1995, and
such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from
time to time.  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Grundy County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Grundy County prepared by FEMA and dated July 18, 1985,
and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.



   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
SFHA delineated as an AH Zone or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the village.



   (E)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an A Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map of the village shall be according to the best existing data available in
the Illinois State Water Survey Flood Plain Information Repository.  When no
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined
from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as
HIP.  The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a
hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in
various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for
estimating peak flood discharges.  Flood flows should be based on
anticipated future land use conditions in the watershed as determined from
adopted local and regional land use plans. Along any watercourses draining
more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to DWR for
approval; once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water
Survey Floodplain Information Repository for Filing.  For a nonriverine
SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus
three feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by
the Illinois State Water Survey.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94; Am. Ord. 859, passed 8-21-95; Am. Ord. 919, passed 11-4-96)



OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD    FRINGE AREAS



§ 153.45  WHEN OCCUPATION AND USE PERMITTED.



   Development in or filing of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage and other provisions of  this
chapter are met.  No use will be permitted which adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems.  Developments located within the
flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the
requirements of §§ 153.85 through 153.88.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.46  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.47  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Inspector.  The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and
legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer,
architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M.S.L. 1929 adj.
datum or N.G.V.D. and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or
filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
building.  For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the
submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of
§§ 153.85 through 153.88 of this chapter.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Building
Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation.  Any development located on land that
can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the
site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.  The Building
Official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior
to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.



   (C)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas shall be submitted.  This plan  shall include a description of the
sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control
measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects.  This plan shall also
include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and
the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance.



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant, copies of all other local, state and federal permits,
approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type
of activity. The Building Inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other
local, state and federal permits have been obtained.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.48  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   (A)   No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to
public health and safety.



   (B)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient
data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the flood plain.



   (C)   Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation.  The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.  In the case of streams
and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the
areas so filled or occupied.  All flood plain storage lost below the
existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed
ten-year flood elevation.  All flood plain storage lost above the existing
ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood
elevation.  All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS



§ 153.55  REGULATORY FLOODWAYS.



   This subchapter applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway.  The
regulatory floodway for the DuPage River and Rock Run Creek South shall be as
delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR according and
referenced in § 153.02.  Only those uses and structures will be permitted
which meet the criteria in this section.  All floodway modifications shall
be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project.  The
development shall also meet the requirements of §§ 153.85 through 153.88.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.56  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUESTED.



   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state
law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.57  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Inspector.  The application shall include the
following information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



      (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;



      (4)   Description of proposed activity;



      (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;



      (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



      (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject
property if different from the applicant;



      (8)   Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;



      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or
other authorized officer shall sign the application form;



      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall
sign the application form; and



      (11)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer
shall sign the name of the trustee by him/her as trust officer.  A
disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each
beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective
interests therein.



   (B)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum:



      (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



      (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of
the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum
or N.G.V.D., adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access
roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water),
regulatory floodway limit, flood plain limit, specifications and dimensions
of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of
cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;



      (3)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);



      (4)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas.  This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects.  This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.



      (5)   A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect
any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.



   (C)   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development shall be provided.



   (D)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of §
153.58.



   (E)   If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until DWR has indicated
conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change.  No structures
may be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.



   (F)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and
existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any
proposed excavation or filling, and flood plain and floodway limits; sealed
by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
building; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §§ 153.85 through 153.88
of this chapter.



   (G)   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:



      (1)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;



      (2)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;



      (3)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts
the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body
of water affected;



      (4)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts
each feasible alternative identified in § 153.59(D)(1) of this chapter would
have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;



      (5)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of
the body of water affected.



   (H)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits and
approvals that may be required for this type of activity.  The Building
Inspector shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal
and state permits have been obtained.  A registered professional engineer,
under the employ or contract of the village shall review and approve
applications reviewed under this section.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.58  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES; APPROPRIATE USES.



   (A)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation,
and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in
flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic
habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation
methods as called for in this chapter.  Only those appropriate uses listed
in 92 Ill. Adm. Code 708 will be allowed.  Appropriate uses do not include
the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to
accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including
landscaping or planting designed  to act  as a fence) and storage of
materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use.



   (B)   The approved appropriate uses are as follows:



      (1)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public
works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding,
erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;



      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or
requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment
facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating,
commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;



      (3)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;



      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities;



      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including
open air pavilions.



      (6)   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable
accessory structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that
will not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;



      (7)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways,
runways and taxiways and any modification thereto;



      (8)   Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth
of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed one foot)
and aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;



      (9)   Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a
positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse.



      (10)   Flood proofing activities to protect previously
existing lawful structures including the construction of water tight window
wells, elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around
residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside
toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior
wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial
improvements to the structure.



      (11)   In the case of damaged or replacement buildings,
reconstruction or repairs made to the building that are valued at less than
50% of the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced,
and which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building.



      (12)   Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do
not increase the building's foot print and are valued at less than 50% of the
market value of the building.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.59  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS FOR APPROPRIATE USES.



   (A)   Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory
floodway maps designated by DWR, the construction of an appropriate use will
be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the
engineering and mitigation criteria set forth by this section and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a
registered professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the
protection requirements of §§ 153.85 through 153.88 of this chapter.



   (B)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood
stages upstream.  For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert
crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway
conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up
to and including the 100-year frequency flood.  In calculating effective
regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:



      (1)   Regulatory floodway conveyance,




         “K” = 1.486 AR2/3




              n



where “n” is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the
cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See
Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York)



      (2)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for  both
existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with
a federal, state or local unit of government can assure the proposed
conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative
to a nonvegetative land cover.



      (3)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance.  The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer
can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:



         (a)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a
wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate
of one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length.



         (b)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a
narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length.



         (c)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of
stream length shall be used.



         (d)   Transition sections shall be provided between
cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the
regulatory floodway delineation on adjacent properties.



         (e)   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall
be located perpendicular to flood flows.



   (C)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase
downstream flooding.  Compensatory storage shall be provided for any
regulatory floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of
fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control
projects.  Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at
least 1.5 times the volume of flood plain storage lost.  Artificially
created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall
not be required to be replaced.  The compensatory regulatory floodway
storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the
proposed 100-year flood elevation.  All regulatory floodway storage lost
below the existing ten year flood elevation shall be replaced below the
proposed ten-year flood elevation.  All regulatory floodway storage lost
above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
proposed ten-year flood elevation.  All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.  If the
compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to DWR through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.  Finally, there shall be
no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification,
unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing
structure.



   (D)   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase
stream erosion or flood heights. For all appropriate uses, except bridges or
culverts or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an
increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
However in the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for
the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows,
velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.



   (E)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches.  The proposed structures shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls
or within recorded flood easements.  If the proposed construction will
increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must
contact DWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam safety permit or waiver.



      (1)   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must
be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations
for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in § 153.35 of this
chapter.  Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart
for the Selection of Highway Culverts.  Bridges must be analyzed using the
U.S.  DOT/Federal  Highway  Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways
calculation procedures.



      (2)   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per
division (B) of this section.



      (3)   Velocity increases must be mitigated per division (C) of
this section.



      (4)   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is
used for recreational or commercial navigation, a Department of
Transportation permit must be received.



      (5)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to DWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by § 153.58.



      (6)   All excavations for the construction of the crossing
shall be designed per division (H) of this section.



   (F)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts
and approach roads.



      (1)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach
reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1
foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood
frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure
is not a source of flood damage.



      (2)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach
is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream flood
plain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning
the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.



      (3)   The determination as to whether or not the existing
crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be
prepared in accordance with the Department of Transportation Rules 92 Ill.
Adm. Code 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted
to the Division for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.



   (G)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water.  Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including  the  100-year  frequency    event  shall  be contained
within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the
channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees
or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or letter
indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from DWR, Dam Safety
Section for a dam safety permit or waiver for any structure built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All
dams and impoundment structures as defined in § 153.02 shall meet the
permitting requirements of 92 Ill. Adm. Code 702 (Construction and
Maintenance of Dams).  If the proposed activity involves a modification of
the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be
demonstrated that:



      (1)   The impoundment is determined to be in the public
interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional
stormwater detention;



      (2)   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;



      (3)   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions.  Impoundment design should include
gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a
pre-sedimentation basin.



      (4)   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in
the upstream watershed to control the effect of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other
pollutants.  If there is more than one municipality in the upstream
watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should
coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control;



      (5)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
§ 153.55.



   (H)   Flood proofing of existing habitable, residential and
commercial structures.  If construction is required beyond the outside
dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the
floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet from the
outside of the building.  Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will
not be required for floodproofing activities.



   (I)   Excavation in the floodway. When excavation is proposed in the
design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for
lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation.  The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency.



      (1)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length;



      (2)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length; and



      (3)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of
stream length shall be used.



      (4)   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland
upstream and downstream of the transition sections.



   (J)   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it
shall be demonstrated that:



      (1)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity
which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions
of the body of water affected.  Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, flood proofing of existing structures, removal of structures
from the flood plain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the
establishment of a stream side buffer strip of green belt.  Channel
modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions
and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;



      (2)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions
would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant
habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement
of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;



      (3)   The  activity  has  been  planned  and designed and
will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the
natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the
following criteria:



         (a)   The physical characteristics of the modified
channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in
length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity.  If the existing channel has
been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions
should be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.



         (b)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be
provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed
such that they will prevent erosion.



         (c)   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used
when feasible.  Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be
limited to one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading
and stabilization effects of the vegetation.



         (d)   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that
which is essential for construction of the channel.



         (e)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side
slope no steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. 
Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization.  Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials.  Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.



         (f)   All disturbed areas associated with the
modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
completion of construction.  Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall
be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of
the vegetative cover.



         (g)   If the existing channel contains considerable
bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features,
such features shall be provided in the new channel.  Spawning and nesting
areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be
established where appropriate.



         (h)  A sediment basin shall  be  installed at the
downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of
downstream water quality.



         (i)   New or relocated channels should be built in the
dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed
prior to diversion of water into the new channel.



         (j)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity
as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood
unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an
increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control
project.



         (k)   Unless the modification is for a public flood
control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater
storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and



      (4)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
Section 800.



   (K)   Seeding and stabilization plan.  For all activities located
in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the
applicant.



   (L)   Soil erosion and sedimentation measures.  For all activities
in the floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:



      (1)   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible.  Construction shall be scheduled to minimize
the time soil is exposed and unprotected.  In no case shall the existing
natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days
prior to the initiation of improvements.



      (2)   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization shall be
applied to denuded areas as soon as possible.  As a minimum, soil
stabilization shall be provided within 15 days after final grade is reached
on any portion of the site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not
be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.



      (3)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before
any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the
movement of eroded sediments off site or into the channel.  Potential
sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check
dams, diversion ditches, and sediment basins.



      (4)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width
shall be preserved or reestablished, where possible, along existing channels
(see division (P)).  Construction vehicle use of channels shall be
minimized.  Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where
necessary, to minimize erosion.  Necessary construction in or along channels
shall be restabilized immediately.



      (5)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois  (1988), also known as
the “Green Book,” and    Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control (IEPA, 1987).



   (M)   Public flood control projects.  For public flood control
projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met
if the applicant can demonstrate to DWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or
easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event.



   (N)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations:



      (1)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the
regulatory floodway study, referenced in § 153.35 must be used for analysis
of the base conditions.  If the study data appears to be in error or
conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence
on the appropriate base conditions data to use.



      (2)   If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the
site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream
receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall
be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency
flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with
the receiving stream at normal water elevations.



      (3)   If the applicant learns from  DWR,  local governments
or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is
scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control
project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the
next five years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to
meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and
the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood
control project is built.



   (O)   Conditional letter of map revision.  If the appropriate use
would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to DWR and to FEMA all
the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from DWR a
conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is
issued.  However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by
DWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by
FEMA and DWR.  In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with
the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before DWR approval
can be given.  No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.  No further development activities
shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by
FEMA and DWR.



   (P)   Professional engineer's supervision.  All engineering
analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered
professional engineer.



   (Q)   For all activities in the floodway involving the construction
within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:



      (1)   All natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved
within at least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.



      (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip
during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall
be established upon completion of construction.



      (3)   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in
the buffer strip.  Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when
necessary, for stream maintenance purposes.  After receipt of conditional
approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit and a
conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the
regulatory floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or
other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area
until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of map
revision is received.  The regulatory floodway map will be revised upon
acceptance and concurrence by DWR and FEMA of the “as built” plans.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.60  STATE REVIEW.



   (A)   For those projects listed below located in a regulatory
floodway, the criteria set forth in this section shall be submitted to DWR
for their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit.



   (B)   DWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile
due to a proposed bridge pursuant to § 153.59 (E).



   (C)   DWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing
bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analyses
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to § 153.59(F).



   (D)   The DWR will review alternative transition sections and
hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to § 153.59(B), (C) and (I).



   (D)   The DWR will review and approve prior to the start of
construction any department projects, dams (as defined in § 153.02) and all
other state, federal or local units of government projects, including
projects of the municipality or county.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.61  OTHER PERMITS.



   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development
permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from DWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5 et seq.  No
permit from DWR shall be required if the Division has delegated
responsibility  to the village.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.62  DAM SAFETY PERMITS.



   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam
as defined in § 153.02 per 92 Ill. Adm. Code 702 (Rules for Construction of
Dams) shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources Dam Safety permit
prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the Building Inspector finds
a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the Building Inspector shall
immediately notify the Dam Safety Section of the Division of Water
Resources.  If the Building Inspector finds a dam which is believed to be in
unsafe condition, the Building Inspector shall immediately notify the owner
of the dam, DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield and the Illinois Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA).



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.63  ACTIVITIES THAT DO NOT REQUIRE ENGINEER'S REVIEW.



   (A)   The activities set forth by this section may be permitted
without a registered professional engineer's review.  Such activities shall
still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation
requirements.



   (B)   Underground and overhead utilities that:



      (1)   Do not result in any increase in existing ground
elevations; or



      (2)   Do not require the placement of above ground structures
in the floodway; or



      (3)   In the case of the underground stream crossings, the top
of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the
existing stream bed; and



      (4)   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers
are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to
catch debris.



   (C)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:



      (1)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing
adjacent natural bank slope;



      (2)   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and



      (3)   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the
outfall location.



   (D)   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground



equipment and patios at grade.



   (E)   Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:



      (1)   Does not exceed 1000 feet in length.



      (2)   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of
bank.



      (3)   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the
cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.



      (4)   Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the
preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.  Where high
channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials.  Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and
gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.



   (F)   Temporary stream crossings in which:



      (1)   The approach roads will be one-half foot or less above
natural grade.



      (2)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without
backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any
drainage tile or outfall invert.



      (3)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at
least two feet below the top of the lowest bank.  Any fill in the channel
shall be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.



      (4)   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.



      (5)   The access road and temporary crossings  will  be 
removed  within  one  year  after authorization.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED



§ 153.70  WHEN OCCUPATION AND USE PERMITTED.



   In SFHA or flood plains, (including AO, AH or unnumbered A zones) where
no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a
square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect
of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses
and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and
passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.71  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or flood plain without
first obtaining a development permit from the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.72  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Inspector.  The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and
existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation
of filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevation at the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of §§ 153.85 through 153.88 of this chapter.



   (B)   The application for a development permit shall also include
the following information.



      (1)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its
purpose, and intended use;



      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area:



      (3)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



      (4)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:



         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity,
name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the
site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment)
datum or N.G.V.D., adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel
(when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of
water), flood plain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north
arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;



         (c)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation,
100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical); and



         (d)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas.  This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects.  This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.



      (5)   Engineering calculations and supporting data  shall
be  submitted  showing  that  the  proposed work will meet the criteria
of § 153.74.



      (6)   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits,
approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type
of activity.  The Building Inspector shall not issue the development permit
unless all required local, state and federal permits have been obtained.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.73  COMPARISON TO BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois
State Water Survey's Flood Plain Information Repository, the Building
Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation.  Should no elevation information exist
for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation
according to § 153.35 (E).  Any development located on land that can be
shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the site's
first Flood Insurance Rate Map Identification is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.  The Building
Official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior
to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.74  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined
shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat.  Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.75  STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE SFHA WHERE FLOODWAY HAS NOT BEEN
DETERMINED.



   (A)   Within all riverine SFHA's where the floodway has not been
determined, the standards set forth by this section shall apply.



   (B)   The developer shall have a registered professional engineer
state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations and data
that the project meets the engineering requirements of § 153.59 (A) through
(M) for the entire flood plain as calculated under the provisions of §
153.35 (E) of this chapter.  As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that
engineering study to DWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway.  Upon
acceptance of their floodway by the Department, the developer shall then
demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of § 153.55 for the
regulatory floodway.  The floodway shall be defined according to the
definition in § 153.02 of this chapter.



   (C)   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a permit from DWR or written documentation that a permit is not
required from DWR.



   (D)   No permit from DWR shall be required if the Division has
delegated permit responsibility to the village per 92 Ill. Adm. Code, Part
708 for regulatory floodways, per DWR's statewide permit entitled
“Construction in Flood Plains with No Designated Floodways in Northeastern
Illinois.”



   (E)   Dam safety permits.  Any work involving the construction,
modification or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water
as defined in § 153.02 shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources
dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the
start of construction of a dam.  If the Building Inspector finds a dam that
does not have a DWR permit, the Building Inspector shall immediately notify
the Dam Safety Section of the Division of Water Resources.  If the Building
Inspector finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the
Building Inspector shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the
Illinois Emergency Services and District Agency (ESDA), and the DWR, Dam
Safety Section in Springfield.



   (F)   The following activities may be permitted without a Registered
Professional Engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and
regulatory floodway.  Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter.



      (1)    Underground and overhead utilities that:



         (a)   Do not result in any increase in existing ground
elevations; or



         (b)   Do not require the placement of above ground
structures in the floodway; or



         (c)   In the case of the underground stream crossings,
the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the
existing stream bed; and



         (d)   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting
towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as
not to catch debris.



      (2)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:



         (a)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the
existing adjacent natural bank slope; and



         (b)   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation;
and



         (c)   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at
the outfall location.



      (3)   Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that:



         (a)   Does not exceed 1000 feet in length or two cubic
yards per lineal foot of streambed.



         (b)   Materials are not placed higher than the existing
top of bank.



         (c)   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the
cross-sectional area of the stream channel by more than 10%.



         (d)   Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes
are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.  Where
high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials.  Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and
gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.



      (4)   Temporary stream crossings in which:



         (a)   The approach roads will be 0.5-foot or less above
natural grade.



         (b)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass
without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above
any drainage tile or outfall invert.



         (c)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be
at least two feet below the top of the lowest bank.  Any fill in the channel
shall be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.



         (d)   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or
otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon
removal of construction.



         (e)   The access road and temporary crossings will be
removed within one year after authorization.



      (5)   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures;



      (6)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic
fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at
grade;



      (7)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or
below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of flood waters;



      (8)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not
exceeding 70 square feet in size, nor ten feet in any one dimension (such as,
animal shelters and tool sheds);



      (9)   The construction of additions to existing buildings
which do not increase the first floor area by more than 20%, which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and
which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are
parallel to the flow of flood waters;



      (10)    Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:



         (a)   The affected length of stream is less than 1000
feet.



         (b)   The work is confined to reestablishing flows in
natural stream channels, or



         (c)   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel
conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.



   (G)   The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.76  COMPENSATORY STORAGE.



   Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use, the volume
of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and
balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.  The excavation volume
shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the
fill or structure.  In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation
shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.  All
flood plain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced below the proposed ten-year flood plain elevation.  All flood plain
storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced
above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.  All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



PERMIT REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLETO ALL FLOOD PLAIN AREAS



§ 153.85  APPLICABILITY.



   In addition to the requirements found in §§ 153.45 through 153.76,
for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways, and SFHA or flood
plains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30,
A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements of this subchapter
shall be met.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.86  PUBLIC HEALTH STANDARDS.



   (A)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers,
flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below
the FPE.



   (B)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary
sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.87  CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.



   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourses shall be maintained.  In addition, the village shall notify
adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for
the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.88  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All buildings located within a 100-year flood plain also known
as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation.  However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway
shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in §
153.58.  This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building;



      (2)   A structural alteration to an existing building that
either increases the first floor area by more than 20% or the building's
market value by more than 50%;



      (3)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site.  This building protection requirement
does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (4)   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days.



   This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following
methods.



   (B)   A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:



      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or
above the flood protection elevation.



      (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
foot deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation.  The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation.  However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures.  The fill shall be protected against erosion
and scour.  The fill shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.



   (C)   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl
space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to
flood waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood.  The permanent openings shall be no more
than one foot above grade, and consist of a minimum of two openings.  The
openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation.



      (2)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored
and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice
and floating debris.



      (3)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.  The lowest floor
(including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above
the flood protection elevation.  Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the flood protection elevation.



      (4)   No area below the flood protection elevation shall be
used for storage of items or materials.



      (5)   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed
on a site for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood
protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and
regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77
Ill. Adm. Code 870.



   (D)   (1)   Only a nonresidential building may be structurally
dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered
professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally
dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.  The building design
shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or
ice.  Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and
similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this
division).



      (2)   Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing
single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor below the
flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The building is not used for human habitation.



         (b)   All areas below the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. 
Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall be constructed and placed
on a building site so as  not  to  block  the flow of flood waters and
shall also meet the appropriate use criteria of §§ 153.55 through 153.63. 
In addition, all other requirements of §§ 153.45 through 153.48, 153.55
through 153.63 and 153.70 through 153.76 must be met.



         (c)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent
flotation.



         (d)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.



         (e)   The building shall be valued at less than $5,000
and be less than 500 square feet in floor size. 



         (f)   The building shall be used only for the storage of
vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or
similar uses.



   (E)   Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may
remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered.  A
nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or
man-made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of its market
value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS; VARIANCES



§ 153.95  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards,
to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land
management, use and development.



   (B)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be
reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
153.45 through 153.88 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood
damage.  Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned
unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered
professional engineer that the plant or plans account for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act, ILCS Ch. 765, Act
205 § 2.



   (C)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks,
travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to
manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. 
Where this information is not available from an existing study filed with the
Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible
for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per §
153.35(E) and the floodway delineation per the definition in § 153.02 and
submitting it to the State Water Survey and DWR for review and approval as
best available regulatory data.



   (D)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels.  Wherever possible, the flood plains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.



   (E)   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any Planned Unit
Development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits
unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.96  VARIANCES.



   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
regulatory floodway as defined in § 153.02.  However, when a development
proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the
standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development
proposal, the applicant may apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a
variance.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of
Trustees.



   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that:



      (1)   The  development  activity  cannot  be located
outside the SFHA;



      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance
were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health,
safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or
creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief
operations, policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities,
or other public facilities;



      (6)   The provisions of §§ 153.48 and 153.74 through 153.76
of this chapter shall still be met;



      (7)   The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;



      (8)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not
represent a general problem, and



      (9)   The granting of the variance will not alter the
essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of §§ 153.85 through 153.88 that
would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:



      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of
these risks and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing that he
assumes the risk and liability.



   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site
or building listed on the National Register of Historical Places or
documented as worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation
Agency may be granted using criteria more  permissive than the requirements
of § 153.95(B) and (C).



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.98  VIOLATION.



   (A)   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or
conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter.  Upon due investigation, the Building Inspector may determine that
a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist.  The Building
Inspector shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.



   (B)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the
violation:



      (1)   The village may make application to the Circuit Court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other
order as the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.



      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined as provided in § 153.99.



      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (4)   The village may record a notice of violation on the
title to the property.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.



   (D)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations.  All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter  shall, 
upon  conviction  thereof,  be fined not less than $50 nor more than $1000
for each offense.



(Ord. 553, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 703, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 789, passed
1-24-94)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Title



   154.02   Effect of chapter



   154.03   Jurisdiction



   154.04   Interpretation



   154.05   Definitions



   154.06   Effect on existing plats and site plans



   154.07   Prohibition of subdivision



   154.08   Prohibition of development



   154.09   Offerings or dedications; plan of future development



   154.10   Variances



   154.11   Enforcement



   154.12   Amendments



   154.13   Resubdivision of land



   154.14   Vacation of plats



   154.15   Publication



Procedure for Approval



   154.20   Pre-application procedure



   154.21   Preliminary plat or preliminary site plan



   154.22   Final plat or final site plan



   154.23   Standards for review of plats and site plans



   154.24   Final site plan approval for commercial and industrial lots



Design Standards



   154.30   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations



   154.31   Streets and alleys



   154.32   Easements



   154.33   Blocks



   154.34   Lots



   154.35   Building setback lines



   154.36   Construction roads



Required Land Improvements



   154.45   Statement certifying improvements



   154.46   Monuments and markers



   154.47   Street improvements



   154.48   Utilities



   154.49   Public utilities



   154.50   Sidewalks



   154.51   Landscaping



   154.52   Driveways



   154.53   Traffic-control devices



Engineering Specifications



   154.60   Standards



   154.61   Sewers



   154.62   [Reserved]



   154.63   Water supply



   154.64   Trench backfill



   154.65   Street improvements



   154.66   Alleys



   154.67   Sidewalks



   154.68   Street lighting improvements



Streets and Public Improvements



   154.75   Completion of improvements



   154.76   Inspection and construction review



   154.77   Acceptance of streets and improvements



Dedication of Lands



   154.85   Dedication of park lands and school sites required; payment
of fees in lieu thereof; formula



   154.86   Density



   154.87   Reservation of additional land for public purposes



   154.88   Combination with adjoining development



   154.89   Topography and grading



   154.90   Improved sites



   154.91   Prerequisite to annexation agreement



   154.92   Time of payment



   154.93   Method of payment



   154.94   Indemnification; hold harmless and release



   154.95   [Reserved]



   154.96   Accounting of funds



   154.97   Periodic review



 



   154.98   Violations



   154.99   Penalty



   Appendix A: Certification Forms for Final Plat



   Appendix B: Table of Minimum Standards for Street Design



   Appendix C: Curb and gutter section



   Appendix D: School site and park site fees



   Appendix E: Sanitary Sewer Material Standards and Specifications



   Appendix F: Storm Sewer Material Standards and Specifications



   Appendix G: Water Supply Material Standards and Specifications



   Appendix H: Curb and Gutter Material Standards and Specifications



   Appendix I: Street Light Material Standards and Specifications



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  TITLE.



   The title of this chapter shall be “Subdivision and Development
Regulations for the Village of Channahon, Will County, Illinois.”



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 278, passed 3-1-82; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.02  EFFECT OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter repeals Ordinance No. 117 entitled “Subdivision
Regulations for the Village of Channahon, Illinois” passed and approved
June 3, 1973.  This chapter, together with the Official Comprehensive Plan
Map, forms a part of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of
Channahon, Ordinance No. 115, passed and approved on May 7, 1973.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.03  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   These regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions,
resubdivision, and development of residential or nonresidential territory
within the corporate limits of the village and contiguous unincorporated
territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits
and not included in any other municipality. 



   (B)   In the event of overlapping jurisdiction with other
municipalities within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the
village, the extent of jurisdiction of the village shall be as determined and
agreed upon between the municipalities or as provided by statute.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 278, passed 3-1-82; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.04  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter
with respect to the use of land are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any provisions of any other
ordinance or any law, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the
regulations that are more restrictive or that impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.



   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate the provisions of any
easement, covenant, or any other private agreement with respect to the use of
land, but no such provision shall operate to lessen the restrictions or lower
the standards as provided in this chapter.



   (D)   If any subchapter, section, division, sentence, clause, phrase
or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.



   (E)   Any proposed plat of subdivision or site plan otherwise in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be disapproved where the
Planning and Zoning Commission, after full examination and review, makes a
definite determination that such proposed subdivision or development would be
in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan or detrimental to the best interest
of the public health, safety, or welfare.



   (F)   Any subdivision or development of land that was not lawfully
existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall not be made lawful
solely by reason of the adoption of this chapter, and to the extent that
subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with the requirements of
this chapter, said subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve
as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.



   APPLICANT.  The person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity seeking approval to subdivide or develop a parcel, including the owner
of record, contract purchasers, subdividers, developers and other persons
having a proprietary interest in the parcel and their successors.



   BLOCK.  A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines
or shore lines of waterways, or the corporate limits of the village.



   BUILDING.  Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind, and that is
permanently affixed to the land.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR.  The Building Inspec- tor of the village.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line indicating the minimum horizontal
distance between the property line and building, either at the front or side
of the lot.



   COLLECTOR THOROUGHFARE.  A street that carries traffic from minor
streets to the thoroughfare system, or between secondary thoroughfares, and
is so designated as a collector thoroughfare on the Comprehensive Plan.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The general comprehensive plan of the village,
including the Official Comprehensive Plan Map and the provisions of this
chapter.



   CONCEPT PLAN.  Plan filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission,
prior to the filing of a preliminary plat or preliminary site plan, that
shall contain such information as set forth in Section 1 of Article II.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The President and the Trustees of the village.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  Local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the convenient reversal of traffic movement.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any construction, building or improvement on a parcel of
land, or substantial change in any existing structures, including planned
unit developments.



   EASEMENT.  A right or privilege in the real property of another.



   FINAL PLAT.  A plat of subdivision meeting the requirements of §
154.22 in the form proposed or approved for recording.



   FRONTAGE.  Length of the property line of the lot, lots or tract of
land abutting a public street, road, highway or rural right-of-way.



   GRADE.  The slope of a road, street or other public way, as specified
by percentage.



   LOT.  A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.



   LOT LINE.  A property boundary line of any subdivision lot or any
parcel of land held in separate ownership, except that where any portion of
the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, such portion of the lot
line thereof shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.



   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE.  A street of considerable continuity that serves
or is intended to serve as the principal traffic artery and is so designated
as a major thoroughfare on the Official Comprehensive Plan Map, generally
having limited access.  Owners or occupants of abutting property or lands
and other persons have no legal right of access to or from these
thoroughfares, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined
by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway.



   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET .  A street which is parallel and adjacent to a
major or collector thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic, and is generally referred to as a
frontage road.



   MINOR STREET.  A street of limited continuity used primarily for
access to abutting properties and serving local needs of a neighborhood.



   OFFICIAL MAP.  The Official Comprehensive Plan Map of the village as
designated by this chapter.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity vested with the legal incidents of ownership with respect to the land
sought to be subdivided or developed under this chapter.



   PARCEL.  The tract of land that is the subject of an application under
this chapter.



   PARKWAY.  An unpaved area along or within a public right-of-way
reserved for the planting of grass, trees, shrubbery or otherwise ornamented
to provide a park-like character.



   PEDESTRIANWAYOR CROSSWALK.  A right- of-way across or within a block
for use by pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a pedestrianway,
crosswalk, or however otherwise designated, and may include utilities where
necessary.



   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.  The Planning and Zoning Commission of
the village.



   PLAT.  A plan, map, drawing or chart representing a plan for
subdivision of land and depicting the information required by this chapter.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The plat representing the plan of development of a
subdivision and containing the information required under § 154.22, intended
to provide preliminary approvals on which  the applicant can rely for
planning purposes.



   PRIVATE STREET.  Any street not dedicated or not to be dedicated for
public use.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.  Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch,
water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, planting strip,
off-street parking area, or other facility for whose maintenance and
operation the village may ultimately assume the ownership or responsibility.



   PUBLIC STREET.  Any street that is dedicated or is to be dedicated for
public use.



   RESUBDIVISION.  A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout on such map or
area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any
map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulation
controlling subdivisions.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, crosswalk, railroad line, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special
use.  The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land-platting purposes in the
village shall mean that every RIGHT-OF-WAY hereafter established and shown on
a final plat is to be separate and distinct from adjoining lots or parcels,
and not included within their dimensions of areas.



   ROADWAY.  A paved portion of a street available for vehicular traffic.



   SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE.  A street of considerable continuity that
serves or is intended to serve as a principal traffic artery between the
various sections of the village, and is so designated as a secondary
thoroughfare on the Comprehensive Plan.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street or crosswalkway right-of-way paved
or otherwise surfaced and intended for pedestrian use only.



   SITE PLAN.  A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the applicant's
plan for the development of land is presented and which he or she submits for
approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   STREET.  A public or private right-of-way that affords a primary means
of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designed as a street,
avenue, highway, road, boulevard, thoroughfare, or however otherwise
designed, but excepting driveways to buildings and alleys.



   SUBDIVIDE.  The division of land into two or more parcels or lots,
including resubdivision.



   SUBDIVISION. 



      (1)   Any parcel of land, vacant or improved, that is divided
or is proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units,
plots or interest by any method, including planned unit developments; or



      (2)   Any construction, building or improvement on a parcel of
land or substantial change in any existing structures, including planned unit
developments.



   SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR.  The Director of Community Development or
his/her designee.



   THOROUGHFARE.  A street with a high degree of continuity, including
major, secondary and collector streets.



   VILLAGE ATTORNEY.  The Village Attorney of the village.



   VILLAGE BOARD.  The Board of Trustees of the village.



   VILLAGE CLERK.  The Village Clerk of the village.



   VILLAGE ENGINEER.  The Village Engineer of the village.



   ZONING ORDINANCE.  The Zoning Ordinance of the village as amended from
time to time.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 278, passed 3-1-82; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589, passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.06  EFFECT ON EXISTING PLATS AND SITE PLANS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the
plats, site plans, construction or designated use of any land or structure in
the event that:



   (A)   Final plat or site plan approval for such subdivision or
development was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this chapter,
or the effective date of any amendment thereof: and



   (B)   Such approval has not by its own terms expired prior to such
effective date; and



   (C)   Such approval was issued on the basis of an application
showing complete plans for proposed construction; and



   (D)   There has been a substantial change of position, substantial
expenditures, or incurrence of substantial obligation by applicant in
reliance of such approval; and



   (E)   Such change of position, expenditures or incurrence of
obligations were made prior to the published or actual notice of a proposed
amendment to this chapter, which amendment would have made illegal the
issuance of such approval; and



   (F)   Construction pursuant to such approval is completed prior to
the expiration of such approval.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.07  PROHIBITION OF SUBDIVISION.



   (A)   No person shall subdivide or resubdivide any parcel of land to
which this chapter applies within the planning jurisdiction of the village
until a subdivision plat, after review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, has received final plat approval by the corporate
authorities as required by this chapter except for a one time transfer of
less than one acre of adjoining and contiguous land which does not involve
new streets or easements of access provided that the land being transferred
is adjoining and contiguous to both parcels before and after the transfer and
all other Village Code requirements are met.



   (B)   No sale of any parcel of land creating a subdivision to which
this chapter applies shall be consummated until a subdivision plat, after
review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, has received
final plat approval by the corporate authorities as required by this chapter.



   (C)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any subdivided lot within the village
to which this chapter applies, until a plat of subdivision has been recorded
following review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
and after having received final plat approval by the corporate authorities as
required by this chapter.



      (1)   In any such subdivision the building permits shall not
issue:



         (a)   Prior to the time temporary street signs have been
installed; and



         (b)   Until any cash contribution in lieu of land
dedications provided in the final plat approval have been received; and



         (c)   Until any other conditions specified for final
approval have been satisfied. 



      (2)   No certificate of occupancy shall be granted for the use
of any building or structure on a parcel within the village and subject to
this chapter until:



         (a)   Roadways providing use to the parcel lots thereof
have been paved with an asphalt binder course; and



         (b)   Sidewalks and parkway landscaping have been
installed adjacent to said unit; and 



         (c)   Permanent street signs and street lights have been
installed along the open roads throughout the subdivision; and



         (d)   The required sanitary sewer and water facilities
have been installed and made ready for servicing the parcel.



   (D)   No person shall offer for recording any plat of subdivision to
which this chapter applies until such plat, after review and recommendation
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, has received final plat approval by
the corporate authorities as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1448,
passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. 1452, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1452, passed
12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1589, passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.08  PROHIBITION OF DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall commence or cause to be commenced any
development within the corporate limits or within the  planning 
jurisdiction of  the village, until a site plan, after review and
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, has received final site
plan approval by the corporate authorities as required by this chapter. 



   (B)   This requirement of site plan approval does not extend to any
of the following:



      (1)   Any development involving the construction of one
single-family dwelling or one multiple-family dwelling unit.



      (2)   Any nonresidential development under single ownership or
control involving the construction of any new buildings or structures of a
total floor area less than 500 square feet.



   (C)   (1)   No building permit shall be issued for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement on any parcel within
the village to which this chapter applies until a site plan, after review and
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, has received final site
plan approval by the corporate authorities as required by this chapter. 



      (2)   No certificate of occupancy shall be granted for the use
of any building or structure on any parcel of land within the village until
all conditions specified for site plan approval have been satisfied.



   (D)   No person, firm, business entity or corporation proposing to
develop a subdivision within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall
proceed with any construction or development work on the site of proposed
subdivision, until:



      (1)   The village has approved and recorded the final plat for
the proposed subdivision, and engineering plans;



      (2)    All fees, charges and contributions have been paid by
the developer;



      (3)   Letters of credit for public improvements have been
posted;



      (4)   All other required governmental permits have been
issued; and



      (5)   The developer has  otherwise fully complied with all
requisite village ordinances and regulations.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78, Am. Ord. 278, passed 3-1-82; Am. Ord. 787, passed
1-24-94; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.09  OFFERINGS OR DEDICATIONS; PLAN OF FUTURE DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   (1)   All offerings or dedications of land to the village
for use as streets, highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other
public uses shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
review and recommendation prior to acceptance by the corporate authorities or
by another municipal body. 



      (2)   Title with respect to all such offerings or dedications
of land shall be conveyed in fee simple to the village or as the corporate
authorities may direct.



   (B)   Where a tract or parcel of land proposed for subdivision is a
part of a larger parcel of land to be subdivided at a later date, the
applicant shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission, in addition to
the preliminary plat, a plan of future development for the remaining land.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.10  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Where the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that
extraordinary hardship or practical difficulties may result from the strict
compliance with these regulations, it may recommend variances to these
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured, provided that:



      (1)   Such variances shall have not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and



      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not recommend
variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to
it in each specific case that:



         (a)   The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other
property;



         (b)   The conditions upon which the request for a
variance are based are unique to property for which it is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property;



         (c)   Because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;



         (d)   The variances will not in any manner vary the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, Official Map or any
other village ordinance.



   (B)   In recommending variances, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall require such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially
the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.



   (C)   (1)   A written request for any such variance shall be
submitted by the applicant at the time when the preliminary plat or site plan
application is  filed for  the consideration of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. 



      (2)   The request shall state fully the grounds and all of the
facts relied upon by the applicant.



   (D)   The applicant shall pay any and all fees, costs and expenses
of the village and its duly authorized agent that are incurred by the village
in the processing of any and all applications pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 278, passed 3-1-82; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.11  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Subdivision Administrator shall:



   (A)   Be responsible for enforcing these subdivision regulations; and



   (B)   Bring any violation or lack of compliance herewith to the
attention of the corporate authorities.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.12  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Any amendments to this chapter shall be made by the corporate
authorities, but only following notice, a public hearing, and recommendations
from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 



   (B)   The notice of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation at least 15 and not more than 30 days prior
to the public hearing.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 639, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.13  RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.



   (A)   Procedure for resubdivision.  For any change in a map of an
approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street
layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot
line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption
of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such resubdivision shall be
approved by the Plan Commission and corporate authorities by the same
procedure, rules and regulations for a subdivision.



   (B)   Procedure for subdivision where future resubdivision is
indicated.



      (1)   Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the
subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land
and there are  indications that such  lots will eventually be resubdivided
into smaller building sites, the Planning and Zoning Commission or corporate
authorities may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening
of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets.



      (2)   Easements provided for the future opening and extension
of such streets may be made by requirement of the plat.



(Ord. 278, passed 3-1-82; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.14  VACATION OF PLATS.



   (A)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner
of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written
instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the
same to be vacated.



   (B)   (1)   Such an instrument shall be approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and corporate authorities in like manner as plats of
subdivisions. 



      (2)   The corporate authorities may reject any such instrument
that abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses,
improvements, streets or alleys.



   (C)   (1)   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or
approved, and recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and



      (2)   Being duly recorded or filed, such instrument shall
operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so
vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public
grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat.



   (D)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the
manner herein provided by all the owners in such plat joining in the
execution of such writing.



(Ord. 278, passed 3-1-82; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.15  PUBLICATION.



   (A)   This chapter is hereby published in pamphlet form as provided
by law. 



   (B)   The Village Clerk is ordered to make copies of this chapter
available to all interested parties, upon payment of such sums as the
corporate authorities shall determine to be adequate to reimburse the general
fund of the village for the cost of printing and distributing the same.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL



§ 154.20  PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   In order to discuss the general purpose of the subdivision
site plan or development in the context of established planning policies and
practices of the village and to insure that required data is properly
prepared and presented before expending the time and money in preparation and
review of a preliminary plat or site plan, any person desiring to subdivide
or develop land subject to this chapter, before filing a preliminary plat or
site plan, may file a concept plan of the subdivision site plan or
development with the Subdivision Administrator. 



   (B)   The concept plan shall contain such information as suggested
by the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to delineate the concept of
the subdivision site plan or development adequately, including but not
limited to, a plat of survey, a topographical map, soil information, current
aerial photographs and a sketch of the proposed development showing a road
system and general land use categories.



   (C)   It may also include information describing the subdivision
site plan proposal, such as the number of residential lots, typical lot width
and depth, business areas, school playground and park areas, other public
areas, proposed restrictive covenants, and proposed street and utilities
improvements. 



   (D)   The applicant may also request that he or she be placed on the
agenda of a regular Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, at which time he
or she shall submit the information specified above, but such request shall
be made not less than one week prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.21  PRELIMINARY PLAT OR PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN.



   (A)   Any applicant shall first file with the Subdivision
Administrator an application and four copies of a preliminary plan or
preliminary site plan not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in size. 



      (1)   Additional copies may be required as deemed necessary by
the Subdivision Administrator.



      (2)   At the time of concept plan review, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may authorize the simultaneous filing of an application for
preliminary and final plat or site plan approvals, without compliance with
separate procedures, in particular cases where the nature and scope of the
subdivision site plan or development proposed does not require separate
review procedures. 



      (3)   Preliminary plats containing  three  lots or less and
that do not involve the opening of any new streets may be exempted from the
requirement of the filing of a preliminary plat and may be submitted as a
final plat.



   (B)   (1)   Any applications for preliminary plat or preliminary
site plan approval shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which presentation
will be made. 



      (2)   The Subdivision Administrator:



         (a)   Shall determine whether the application and plat
or plan are in proper form; and



         (b)   Shall  not consider the application as filed
until:



            1.   All documents are in accordance with the
requirements as set forth herein; and



            2.   All filing fees have been paid; and



            3.   An executed Professional Fee Agreement and
the related deposit have been provided to the village in accordance with §
150.50.



   (C)   The following general information, where applicable, shall
be  shown on the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan unless waived by
the Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision site plan (which
shall not duplicate or resemble the name of any existing subdivision site
plan within a radius of five miles);



      (2)   Date of preparation, north point and scale of drawing,
which shall be one inch = 100 feet;



      (3)   An identification clearly stating that the map is a
preliminary subdivision site plan plat or a preliminary site plan;



      (4)   Legal description of the parcel;



      (5)   Names and addresses of the record owner or owners, the
applicant, and the Illinois-registered land surveyor or the licensed
professional engineer who prepared the plat, with the appropriate seal
affixed; and



      (6)   A vicinity map showing the general location of the
parcel within the village and environs.



   (D)   The following conditions, if found to exist on the parcel,
shall be shown on any preliminary plat or site plan unless waived by the
Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   The location, width and names of all streets within or
adjacent to the parcel together with easements, public utility and railroad
rights-of-way, and other important features, such as municipal boundary
lines, section lines, corners and monuments.



      (2)   Contour lines of the parcel and all adjacent land within
100 feet of the boundaries of the parcel showing intervals no greater than:



         (a)   One foot contour intervals for ground slopes less
than 0.5%;



         (b)   Two foot contour intervals for ground slope
greater than 0.5% but less than 2%; and



         (c)   Five foot contour intervals for ground slope
exceeding 5%.



      (3)   The location and direction of all watercourses and the
location of all areas subject to flooding, including:



         (a)   The flowlines of streams and channels showing
their normal shorelines and floodway limits;



         (b)   Lakes, ponds, swamps, marshes and any detention
basins showing their normal shorelines, floodway limits and lines of inflow
and outflow, if any; and



         (c)   Seeps, springs, flowings and wells. 



      (4)   Natural features, such as rock outcroppings, wooded
areas, and isolated, preservable trees one foot or more in diameter.



      (5)   Present uses of the parcel, including the location of
all existing structures, showing those that will be removed and those that
will remain on the parcel after the final plat is recorded or development
completed.



      (6)   (a)   The location and size of existing sanitary and
combined storm sewers water mains, culverts, drain pipes, catch basins,
manholes, hydrants and electric and gas lines within the parcel and in
adjacent streets or rights-of-way. 



         (b)   If water mains, sewers or electric or gas lines
are not on or adjacent to the parcel, indicate the direction and distance to,
and size of, the nearest usable facilities.



      (7)   Zoning classifications of the parcel and of lands
adjacent.



      (8)   Houses, barns, shacks and other significant improvements.



   (E)   The following improvements, if proposed or required, shall be
shown on the preliminary plat or site plan, or in supporting documents,
unless waived by the Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   Streets and rights-of-way, showing the location, widths,
number, names and approximate grades thereof;



      (2)   The preliminary plat shall show the relationship between
existing and proposed streets, and also show proposed walks, curbs and
gutters;



      (3)   Easements showing width and purpose;



      (4)   Lots showing approximate dimensions, minimum lot sizes
and proposed lot and block numbers;



      (5)   Preliminary engineering plan showing size and location
of sanitary, storm combined sewers, water mains, culverts and electric and
gas lines;



      (6)   Sites to be dedicated for school, park, playground or
other public purposes, together with appropriate acreage of each;



      (7)   Proposed building setback lines;



      (8)   Proposed grading plan of the parcel at intervals of not
more than two feet if the overall plan requires changes in the general
topography;



      (9)   The floor area and lot coverage of each building or
structure and the floor area ratio for each parcel that is the ratio of the
square footage of a building or structure to the square footage of the lot;



      (10)   Legally established centerline elevations; and



      (11)   Proposed public improvements, such as highways or other
major improvements, as planned by public authorities for future construction
on or near the parcel.



   (F)   The following supporting data shall be submitted in separate
statements or maps accompanying the preliminary plat or site plan, or, if
practical, such data may be shown on the preliminary plat or preliminary site
plan, unless waived by the Plan Commissions:   



      (1)   Proof of ownership of the parcel and applicant's
interest therein;



      (2)   A map extending for a minimum distance of 100 feet on
all sides of the parcel showing existing use and ownership of adjacent lands,
showing streets, rights-of-way and dedicated easements, locations of existing
structures and elevation of their foundations, approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls,
railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby residential land uses or
adverse influences;



      (3)   An aerial map:



         (a)   Showing the parcel to be subdivided or developed;



         (b)   Including a scale; and



         (c)   Showing the year in which the photograph was taken;



      (4)   Existing or proposed annexation agreement that pertains
to the parcel;



      (5)   Estimated cost of the development;



      (6)   Estimated construction and development schedule;



      (7)   Generalized landscaping plan;



      (8)   Proposed building types;



      (9)   Statement concerning methods of sewage waste disposal. 



         (a)   Where the sanitary sewage facilities are proposed
to be provided by individual septic systems, percolation tests shall be made
on the property in cooperation with the Will County Health Department. 



         (b)   A copy of the test results, together with the
recommendation of the Health Department as a minimum lot size, shall be made
available to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Engineer;



      (10)   Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping
centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings;



      (11)   [Reserved];



      (12)   (a)   Profile drawings of each stream, channel, pond
and basin on the parcel and on any adjoining land that may affect the layout
or drainage of the parcel for a minimum of 500 feet in each direction, up and
downstream, showing elevations of the following:



            1.   The bed;



            2.   Channel banks, if any;



            3.   Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets
and culverts into the stream, channel or basin; and



            4.   Flood of record elevation; and



         (b)   The applicant's engineer shall, in drawing his or
her profiles, extend or project the established fold of recorded elevation
upstream or downstream for a distance of 500 feet; and



      (13)   A preliminary drainage plan, designed to handle safely
the stormwater runoff, accompanied by maps or other descriptive material
showing the following:



         (a)   The extent and area of each watershed tributary to
the drainage channels of the parcel;



         (b)   Existing storm sewers and other storm drains to be
built and sizes;



         (c)   Existing streams and floodwater runoff channels to
be maintained, enlarged, altered, or eliminated, and new channels to be
constructed, their locations, cross sections, and profiles;



         (d)   Existing culverts and bridges, drainage areas,
elevations and adequacy of waterway openings and new culverts and bridges to
be built;



         (e)   Existing detention ponds and basins to be
maintained, enlarged, altered and new ponds or basins to be built with or
without dams or flow-retention devices; and



         (f)   Parking lots shall be so designed so as to not
store rain water for detention purposes.



   (G)   (1)   Upon the determination that the application and
preliminary plat or preliminary site plan are in proper form, the Subdivision
Administrator shall place the matter on a Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting agenda and notice shall be served on the applicant confirming the
time and place of the meeting at which the matter will be discussed. 



      (2)   The Village Engineer shall also be notified and supplied
with copies of the application, preliminary plat or preliminary site plan and
other documents.



   (H)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its written
report to the corporate authorities, recommending approval or disapproval of
the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan.



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its
report within 90 days from the date of the application or the filing by the
applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is
later, unless such time shall be extended by the mutual consent of the
applicant and the Planning and Zoning Commission. 



      (2)   If the recommendation is to disapprove, the report shall
set forth the reasons for its disapproval, and specify with particularity the
aspects in which the proposed plat or site plan fails to meet the standards
of § 154.23. 



      (3)   A copy of the report shall also be forwarded to the
applicant.



   (I)   The corporate authorities by resolution shall approve or
reject the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan within 30 days after its
next regularly scheduled meeting following the date of action of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, unless such time is extended by the mutual consent of
the applicant and the corporate authorities.



      (1)   If it rejects the plat or site plan, the resolution
shall set forth the reasons for its disapproval and specify with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat or site plan fails to
meet the standards of § 154.23. 



      (2)   A copy of the decision of the corporate authorities
shall be furnished to the applicant.



   (J)   Approval of the preliminary plat or plan by the corporate
authorities shall not qualify the plat or plan for recording, but shall be
considered permission to prepare the final plat or plan with detailed plans
and specifications for the proposed subdivision site plan or development. 



      (1)   Such preliminary approval shall be effective for no more
than one year from the date of approval, unless, upon application by the
applicant, the corporate authorities grant an extension of time for an
additional one year.



      (2)   Such application shall not require an additional filing
fee or the submission of additional copies of the plat or site plan. 



      (3)   The applicant may rely for planning purposes on any
aspect that has received preliminary plat approval during the effective
period.



   (K)   An applicant shall simultaneously file with the State
Department of Transportation, relevant local highway authority or the County
Health Department, as appropriate, a copy of the application for preliminary
approval of any proposed plat filed with the village. 



      (1)   The department or authority receiving the application
shall review the application based solely upon safety or access-control
standards and provide written approval or disapproval  to  the  Planning 
and  Zoning Commission and to the corporate authorities not later than 90
days from the date the application is received. 



      (2)   The 90-day period may be changed by mutual agreement.



      (3)   If disapproved, the department or authority shall
provide reasons for the disapproval related to safety or access control
standards, and identify improvements that will remove the disapproval. 



      (4)   The corporate authorities may approve the plat once the
improvements have been incorporated into the application, or in the event
that the department or authority fails to respond in writing to the village
within the 90-day period or other period established by mutual agreement.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 639, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589, passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.22  FINAL PLAT OR FINAL SITE PLAN.



   (A)   (1)   Within one year after receiving preliminary
subdivision site plan plat or site plan approval by the corporate
authorities, the applicant shall file with the Subdivision Administrator:



         (a)   An application for final plat or final site plan
approval;



         (b)   Four initial copies of a final plat or final site
plan not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in size;



         (c)   An electronic copy in a format acceptable to the
Subdivision Administrator; and



         (d)   One 11 x 17-inch copy in a quantity and form as
required by the Subdivision Administrator.



      (2)   Any application for final plat or final site plan
approval shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the regular monthly meeting
of the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to receive action at such
meeting.



   (B)   The following general information, where applicable, shall be
shown on the final plat or final site plan, unless waived by the Planning and
Zoning Commission:



      (1)   The date of preparation, north point and scale of
drawing, which shall be one inch = 100 feet, or other scale as approved by
the Village Engineer;



      (2)   Legal description of the parcel;



      (3)   The names and addresses of the record land owner, the
applicant and the Illinois-registered surveyor or licensed professional
engineer who prepared the plat, with the appropriate seal affixed;



      (4)   Reference points of existing surveys identified, related
to the plat by distances and bearing, and reference to a field book or map as
follows:



         (a)   All stakes, monuments or other evidence found on
the ground and used to determine the boundaries of the parcel;



         (b)   Adjoining corners of all adjoining parcels;



         (c)   When the village has established the center line
of the street adjacent to or within the proposed parcel, the location of such
center line and monument found or reset shall be shown; and



         (d)   All other monuments found or established in making
the survey of the parcel, or required to be installed by the provisions of
this chapter or by an Act revising the law of plats  adopted March 21, 1874,
as amended, ILCS Ch. 765;



      (5)   Lot and block lines with dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles, and radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent
bearings. 



         (a)   Parcel boundaries and street bearings shall be
shown to the nearest ten seconds with the basis of the bearings. 



         (b)   All distances shall be shown to the nearest 0.01
feet. 



         (c)   Lot area in square feet for each lot shall be
designated;



      (6)   (a)   The width of the portion of any streets being
dedicated and the width of any existing rights-of-way, all shown each side of
the center line.



         (b)   For streets on a curvature, all curve data shall
be based on the street center line, and in addition to the center line
dimensions, the radii and central angles shall be indicated;



      (7)   All easements shall be denoted by fine dotted lines,
clearly identified; and if already of record, the recorder's references to
such easement.



         (a)   The width of the easement, its length and bearing,
and sufficient ties to locate it definitely with respect to the plat must be
shown. 



         (b)   If an easement is not precisely located of record,
a description of such easement shall be included.



         (c)   If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it
shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificate of identification;



      (8)   Lot numbers beginning with the number one and numbered
consecutively within each block;



      (9)   Block numbers or letters beginning with the number one
or letter “A” and continuing consecutively without omission or
duplication throughout the subdivision site plan.



         (a)   The figures shall be solid, of sufficient size and
thickness to stand out, and so placed as not to obliterate any figure. 



         (b)   Block figures of an addition to a subdivision site
plan of the same name shall be a continuation of the numbering in the
original subdivision site plan;



      (10)   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas
to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purpose indicated
thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common use of
all property owners;



      (11)   Building setback lines, accurately shown in dimensions;



      (12)   The name of each street shown on the plat;



      (13)   Street numbers shall be obtained from the village and
shown on final plat;



      (14)   The name of the subdivision plan;



      (15)   Existing and proposed grading plan of development at
the intervals specified in § 154.21(D)(2), if the overall plan requires
changes in the general topography and the regulatory limits of the 100-year
flood frequency event, when applicable;



      (16)   Location of adjoining roads, water courses and bodies
of water, marshes, rock outcroppings, wooded areas, and railroads within 100
feet of the property;



      (17)   Location and dimensions of on-site pedestrian and
vehicular access ways, design of ingress and egress of vehicles to and from
the site onto public streets, and curb and sidewalk lines, including sidewalk
ramps for the handicapped where applicable;



      (18)   Location of buildings and other structures;



      (19)   Location and intensity of outdoor lighting system;



      (20)   Use of property within 100 feet of the boundaries of
the site;



      (21)   All off-street parking, loading spaces and walkways,
indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles, and a
specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided;



      (22)   Forms of certification as provided for in Appendix A;



      (23)   The mortgagee shall also execute the plat, if
applicable, with the following certification:



         “MORTGAGEE:



         BY:                                  



            Its duly authorized officer



ATTEST:



                                 



Its duly authorized officer



I, the undersigned, a Notary Public, in and for said County,  in the State
aforesaid,  do hereby certify that                 , personally
known to me to be the                       of            
  who is the mortgagee, and personally known to me to be the same persons
whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me
this day in person and severally acknowledged that as such           and
              , they signed and delivered the said instrument as    
              and                   to be affixed thereto,
pursuant to authority given by the Board of Directors of said          
      as their free and voluntary act, and as the free and voluntary act
and deed of said               for the uses and purposes therein set
forth.



Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this       day of           ,
20    .



                                  



         Notary Public”



      (24)   The plat shall have specific language that dedicates
all public improvements to the village with the language “Dedicated to the
Public;” and



      (25)   The name and mailing address of the village for return
of the plat by the County Recorder.



   (C)   The following supporting data, where applicable, shall be
supplied in separate statements or maps, or, if practical, may be shown on
the final plat or site plan, unless waived by the Planning and Zoning
Commission: 



      (1)   A copy of any restrictions or covenants to be created by
record and any charter or by-laws of any property owners' association to be
created;



      (2)   The following certificates, which may be combined where
appropriate:



         (a)   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all
parties having any legal or beneficial interest in the parcel consenting to
the preparation and recording of the said plat;



         (b)   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all
parties having any interest in the land, dedicating all parcels of land
intended for any public use; and 



         (c)   Certification by the County Clerk showing that all
taxes and special assessments due on the parcel have been paid in full.



      (3)   Plans and specifications for the required public
improvements, together with the written report of the Village Engineer
required by § 154.23(C)(3);



      (4)   Existing soil conditions based upon soil borings
prescribed by the Village Engineer in light of the proposed use of the parcel;



      (5)   Landscape plan showing location, type and approximate
size of plantings;



      (6)   Architectural elevations for building types;



      (7)   Development data.



         (a)   Development data showing number of floors, floor
area, height and location of each building and proposed general use for each
building and the floor area ratio for the entire development. 



         (b)   If a multifamily residential building, the number,
size and type of dwelling units:



      (8)   A final drainage plan.



         (a)   A final drainage plan providing for the adequate
disposition of natural and storm water in accordance with the design criteria
and standards of this chapter, indicating location, sizes, types and grades
of ditches, catch basins and pipe, and connections to existing drainage
system.



         (b)   The drainage plan shall depict the proposed
100-year flood frequency boundaries, when applicable;



      (9)   A soil erosion control plan providing for the adequate
control of erosion and sedimentation, indicating the proposed temporary and
permanent control practices and measures that will be implemented during all
phases of clearing, grading and construction;



      (10)   Sewage disposal.



         (a)   In all cases where private central sanitary sewer
systems are to be used, the applicant shall secure the necessary permits for
installation and operation of the system from the State Environmental
Protection Agency, the County Health Department and the village. 



         (b)   In all cases where private septic systems are to
be used, percolation tests shall also be made on each building lot and a copy
of the data and a recommendation of minimum lot sizes by the Will County
Health Department shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Village Engineer;



      (11)   A schedule showing phasing of other proposed
improvements.



   (D)   The applicant shall supply the following forms of guarantee to
the village.



      (1)   An improvement completion guarantee under which the
applicant agrees to install any required improvements at his or her own
expense in accordance with the plans and specifications within the time
required as a condition of approval.



         (a)   Acceptable improvement completion guarantees:



            1.   Cash escrow. 



               a.   Cash deposit or certified check in the
total amount required shall be placed with the Village Clerk, and
administered in accordance with the provisions of an escrow agreement to be
negotiated and approved by the Village Attorney. 



               b.   Such agreement may contain provisions
for specific application of such funds, partial contract payout, pro rata
reduction of deposit excess, final escrow settlement, and other pertinent
administrative matters as may be required.



               c.   The escrow agreement shall be in an
acceptable form as prescribed by the corporate authorities.



            2.   Letter of credit. 



               a.   An irrevocable commercial letter of
credit with any financial institution that:



                  (i)   Must be approved by the Village
Attorney and Village Engineer; and



                  (ii)   Provides for the administration
of such credit in the manner as set forth in § 154.22(D)(1)(a)1. above. 



               b.   The letter of credit shall be in an
acceptable form as prescribed by the corporate authorities.



            3.   Completion bond. 



               a.   A completion bond to insure the
construction of the improvements in a satisfactory manner and within the
period  specified  by  the  corporate  authorities. 



               b.   The bond shall be payable to the
village and in a form with surety and conditions as approved by the Village
Attorney and Village Engineer.



         (b)   The amount of the improvement completion guarantee
shall be based on: the total cost of the estimated construction, engineering,
surveying and fees for each specific step of the required improvements, plus
20% of such total for contingencies, maintenance of improvements and the
abatement of construction nuisance and erosion control during the period
prior to acceptance of improvements for a specific step, including all
professional fees of the village, all as approved by the Village Engineer.



         (c)   That each improvement completion guarantee shall
be separately itemized by steps as follows:



            1.   Step 1. Underground improvements, including,
but not limited to :  storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water main detention
facilities, overland flood routes; and



            2.   Step 2.  Basic street improvements,
including, but not limited to:  curbs, gutters, base course, binder course,
street signs and street lights; and



            3.   Step 3. Finished street improvements,
including, but not limited to:  final surface improvements; and



            4   Step 4. Roadway improvements, including, but
not limited to:  sidewalks, bike paths, walking paths, parkway/ROW
landscaping, park landscaping and street trees.



         (d)   Uncompleted work.



            1.   If the balance of work remaining uncompleted
in any specific step equals 5% or less, as determined by the Village
Engineer, of the original amount of the completion guarantee, as specified in
§ 154.22(D)(1)(b), the village may approve a reduction in the guarantee for
that step to an amount equal to 20% of the original guarantee amount for that
step. 



            2.   The village shall not under any circumstances
reduce an improvement completion guarantee for a step if the work remaining
in that step exceeds 5%.



            3.   The village shall not accept any portion of
the improvements in a step until that step has been 100% completed. 



            4.   The village shall not accept any portion of
the improvements in steps 1, 2, or 3 until all improvements cumulative to
those steps have been 100% completed.



         (e)   The village shall approve 100% reductions in a
step's improvement completion guarantee only after all improvements in that
step, as itemized, have been completed and demonstrated by "as-built"
engineering plans provided by the developer as described in § 154.77



         (f)   All improvement completion guarantee reductions or
acceptance of improvements shall be by written resolution or letter of the
corporate authorities.



         (g)   The resolution/letter completely eliminating the
improvement completion guarantee of a specific step shall also include
acceptance of any public improvements within that step.



         (h)   Improvement completion guarantee release and
public improvements acceptance are contingent upon village receipt of a two
year maintenance guarantee as then provided by this chapter.



         (i)   All improvement completion guarantees shall be for
two years from the date of approval of the final plat, approval of final site
plan or village receipt of guarantee funds, whichever occurs later.



         (j)   Extension of improvement completion guarantees
past the original two year time frame described in division (D)(1)(i) above
shall be as follows:



            1.   When improvements for a specific step have
not been completed or accepted within the two year time frame as described in
division (D)(1)(i) above an amendment of the guarantee extending the
expiration date by one year will be required.



            2.   When improvements for a specific step have
not been completed or accepted within one year from the amended expiration
date, as described in division (D)(1)(j)1. above, the following amendments to
the guarantee will be required: extension of the expiration date by one year;
adjustment to the remaining guarantee amounts for each of the previous three
years as determined by the Village Engineer using the Construction Cost Index.



            3.   When improvements for a specific step have
not been completed or accepted within one year from the amended expiration
date, as described in division (D)(1)(j)2. above and for each successive year
thereafter, the following amendments to the guarantee will be required:
extension of the expiration date by one year; adjustment to the remaining
guarantee amounts for the previous year as determined by the Village Engineer
using the Construction Cost Index.



            4.   For guarantees which may not include a
specified expiration date, amendment of guarantee amounts as specified in
division (D)(1)(j) will still be required.



      (2)   A maintenance guarantee to be furnished upon final
completion of public improvements in a form as prescribed under division
(D)(1)(a) above, effective for a period of two years after the final
acceptance of said improvements or village receipt of maintenance guarantee
funds, whichever occurs later, for the purpose of:



         (a)   Guaranteeing against and securing the correction
of any defect in material or workmanship furnished for such public
improvements, latent in character, and not discernible at the time of final
inspection or acceptance by the village;



         (b)   Guaranteeing against and securing the correction
of any damage to public improvements by reason of settling of the ground,
base or foundation thereof. 



            1.   Such maintenance guarantee shall also provide
that as such defects develop, the amount held hereunder may be applied by the
village for any amounts incurred to correct such defects, and that the
balance of such deposit, if any, held at the end of such two-year period
shall be returned by the village to the depositor without interest. 



            2.   The amount of the maintenance guarantee for a
specific step shall be not less than 20% of the total initial amount of the
improvement completion guarantee for that step; 



         (c)   Guaranteeing all lots within the development will
be free of debris, are rough graded, are maintainable, have lawn grass
established, and have sufficient erosion control measures in place.  If lawn
grass cannot be established on existing soils, sufficient topsoil shall be
spread on site. 



      (3)   However, for property outside the corporate limits of
the village, no such agreement shall be required where the applicant has
entered into a similar agreement covering the parcel with the county
authorities.



   (E)   (1)   Upon the determination that the application and final
plat or final site plan  are in  proper form, the Subdivision Administrator
shall place the matter on a Planning and Zoning Commission meeting agenda and
notice shall be served on the applicant confirming the time and place of the
meeting at which the matter will be discussed. 



      (2)   The Village Engineer shall also be notified and supplied
with copies of the application, final plat or final site plan, and other
documents.



   (F)   The applicant may elect to have final approval of a geographic
part  or  parts of the plat that received preliminary approval, and may
delay application for approval of other parts until a later date or dates
beyond one year with the approval of the corporate authorities.



      (1)   Provided, all facilities required to serve the part or
parts for which final approval is sought have been provided. 



      (2)   In such case, only such part or parts of the plat as
have received final approval shall be recorded.



   (G)   If the applicant so elects, he or she may delay furnishing the
guarantees required by division (D) of this section until notified that the
final plat has been approved by the corporate authorities in all other
respects; provided that the signature of the President and the Clerk and the
seal of the village are not be affixed to the plat until the required
guarantees are furnished and approved.



   (H)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its written
report to the corporate authorities, recommending approval or disapproval of
the final plat or final site plan, within 15 days from the date of its next
regular or special meeting, following the filing of the last required
document or other paper that shall be considered the date of filing the
application for final approval of the plat or site plan.



      (1)   The signatures of the chairman and secretary of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be affixed to the final plat or final
site plan after approval by the corporate authorities.



      (2)   If the recommendation is to disap- prove, the report
shall set forth the reasons for its disapproval, and specify with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat or site plan fails to
meet the standards of § 154.23. 



      (3)   A copy of the report shall also be forwarded to the
applicant.



   (I)   After receiving the final recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the corporate authorities shall approve or disapprove the
final plat or site plan within 60 days from the date of filing application
for final approval of the plat or site plan, unless the applicant and the
corporate authorities mutually agree to extend this 60-day period. 



      (1)   If the final plat or final site plan is disapproved, the
corporate authorities  shall state  the  reasons for the disapproval,
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the final plat or final
site plan fails to meet the standards of § 154.23. 



   (J)   The final subdivision site plan plat, together with all
covenants and restrictions, shall be recorded by the Village Clerk in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds for the county in which the property is
located and returned to the Village Clerk. 



      (1)   All recording fees shall be prepaid by the applicant. 



      (2)   The Village Clerk shall notify the Subdivision
Administrator of the recording of the final plat or final site plan.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 639, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 773, passed
10-4-93; Am. Ord. 780, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am.
Ord. 1543, passed 8-4-08; Am. Ord. 1589, passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.23  STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF PLATS AND SITE PLANS.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval
and the corporate authorities shall approve a preliminary or final plat or a
preliminary or final site plan, unless it makes written findings specifying
the manner in which:



      (1)   The design and layout of the subdivision site plan or
development does not conform to the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   The applicant has not made adequate provision to install
improvements required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or corporate
authorities under authority of this chapter;



      (3)   The final plat of subdivision or final site plan fails
to comply with an approved preliminary plat of subdivision site plan or
preliminary site plan;



      (4)   The plat or site plan does not conform with this
chapter, the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Zoning Map, the Stormwater
Detention Regulations (Ch. 53), Flood Hazard Prevention (Ch. 153), Soil
Erosion Regulations (Ch. 157), established village planning policies, and all
other village ordinances;



      (5)   The provisions for vehicular loading, unloading, parking
or circulation on the parcel or onto adjacent public rights-of-way will
create hazards to safety or will cause significant burdens on transportation
facilities that could be avoided by modification of the plan;



      (6)   The vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation system
creates hazards to safety that could be avoided by modification of the plan;



      (7)   The proposed plan unnecessarily and in specified
particulars destroys, damages, or detrimentally alters significant natural,
topographic or physical features of the site and development;



      (8)   The proposed landscaping, screening or lighting fails to
provide adequate acoustical or visual privacy to incompatible adjacent uses
that could be avoided by modification of the plan;



      (9)   The bulk and location of proposed buildings and
structures will have significant adverse impact on adjacent property and
development of the parcel is not feasible in a manner that will avoid these
consequences;



      (10)   The proposed plat or site plan makes inadequate
provision for the use and maintenance of open space, and this failure may
result in a burden on the public or on the adjacent properties;



      (11)   The proposed development will impose an undue burden
upon off-site public services, including sanitary sewer, water and storm
drainage, which conclusion shall be based upon a written report of the
Village Engineer provided that there is no provision in the capital works
program of the village to correct the specific burden and that the applicant
has not agreed to alleviate that portion of the burden attributable to the
proposed development; and



      (12)   The subdivision site plan or development is subject to
periodic flooding or contains poor drainage facilities and would make
adequate drainage of the lots and streets impossible.



   (B)   If any of the foregoing standards are cited as justification
for disapproving a plat or site plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the corporate authorities shall:



      (1)   Specify the manner in which the final plat or final site
plan could be modified to avoid the specified deficiency; or



      (2)   State the reasons why the specified deficiency cannot be
avoided consistent with applicant's objectives.



   (C)   Before submitting the final plat or final site plan for
review, the applicant shall submit engineering plans, details or
specifications for all proposed improvements regulated by §§ 154.30 through
154.68 hereof for approval of the Village Engineer.



      (1)   Upon the approval of preliminary plat or site plan, the
applicant shall have  a licensed professional engineer prepare and certify
drawings for said improvements, which shall be submitted in triplicate to the
Village Engineer at least 15 days prior to the presentation of final plat for
approval.



      (2)   Engineering drawings for required improvements shall
contain the following data and information:



         (a)   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates
for street construction, including centerline profile and a grade line for
each street with a typical cross-section of the roadway. 



            1.   The profiles of grade lines shall be shown to
a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal, and one inch equals five feet
vertical.



            2.   This information shall be shown on standard
plan and profile sheets;



         (b)   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates
of proposed storm drainage improvements, including surface drainage, storm
sewers and appurtenances and detention or retention basins;



         (c)   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates
of proposed water distribution systems and proposed water supply facilities,
if any;



         (d)   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates
of sewage systems and of sewage treatment plants, if any;



         (e)   Plans, details, specifications and cost estimates
for proposed sidewalks, or bikeways, if any;



         (f)   Plans, details and specifications and cost
estimates of the proposed street lighting system; and



         (g)   When unusual conditions exist, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may require additional specifications, plans and drawings
as may be necessary for an adequate review of the improvements to be
installed.



      (3)   The Village Engineer shall review all engineering
drawings in order to determine whether such drawings are consistent with the
approved preliminary plat or plan and comply with §§ 154.30 through
154.68. 



         (a)   Such drawings shall be distributed to such other 
persons as may be necessary. 



         (b)    If they are in compliance with this chapter, the
Village Engineer shall forward a report to the Subdivision Administrator that
they so conform and comply. 



         (c)   If the plans, details or specifications do not
conform or comply, the Village Engineer shall notify the applicant and the
Subdivision Administrator of the specific manner in which they do not so
conform or comply.



      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not act upon
the final plat or final site plan until:



         (a)   The engineering drawings have been reviewed by the
Village Engineer; and



         (b)   A report of compliance or non-compliance has been
received by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.24  FINAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LOTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The intent of this section is to establish
procedures and standards for the review and approval of site plans to ensure
full compliance with all local, state and federal ordinances and regulations,
and to ensure that a proposed land use or activity is compatible with the
character of the surrounding area, the adjacent uses of land, the natural
environment, the capacities of public services and will protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Scope.  This section shall apply to the following:



      (1)   The construction of any new, nonresidential building or
structure exceeding 500 square feet;



      (2)   The conversion, in whole or in part, of an existing
building from residential to nonresidential building or structure; and



      (3)   The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no
buildings or structures are proposed.



   (C)   Site plan approval procedures.  No land, building, or
structure shall be erected or used and no building permit shall be issued for
a development within the scope of this section, unless and until a site plan
has been approved in accordance with this section.



   (D)   Application procedure. 



      (1)   The applicant shall submit an application on forms
provided by the village for review and approval of a site plan. 



      (2)   The complete application shall consist of the following:



         (a)   A fully executed and signed copy of the
application for site plan review, and application fee if applicable;



         (b)   A fully executed Professional Fee Agreement and
deposit; and



         (c)   Twenty copies of the site plan and supporting
documents.



   (E)   Site plan requirements.  The site plan shall include at a
minimum the following:



      (1)   General information.



         (a)   Name, address and phone number of the developer.



         (b)   Name, address and phone number of the record owner
if different from developer.



         (c)   Name, address and phone number of the architect,
engineer, landscape architect, land planner, surveyor or consulting firm
responsible for preparing the plan(s).



         (d)   Date of plan preparation/revision.



         (e)    North arrow and scale.



         (f)   Legal description of the property.



         (g)   If applicable, a Site Data Table indicating the
gross acreage, net acreage, site coverage percentage, building area(s), floor
area ratio.



      (2)    Existing conditions



         (a)   Zoning and use of the property.



         (b)   Zoning and use of all adjacent properties.



         (c)   Existing topography of the site shown at two-foot
intervals and extending a minimum of 25 feet beyond the property lines of the
site.



         (d)   Building setback lines.



         (e)   Location and extent of any water bodies, wetlands,
streams and floodplains on or adjacent to the site.



         (f)   Location and size of existing trees.



         (g)   Location of other notable natural features.



         (h)   Location and dimension of any existing easements.



         (i)   Location, size, and ground floor elevation of all
existing buildings on the site.



         (j)   Location and dimension of any other structures or
improvements on the site.



         (k)   Location, names, and widths of existing streets
and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the site.



         (l)   Location and size of any existing storm sewer,
water main, sanitary sewer, culverts, drains, field tiles, on-site disposal
systems, wells, power or telephone poles, electrical lines, telephone lines,
and gas lines on the subject site, or of any such entities off-site that will
serve the subject site.



         (m)   The location, front view and dimension of existing
signs.



      (3)   Proposed development



         (a)   Proposed use and zoning.



         (b)   A grading plan showing the proposed changes in the
topography of the site at two-foot intervals, with spot grades provided at
significant points.



         (c)   The location and dimensions of all provisions for
water supply and sanitary sewer.



         (d)   A stormwater detention/retention plan, including
stormwater run-off and detention calculation.



         (e)   The location, elevation and size of all catch
basins, ditches, swales, retention basins and storm sewers.



         (f)   An erosion control plan.



         (g)   The location, dimensions and foundation/floor
elevations of all proposed buildings or expansions on the site.



         (h)   The location and dimensions of proposed driveways,
parking areas, loading areas and sidewalks.



         (i)   The location, dimensions, front view and materials
of proposed signs.



         (j)   The location and type of exterior lighting,
including a point-by-point photometric plan.



         (k)   The location and nature of electrical, telephone,
gas, cable or other utility services to be installed at the site.



         (l)   Building plans showing the floor plans and
elevations of all proposed principal and accessory buildings, and a schedule
of the type and color of exterior surface materials.



         (m)   Landscape plans shall be submitted in accordance
with § 158.35(B).



      (4)   Supporting reports, documents, exhibits, etc.



   (F)   Review procedures.



      (1)   A complete application for Site Plan approval shall be
filed with the village not less than 20 days prior to any Planning and Zoning
Commission meeting scheduled to review said application and Site Plan.



      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the Site
Plan and make a recommendation to the President and Board of Trustees to
approve or disapprove the Site Plan within 60 days. The Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendation may include conditions and is advisory in nature.



      (3)   The President and Board of Trustees shall approve or
disapprove the Site Plan within 60 days of receiving the Planning and Zoning
recommendation.



   (G)   Approval criteria and standards.



      (1)   Site configuration.  Buildings and structures will meet
or exceed setback standards, height and other dimensional standards and be
appropriately placed in relation to natural features of the site.



      (2)   Buildings. 



         (a)   Buildings shall be designed, situated and
constructed so as to conform to any applicable design criteria of the
village. 



         (b)   All buildings shall have a strong visual
relationship and design compatibility between the building, the site, and
adjacent development.



         (c)    The exterior appearances and mass of the
building(s) shall complement the existing development and character within
the surrounding area.



      (3)   Impact on surrounding land uses and zoning.



         (a)   The proposed site plan will be harmonious with,
and not harmful or injurious to, existing and planned uses in the immediate
area.



         (b)   The proposed improvements will be coordinated with
improvements serving the site and other properties in the area.



         (c)    The Site Plan shall meet the intent of this
section and the intent of the Zoning Code.



      (4)   Preservation of natural features.  The site plan shall
demonstrate judicious effort to preserve the integrity of the land, natural
topography, drainage, wetlands, watercourses, floodplains and existing
vegetation.



      (5)   Signs.



         (a)   Proposed signs shall meet the requirements of all
applicable village regulations and shall be generally complementary with
surrounding properties and traffic operations. 



         (b)   The size, location, design and lighting of the
signs shall be considered in relation to adjacent sites, glare, traffic
safety and compatibility with adjoining properties.



      (6)   Exterior lighting.



         (a)   At the expense of the owner/developer, all roads,
driveways, sidewalks, parking lots and other common areas and facilities
shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property, and the
safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots and
other common areas and facilities. 



         (b)   Without limiting the generality of the foregoing
standards, the following minimum standards shall apply:



            1.   Lights shall be installed in all parking
areas containing five or more parking spaces, and shall be illuminated
between dusk and dawn, whenever said premises are open for operation;



            2.   OPEN FOR OPERATION shall be construed to mean
any time that a retail business is open for the sale of goods or services or
a retail, office or industrial facility actually has employees, other than
guards or watchmen, working within or upon the premises; 



            3.   Lights shall not be more than 15 feet in
height in residential zoning districts and not more than 30 feet in height in
other zoning districts.



            4.   Where lighted areas are required, lighting
shall be provided as follows:



 

Zoning District
 
Minimum*
 
Maximum


Residential
 

1.0

 

2.0



Commercial
 

1.0

 

3.0



Industrial
 

2.5

 

5.0



  * Average ground level footcandles.



 



   Average illumination at property line shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles.



            5.   All lighting shall be constructed, positioned
and maintained in such a way so as not to reflect light either directly or
indirectly onto adjacent properties.



      (7)   Parking and loading.  The number location and
dimensions of all parking and loading spaces and the design of parking and
loading areas shall meet the requirements of all applicable village
regulations.



      (8)   Landscaping and screening.  Landscaping and screening
shall be in accordance with Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1430, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 1530,
passed 4-7-08)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 154.30  CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the design standards established herein, all
subdivision site plan plats shall comply with the laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations set forth by this section.



   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, as amended from time to time.



   (C)   The Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of
the appropriate jurisdiction, including but not limited to, the Stormwater
Detention Regulations (Ch. 53), Flood Hazard Prevention (Ch. 153), and Soil
Erosion Regulations (Ch. 157), all amended from time to time.



   (D)   The Comprehensive Plan and Official Zoning Map of the village
or any portions thereof.



   (E)   The special requirements of this chapter and any rules of the
village, the State Environmental Protection Agency and the County Public
Health Department relating to lot size and lot elevation, if the subdivision
site plan is not served by public water or by a public sewer and provision
for one or both of these services has not been made.



   (F)   The rules of the State Division of Highways relating to safety
of access and the preservation of the public interest and investment in the
streets, if the subdivision site plan or any lot contained therein abuts a
state truck highway or connecting street.



   (G)   All design, dimensions, materials and methods of construction
of improvements not specifically established in this chapter shall conform to
applicable federal, state and village regulations, which are located in the
office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.31  STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Streets shall be designed and located in relation to existing
and planned streets, to topographical conditions and natural terrain
features, such as streams and existing tree growth, to public convenience and
safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served
by such streets.



   (B)   (1)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as
established on the Official Zoning Map.



      (2)   All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special
traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches
and shopping centers, to population densities and to the pattern of existing
and proposed land uses. 



      (3)   Minor streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient, safe access to property.



      (4)   Street patterns.



         (a)   The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need
not necessarily be adhered to. 



         (b)   The use of curvilinear streets shall be encouraged
where such use will result in a more desirable layout.



         (c)   The use of cul-de-sacs and U-shaped streets is not
encouraged.



      (5)   Proposed streets.



         (a)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary
lines of the parcel to be subdivided;



         (b)   Unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions; or



         (c)   Unless, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of
the layout of the subdivision site plan with the existing layout or the most
advantageous future development of adjacent parcels.   



      (6)   In business and industrial developments, the streets and
other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of
buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck
loading and maneuvering areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between
the various types of traffic.



      (7)   Dual access shall be provided in any subdivision site
plan beginning with the initial construction, and shall be maintained in
suitable condition for passage of private and emergency vehicles.



   (C)   (1)   Where a subdivision site plan borders on or contains
a railroad or highway, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require a
street approximately parallel to and on each side of such railroad or
highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening
land, for park purposes in residential districts or for commercial or
industrial purposes in appropriate districts. 



      (2)   Such distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.



   (D)   Where a subdivision site plan abuts or contains an existing or
proposed highway or major thoroughfare, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan or
Official Zoning Map, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require:



      (1)   Marginal access streets;



      (2)   Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
non-access reservation, at least ten-feet wide, along the rear property line;



      (3)   Deep lots with rear service alleys; or



      (4)   Such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and
local traffic.



   (E)   (1)   Street right-of-way widths shall be as specified in
Appendix B, Table of Minimum Standards.



      (2)   Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities or
streets shall be prohibited.



      (3)   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at
any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve
with a radius adequate to insure clear sight distances. (See Appendix B.)



   (F)   Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street
and the first floor elevation of the houses or buildings to permit convenient
and economical access to and drainage of the lots.



   (G)   Street gradients and vertical curves shall be as specified in
Appendix B, Table of Minimum Standards.



   (H)   Tangents shall be introduced between reverse curves on all
streets.  (See Appendix B.)



   (I)   (1)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other
street at less than 60 degrees.



         (a)   A proposed intersection of two new streets at an
angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. 



         (b)   Not more than two streets shall intersect at any
one point, unless specifically approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (2)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150
feet shall be avoided.



      (3)   All street intersections should encourage safe traffic
flow.



   (J)   (1)   No street names shall be used that will duplicate or
be confused with the names of existing streets. 



      (2)   Existing street names shall be projected whenever
possible. 



      (3)   Street names shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (K)   (1)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial, business and
industrial districts, except that the Planning and Zoning Commission may
waive this requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made
for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking,
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed and in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.



      (2)   The width of alleys shall not be less than 20 feet.



      (3)   Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted,
except where deemed necessary and on the recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission.



      (4)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment
shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners may be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.



      (5)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if
unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at
the dead end, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.32  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Easements shall be provided for drainage and utilities.



      (1)   Drainage easements shall be at least 71/2-feet wide on
rear - and side-lot lines.



      (2)   Utility easements shall be at least 15-feet wide or
71/2-feet wide on each lot, where applicable.



   (B)   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block
to block. 



      (1)   No buildings, structures or permanent fixtures,
excluding fences and driveways, shall be constructed upon any easement.  No
fence or driveway shall be constructed on any easement or any adjoining
property in such a manner that impedes or alters the natural surface water
drainage of the property upon which the fence or driveway is constructed. 
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to return any fence or
driveway located on any public easement to a good and sound condition if any
public body, or their agents, removes or destroys any part of said fence or
driveway in their normal course of business.



      (2)   All 100-year overflow routes shall be contained within
an easement.



   (C)   (1)   Where a subdivision site plan is traversed by a water
course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of
such water course, and shall include such further width or construction, or
both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as determined by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.



      (2)   Parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection therewith.



   (D)   A snow removal easement shall be provided in each cul-de-sac
and shall be at least 20 feet wide and ten feet deep. 



      (1)   The snow removal easement shall be located as close as
possible to opposite the entrance of the cul-de-sac.



      (2)   No driveways, trees or structures, including mailboxes,
light poles and fire hydrants shall be placed in the easement or between the
easement and the curb.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 804, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589, passed 8-3-09)                         
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                     



§ 154.33  BLOCKS.



   (A)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined
with due regard to:



      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the
special needs of the types of uses contemplated;



      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions
within the corporate limits of the village;



      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and
safety of street traffic; and



      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.



   (B)   (1)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet, or be less
than 600 feet.



      (2)   Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length.



   (C)   Pedestrian crosswalk easements not less than ten-feet wide
shall be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to provide for
pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities.



   (D)   Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or
industrial use shall be designed as such, and the plan shall show adequate
off-street areas to provide parking, loading docks and other such facilities
as may be required by the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.34  LOTS.



   (A)   (1)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation
shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision site plan and for
the type of development and use contemplated. 



      (2)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   (1)   Residential lot sizes, regardless of jurisdictional
boundary, shall meet the minimum requirements herein established and shall
comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department of Public
Health and the County Health Department.



      (2)   Lots abutting a water course, drainage way, channel or
stream shall have a minimum width or depth, as required to provide an
adequate building  site and to afford the minimum usable area required in
this chapter or the Zoning Ordinance for front, rear and side yards.



      (3)   Depths and widths of lots or properties reserved or laid
out for commercial, business or industrial purposes shall be adequate to
provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required in the
Zoning Ordinance.



   (C)   (1)   All residential lots shall abut a publicly or
privately dedicated street.



      (2)   All commercial and industrial lots shall abut a publicly
dedicated street, privately dedicated street, or a perpetual access easement.



   (D)   (1)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from highways or thoroughfares or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.



      (2)   A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, and
across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided
along the rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major
thoroughfares.



   (E)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines.



   (F)   (1)   Where residential lots fronting on thoroughfares are
permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, they should be platted with
extra depth to permit generous distances between the buildings and such
trafficways. 



      (2)   Where lots front on thoroughfares, the normal building
setback line shall be increased by an additional 20 feet. 



      (3)   Business, commercial, or industrial buildings in
residential blocks shall be provided with setbacks at least equal to the
setback of the residential properties in that block and shall comply with all
applicable zoning requirements.



   (G)   (1)   Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area.



      (2)   Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration
of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.



   (H)   Lots at right angles to each other shall be avoided wherever
possible, especially in residential areas.



   (I)   Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to
permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.



   (J)   Lot lines shall follow municipal boundary lines whenever
practicable, rather than cross them.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)



§ 154.35  BUILDING SETBACK LINES.



   Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall
conform to the front, side and rear yard provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.36  CONSTRUCTION ROADS.



   (A)   (1)   All developments of property that are subject to this
chapter shall, whenever practicable, provide a construction road over the
private property being developed for the use of all vehicles and equipment
used in connection with such development and the making or delivery of
materials and supplies thereto. 



      (2)   The construction road shall be continuous maintained by
the developer in a dust-free manner.



   (B)   Every construction road herein required shall be depicted on
the preliminary and final plat of development.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision specified herein, street
tress are to be planted in the parkway with at least two street trees per lot
and four street trees on a corner lot.



(Ord. 541, passed 9-11-89; Am. Ord. 639, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS



§ 154.45  STATEMENT CERTIFYING IMPROVEMENTS.



   No subdivision site plan of land shall be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, unless the applicant has submitted a statement signed by
the Village Engineer certifying that the improvements described in the plans
and specifications of the applicant, together with agreements, meet the
minimum requirements of all ordinances of the village and that they comply
with the engineering specifications of this chapter.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.46  MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.



   (A)   Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of
the outside boundary but no further than 1/4-mile apart. 



   (B)   The monuments shall be of concrete, not less than six inches
in diameter and 36-inches deep, with a center copper dowel three-inches long
cast in place. 



   (C)   Iron pipe or steel bars not less than 9/16-inch or 5/8-inch in
diameter, and 30-inches long shall be set at the intersection of street
centerlines and at all corners of lots not marked by monuments.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.47  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Street improvements shall be provided in each new subdivision
site plan in accordance with the regulations set forth in this section, and
the tables of minimum standards and typical section as set forth as
Appendices B and C respectively. 



   (B)   The regulations for street improvements are as follows:



      (1)   All streets in single-family residential zoning areas
shall be constructed in accordance with this chapter;



      (2)   All streets in multifamily and commercial zoning areas
shall be constructed in accordance with collector thoroughfare standards;



      (3)   For industrial and other special use areas as determined
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Engineer; and



      (4)   All street construction, including those  listed
above,  shall conform to the requirements of the Illinois Division of
Highways Standard Specificationsfor Road and Bridge Construction, adopted
July 1, 1976 and amended from time to time.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.48  UTILITIES.



   (A)   Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed in accordance with
the requirements of the village and the State Environmental Protection
Agency. 



      (1)   No oxidation ponds, seepage lagoons or holding lagoons
will be constructed except upon specific approval of the Village Engineer. 



      (2)   Sewers may be placed only in public rights-of-way or in
easements. 



      (3)   Detailed specifications are included in §§ 154.60
through 154.68.



   (B)   The drainage system within the development shall be designed
in accordance with provisions contained in §§ 154.60 through 154.68 herein,
and shall anticipate and provide capacity for drainage from naturally
tributary land.



      (1)   Such design shall provide adequate capacity for
transmitting such drainage from the other tributary areas on the basis of the
ultimate development of such other tributary areas, but such drainage system
need not make provision for the retention of drainage from other tributary
areas.



      (2)   Drainage calculations shall be submitted with the
plans. 



      (3)   Where storm sewer discharges into an open ditch or
natural water course a concrete headwall shall be provided according to
standards obtained from the Village Engineer.



   (C)   All residential, commercial, industrial and community facility
buildings or structures shall be served by an adequate water supply and
distribution system. 



      (1)   The design of the system shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the State Department of Public Health.



      (2)   Detail specifications are included in §§ 154.60
through 154.68.



   (D)   In all cases where private central sanitary sewer systems are
to be used, the applicant shall secure the necessary permits for installation
and operation of the systems.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.49  PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   All utility lines for telephone, cable television and electric
service shall be placed entirely underground throughout a subdivided area.



   (B)   Said conduits or cables shall be placed within easements or 
dedicated  public ways in a manner that will not conflict with other
underground services. 



   (C)   Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to
be unsightly or hazardous to the public. 



   (D)   The utility lines shall be parallel to and not less than 12
inches from the property lines. 



   (E)   Corner markers, as required in § 154.46 of this chapter,
shall not be disturbed by the installation of utility lines.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.50  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   (1)   Concrete sidewalks shall be provided throughout the
subdivision site plan to serve the anticipated needs of its residents. 



      (2)   Sidewalks shall be located in accordance with proper
land planning procedures and with due regard for public safety and
anticipated concentration of pedestrian traffic.



   (B)   (1)   Sidewalks located along minor, cul-de- sac, loop or
marginal access streets shall have sidewalks not less than four-feet wide.



      (2)   Sidewalks located along thoroughfares shall have
sidewalks not less than five-feet wide.



      (3)   Where practicable, all sidewalks shall be located so
that a parkway separates the curbs from the sidewalk. 



      (4)   Detailed specifications are included in § 154.67.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the fact that installation of sidewalks is
required to be completed within two years of final plat approval, the
corporate authorities may, upon application, grant extensions for up to six
months for such sidewalk completion.



      (1)   No more than four such extensions may be granted.



      (2)   No extension shall be granted unless or until the
applicant's (developer's) subdivision security bond or letter of credit has
been extended to remain valid during the term of any such extension.



      (3)   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed a waiver of the
applicant's (developer's) responsibility to complete the sidewalks, and
provided further that if the applicant (developer) transfers ownership of any
lot the sidewalk of which has not been accepted by the village, the applicant
(developer) and the owner of the lot shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the completion and maintenance of the sidewalk.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 702, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.51  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   (1)   In  the event  that topsoil is removed, prior to, 
during or  after construction, it shall be replaced to  a  depth  not 
less  than  four  inches  in all  lawns and planting areas. 



      (2)   Said topsoil shall be provided and spread by the general
contractor or subcontractor.



   (B)   All unpaved areas within the street right-of- way shall be
seeded or sodded. 



      (1)   Before the release of the two-year maintenance bond can
be recommended by the Village Engineer, all unpaved areas between the edge of
the road pavement and the right-of-way line must support an adequate mat of
grass. 



      (2)   Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all
landscaping.



   (C)   All parkway plantings shall be in accordance with Chapter 158:
Landscape Ordinance.



   (D)   (1)    To minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound,
protective screen planting may be required to secure a reasonably effective
physical barrier between residential properties and adjoining uses. 



      (2)   The screen planting plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect and shall meet the approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   (E)   All stormwater basins, owned and maintained by the village,
shall be designed to enhance water quality, control erosion and
sedimentation, and discourage nuisance waterfowl.  Wet stormwater basins,
owned and maintained by the village, shall be landscaped from the normal
water line to ten feet beyond the high water line with 70% grasses that have
a mature height of 30 inches and 30% woody species that have a mature height
of at least six feet.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 934, passed 1-20-97; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1530, passed 4-7-08)



§ 154.52  DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   Residential.



      (1)   Every subdivided lot that is new construction or
improvements to 50% or more of the existing driveway surface area shall have
a paved driveway consisting of asphalt, brick, concrete pavers, or other
concrete surface minimally extending from an adjacent public/private street
and/or back of curb to the front setback line of the principal structure
located on the lot.



      (2)   When village construction projects damage or require the
removal of a driveway in village right-of-way, the driveway will be replaced
in kind at the village's cost not to exceed 115% of the total cost to replace
a similar plain concrete driveway meeting minimum village standards. The
limits of the replacement and cost will be determined by the Village Engineer.



      (3)   A maximum of two driveway aprons are allowed per
single-family dwelling unit and shall not exceed a combined/total width of 35
feet.



      (4)   Driveway widths of multi-family/single family attached
dwelling units will be assessed on a case-by-case basis and determined by the
Village Engineer.



      (5)   Driveways must be installed and complete before the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit.



      (6)   All newly constructed driveways, or improvements to 50%
or more of the existing driveway surface area, must be permitted in
accordance with § 151.56(B)(3) of the Building Code. Driveway sealing and
other routine maintenance does not require a permit.



      (7)   Before the construction of any driveway on a public
utility easement, the following conditions must be proven and met before the
issuance of a driveway permit:



         (a)   No public utilities are installed or planned
within the easement.



         (b)   The flow of storm water will not be impeded.



      (8)   Construction of a driveway within a snow easement is
prohibited.



      (9)   Driveway construction will be allowed in the rear of a
lot where improved alleys exist and the construction shall be in accordance
with this subchapter.



   (B)   Commercial.



      (1)   A maximum of two driveway aprons not exceeding a
combined/total width of 70 feet plus the turning radius are allowed per
commercial lot, unless otherwise approved through site plan approval.



      (2)   Before the construction of any driveway on a public
utility easement, the following conditions must be proven and met before the
issuance of a driveway permit:



         (a)   No public utilities are installed or planned
within the easement.



         (b)   The flow of storm water will not be impeded.



      (3)   Construction of a driveway within a snow easement is
prohibited.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 795, passed 3-21-94; Am. Ord. 1544, passed
8-4-08; Am. Ord. 1737, passed 3-18-13; Am. Ord. 1876, passed 12-19-16)



§ 154.53  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The village may, within two years of final plat approval,
designate the location and type of traffic control devices that are required
in any subdivision and/or development. 



   (B)   The applicant shall reimburse the village for costs associated
with the acquisition, installation, replacement and maintenance of any such
required traffic-control devices. 



   (C)   Such costs shall be included in the applicant's letter of
credit.



(Ord. 702, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS



§ 154.60  STANDARDS.



   (A)   The applicant shall install storm and sanitary sewers, a water
supply system, street grading and pavement, alleys, pedestrianways, public
utilities, and street lighting in accordance with applicable ordinances and
standards of construction of the village.



   (B)   No subdivision of land shall be approved by the corporate
authorities without receiving a statement signed by the Village Engineer
certifying that the improvements described in the applicant's plans and
specifications, together with any agreements, meet the minimum requirements
of all ordinances of the village and that they comply with the following
standards in this subchapter.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.61  SEWERS.



   (A)   Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer services shall be installed
to serve all properties in the subdivision. 



      (1)   Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public
sanitary sewerage systems. 



      (2)   Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with
the minimum standards and specifications, as contained in Appendix E attached
to Ordinance 864 and incorporated herein by reference, passed 11-6-95, or as
approved by the Village Board after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   (B)   Storm sewers shall be installed to serve all properties in the
subdivision.



      (1)   Sump pump discharge conveyance systems.



         (a)   Sump pump discharge conveyance pipes, either
separate or in combination with storm sewers, shall be installed, unless it
can be empirically demonstrated that site-specific soils exhibit an
infiltration rate greater than or equal to 3.2x10-3 cubic feet per second per
square foot.



         (b)   Generally within rear yard drainage easements,
sump pump discharge conveyance systems shall consist of an inlet provided at
alternating lot corners, with capped service tees for each adjacent lot, and
installed so as not to interfere with other public utilities. 



      (2)   Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with
the minimum standards and specifications, as contained in Appendix F attached
to Ordinance 864, passed 11-6-95 and incorporated herein by reference, or as
approved by the Village Board after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.62 [RESERVED.]



§ 154.63  WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   Water distribution facilities, including piping, fittings,
hydrants, valves, valve vaults, water services and all other needful
appurtenances adequate for fire and domestic needs shall be installed to
serve all properties within the subdivision.



   (B)   Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards and specifications as contained in Appendix G to this
chapter, or as approved by the Village Board after recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (C)   At no time shall anyone other than village-authorized
personnel operate valves or hydrants.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.64  TRENCH BACKFILL.



   (A)   (1)   All trenches caused by the construction of sewers,
water mains, water service pipes, and in excavation around catch basins,
manholes, inlets and other appurtenances within two feet of the limits of
existing or proposed pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be
backfilled with trench backfill.



      (2)   When, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, proper
compaction of the trench cannot be obtained, a flowable fill shall be
utilized.



   (B)   Trench backfill shall be compacted in place to 95% of maximum
density at optimum moisture, as determined by the Standard Proctor Test, and
as specified in the appendices to this chapter, for the specific type of
improvement.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.65  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded to the
required section.



   (B)   All unsuitable sub-base material shall be removed and replaced
with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices.



      (1)   Soil test reports are to be submitted to the Village
Engineer at the time of plan submittal.



      (2)   Subgrade stability improvements will be required for
soils with an IBR less than 6.



   (C)   Vertical curves.



      (1)   Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in
centerline gradient occurs, except where the algebraic difference in
gradients is one percent or less. 



      (2)   The length of vertical curves shall be established on
the basis of design, speed and stopping distance, in accordance with
standards obtainable from the Village Engineer.



   (D)   All pavement thicknesses, including sur- face, base courses
and sub-base courses, shall be designed in accordance with the Illinois
Department of Transportation standards. 



      (1)   The minimum thicknesses for Class IV streets shall be as
specified in Appendix C. 



      (2)   Proof roll of the sub-base and base course shall be
conducted; and densities of the sub-base, base course, binder course and
surface course of all streets shall be field-verified during construction
with nuclear methods by a village-employed testing service, in accordance
with the provisions set forth in § 154.76 of this chapter.



   (E)   (1)   Class III streets require design data to be submitted
to the Village Engineer at the time of plan submittal, and shall always meet
or exceed the minimum requirements in Appendix C.



      (2)   However, alternate materials may be considered by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, if recommended by the Village Engineer, if
structurally equal:



         (a)   Standard reinforced, portland  cement concrete
pavement, having a uniform thickness of eight inches. Concrete for such
pavement shall conform to the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; and



         (b)   Five-inches-thick, bituminous- aggregate-mixture
base course, a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder, and a surface
course having a minimum compacted thickness of three inches.  Bituminous
pavement shall conform to the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.



   (F)   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and
shall be combination (integral) concrete. 



      (1)   Curbs may be constructed integrally with the portland
cement concrete pavement. 



      (2)   All curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance
with the minimum standards and specifications, as contained in Appendix H to
this chapter, or as approved by the Village Board after recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.66  ALLEYS. 



   Alley pavement shall conform with the specifications of § 154.65.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.67  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete to
a thickness of five inches. 



   (B)   An aggregate base with a minimum thickness of two inches shall
be provided under all sidewalks. 



   (C)   Concrete for such sidewalks shall conform to the Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.68  STREET LIGHTING IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Street lighting improvements shall be installed to serve all
properties within the subdivision. 



   (B)   Such improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards and specifications, as contained in Appendix I to this
chapter, or as approved by the Village Board after recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 702, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 804, passed
6-6-94 Am. Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS



§ 154.75  COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Bituminous binder course shall be installed within
one year of the date of the recording of the final plat.



      (2)   Surface course shall be installed no earlier than one
year following complete installation of the binder course.



      (3)   All remaining public improvements shall be completed
within two years of the date of the recording of the final plat.



   (B)   Prior to commencement of the construction of any public
improvements, the developer shall post as many signs at as many locations as
deemed reasonable by the Planning and Zoning Commission, prohibiting
construction traffic on certain streets during the development of the
subdivision.



   (C)   (1)   The village will erect temporary street name signs at
all intersections immediately following installation of the curb and gutters,
and relocate the sign to the permanent location. 



      (2)   Costs for these services will be billed to the developer.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 580, passed 5-7-90; Am. Ord. 639, passed
3-4-91; Am. Ord. 780, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord.
1543, passed 8-4-08)



§ 154.76  INSPECTION AND CONSTRUCTION REVIEW.



   (A)   All public improvements required to be made under the
provisions of this chapter shall be inspected during the course of
construction by the Village Engineer or by a member of the village staff.



      (1)   All reasonable fees (including reasonable attorney's
fees, engineering fees and/or staff cost) associated with such inspection and
the reviewing of those plans and associated with such inspection and the
reviewing of the plans and specifications for such improvements shall be paid
by the applicant.



      (2)   The applicant may be required to post a deposit with the
village to cover the anticipated costs of such inspection before they are
undertaken.



      (3)   In the event that inspection fees are not paid in a
timely manner, the village may, at its sole option, draw down on any
subdivision improvement /maintenance security that may be available.



   (B)   The applicant shall give at least 48 hours written
notification to the Village Engineer prior to the performance of any of the
following:



      (1)   The construction of any roadway or street;



      (2)   The surfacing of any roadway or street;



      (3)   The installation of any curbing or gutters;



      (4)   The grading or backfilling of any open trench or
excavation in which any utility facilities have been installed, including but
not limited to, water lines, sewer lines, and electrical cables;



      (5)   The construction of any sidewalk; and



      (6)   The filing, pressure testing, chlorination, or water
sampling of any water main.



   (C)   Within the 48-hour notice period, the Village Engineer may
conduct on-site inspection to determine that the proposed work complies with
the engineering drawing. 



      (1)   If,  in the  opinion  of  the  Village  Engineer,
proposed work does not comply with such final drawings, the Village Engineer
shall have the authority to order that all such proposed work shall be
terminated until such time as necessary steps are taken to correct any
defects or deficiencies. 



      (2)   Upon the correction of such deficiencies, the applicant
shall again notify the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 804, passed 6-6-94; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.77  ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   When the applicant has completed construction of improvements
associated with both Steps 1 and 2, or when he or she has received reductions
to both steps 1 and 2 per § 154.22(D)(1)(d), he or she shall notify the
Village Engineer by letter and formally request a review of "as-built"
engineering plans (record drawings) by said party or a duly designated deputy.



      (1)   In this letter he or she shall:



         (a)   State that all improvements associated with steps
1 and 2 are 100% complete and in substantial conformance to Approved For
Construction site plans previously approved by the Village of Channahon; and



         (b)   Enclose five full size and three scalable 11 x 17
copies of the subdivision plan that shows these improvements (record
drawings) and include:



            1.   All sheets and information which were part of
Approved for Construction site plans.



            2.   All "as-built" information as required by the
Village Engineer.



            3.   Additional sheets used to show details of
specific areas such as overland flood routes, ponds, etc. may be added to the
end of record drawing plans.



            4.   Record drawings shall be provided by the
developer and signed and stamped by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Illinois.



      (2)   Upon completion of "as built" record drawings review,
the village or a duly designated deputy will provide a final inspection of
all improvements associated with steps 1 and 2.



         (a)   The village shall make his or her inspection no
later than 30 days after approval of the "as-built" record drawings; except
between November 15 and April 1 where inspections are contingent upon weather
conditions as determined by the Village Engineer.



         (b)   The applicant shall pay the cost of this
inspection.



         (c)   No later than 45 days after inspection of the
subdivision improvements, the applicant shall be notified by the Village
Engineer in writing of the results of the inspection.



         (d)   When applicable, deficiencies found as a result of
review of record drawings, sanitary sewer televising reports, inspection of
improvements, resident concerns, or other methods, must be corrected under
the observation of village staff and approved by the Village Engineer prior
to final acceptance of improvements.



      (3)   Where applicable as determined by the Village Engineer,
updated information resulting from correction of deficiencies may required by
the village.



   (B)   Upon completion all improvements associated with steps 1, 2
and 3 as described in



§ 154.22(D)(1)(c), and completion of record drawings review as described in
division (A) of this section, and subject to § 154.22(D)(1)(d), the
applicant will request acceptance of public improvements associated with
these steps.



      (1)   In this letter he or she shall:



         (a)   State that all improvements are 100% complete and
in substantial conformance to Approved For Construction site plans previously
approved by the Village of Channahon; and



         (b)   Request acceptance of all public improvements
associated with these steps.



      (2)   The village or a duly designated deputy will provide a
final inspection of all improvements.



         (a)   The village shall make his or her inspection no
later than 30 days after receipt of the request; except between November 15
and April 1 where inspections are contingent upon weather conditions as
determined by the Village Engineer.



         (b)   The applicant shall pay the cost of this
inspection.



      (3)   No later than 45 days after inspection of the
subdivision improvements, the applicant shall be notified by the Village
Engineer in writing of the results of the inspection.



            (a)   When applicable, deficiencies found as a
result of record drawings review, sanitary sewer televising reports,
inspection of improvements, resident concerns, or other methods, must be
corrected under the observation of village staff and approved by the Village
Engineer prior to final acceptance of improvements.



   (C)   Upon completion of all improvements associated with step 4 as
described in § 154.22(D)(1)(c), and completion of record drawings review as
described in division (A) of this section, and subject to § 154.22(D)(1)(d),
the applicant will request acceptance of public improvements associated with
this step.



      (1)   In this letter he or she shall:



         (a)   State that all improvements are 100% complete and
in substantial conformance to Approved For Construction site plans previously
approved by the Village of Channahon; and



         (b)   Request acceptance of all public improvements
associated with this step.



      (2)   The village or a duly designated deputy will provide a
final inspection of all improvements.



         (a)   The village shall make his or her inspection no
later than 30 days after receipt of the request; except between November 15
and April 1 where inspections are contingent upon weather conditions as
determined by the Village Engineer.



         (b)   The applicant shall pay the cost of this
inspection.



      (3)   No later than 45 days after inspection of the
subdivision improvements, the applicant shall be notified by the Village
Engineer in writing of the results of the inspection.



         (a)   When applicable, deficiencies found as a result of
record drawings review, sanitary sewer televising reports, inspection of
improvements, resident concerns, or other methods, must be corrected under
the observation of village staff and approved by the Village Engineer prior
to final acceptance of improvements.



   (D)   Acceptance of streets and improvements is conditional, based
upon a two-year maintenance period that commences with the formal date of
acceptance of public improvements by the corporate authorities or village
receipt of maintenance guarantee funds, whichever occurs later.



      (1)   Maintenance guarantees are to be provided as described
in § 154.22(D)(2).



      (2)   At the end of the two-year period, if all accepted
improvements are in satisfactory condition as determined by the Village
Engineer and following a final walkthrough inspection by village staff, the
maintenance guarantee shall be released by the corporate authorities.



   (E)   Prior to such final acceptance, all streets and storm sewer
and sanitary sewer appurtenances shall be cleaned at the expense of the
applicant to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.



   (F)   Final acceptance of all streets and improvements and release
of associated guarantees is the responsibility of the corporate authorities.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1543,
passed 8-4-08)



DEDICATION OF LANDS



§ 154.85  DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS AND SCHOOL SITES REQUIRED; PAYMENT OF
FEES IN LIEU THEREOF; FORMULA.



   (A)   As  a  condition  of  approval of a  final plat of 
subdivision  or  of  a  final  plat  of  planned  unit development,
each subdivider or developer will be required to dedicate land for park and
recreation purposes and land for school sites to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the development, or cash contributions in
lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of
the village upon recommendation of the Board of Commissioners of the
Channahon park districts and the school districts affected, in accordance
with the criteria and formula set forth by this section.



   (B)   Criteria for requiring land dedication.



      (1)   Park and recreational land dedication.



         (a)   Requirement and population ratio.



            1.   The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. 



            2.   The total requirement shall be 6.25 acres of
land per 1,000 of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:



 


Types of Recreation Area

 

Size Range

 

Minimum Acres per 1,000 People*

 

Minimum Acres per 1,000 People






Play lot

 

Minimum 8,000 square feet

 

Not applicable

 

0.75




School park (neighborhood park playground)

 

Minimum 5 acres

 

1.25

 

1.75




Neighborhood park

 

Minimum 31/2 acres

 

1.25

 

1.75




District-wide park or play field

 

Minimum 4 acres up to 30 acres

 

1.5

 

2




Community-wide recreation park

 

Minimum 12 acres up to 30 acres

 

2.25

 

2.75





 

Total

 

6.25 acres of land per 1,000 people

 

9




* Population figures are obtained from the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit in  § 154.86





 



         (b)   Location.



            1.   The location of the site to be dedicated
shall be determined by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Channahon Community Park District,
taking into account the suitability of the site for park and recreational
purposes, and its relationship to population concentrations.



               a.    A central location that will serve
equally the entire development is most desirable. 



               b.   In large developments, these sites can
be located throughout the development, according to standards for park
distances established by the comprehensive plan of the Channahon Community
Park District.



            2.   While the ultimate decision as to the final
location of any park site or the acceptance of a cash contribution in lieu
thereof must be reserved to the village, the village recognizes that the
ultimate responsibility for development and maintenance of recreation land
and facilities lies with the Channahon Park District. 



            3.   The village shall provide the park district
with copies of all preliminary plats submitted to the village, and request
that the park district submit its comments to the village.



            4.   The village acknowledges that the park
district cannot be compelled to accept any land dedication that the park
district does not want to accept.



            5.   In the event the park district refuses to
accept a parcel of land, which has been selected to be set aside pursuant to
the provisions hereof, the village:



               a.   May require cash contributions in lieu
of the dedication of the parcel of land; or



               b.   May, at its sole option, require
dedication or conveyance of the parcel to:



                  (i)   The village; or 



                  (ii)   Such other person or
organization as the Village Board of Trustees determines to be best suited to
meet the recreational needs of the residents.



         (c)   Credit for private open spaces and recreation
areas.



            1.   When subdividers or developers provide
private recreation areas and facilities, it may have the effect of reducing
the demand for local public recreational services.



               a.   However, such private areas and
facilities are  difficult or impossible to develop and maintain because
ownership usually is surrendered to the adjacent owners or a homeowners'
association, who might not have the personnel or the financial resources for
maintenance and improvement. 



               b.   Nevertheless, there may be instances in
which the public is better served by providing for private recreation areas
and facilities in lieu of public ones. 



               c.   Credit for private recreation areas and
facilities may be allowed only where the Village Board of Trustees has made a
determination that private recreational areas, in lieu of or in conjunction
with publicly dedicated recre-ational areas, will, by reason of the type of
develop-ment, better serve the interests of the public than where wholly
public dedications are required.



            2.   Where allowed, a substitution of private open
space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of
improvement and the installation of recreational facilities, including
equipment by the developer, as part of his or her obligation.



               a.   Detailed plans of such areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the
village, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the
subdivider or developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas
will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the
appropriate legal documents. 



               b.   Private “swimming clubs” are
included in the provision. 



               c.   When an adjustment for private
recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total
park-land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or
planned unit development, and then subtract the credit to be given for such
private areas as determined by the Village of Board Trustees.



         (d)   Improvements by developer. 



            1.   All land donated pursuant to this section to
either the village or the Channahon Park District and all land reserved as
private recreation areas, as provided herein, shall be fully improved by the
developer or subdivider. 



            2.   All property shall be dedicated or reserved
in a fully improved condition ready for service of electricity, gas, water
and sewer service; streets, including sidewalks, enclosed drainage, curbs and
gutters shall be installed in compliance with ordinances of the village.



            3.   To ensure the timely installation of such
improvements the village may require the posting of a bond in the form of an
irrevocable letter of credit in a form and from a financial institution that
are both acceptable to the village. 



            4.   This letter of credit shall be in the amount
of 120% of the cost of the required public improvements as estimated by the
Village Engineer and in accordance with all requirements of the village
Subdivision Ordinance. 



            5.   This bond or letter of credit may be reduced
upon under the conditions and in the same manner as is required by the
village Subdivision Ordinance.



         (e)   Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of
park sites.



            1.   Requirement and use of contributions. 



               a.   Where the development is “small”
and the resulting site is too small to be practical, or when the available
land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes, the village shall
require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the
land dedication required.



               b.   In considering whether a development is
“small” as used herein, the village may consider whether the total number
of proposed dwelling units will produce less than the minimum number of
people for one park of each park classification in accordance with this
section.



               c.   The cash contributions in lieu of park
and recreation land dedication shall be paid to the village prior to the
issuance of building permits for any building or structure in the subdivision
or planned unit development. 



               d.   The village shall turn over to the
Channahon Park District all dollars actually collected under this section
bi-annually as determined by the village. 



               e.   Such contributions shall be used solely
for the acquisition or improvement of park and recreation land as hereinabove
classified, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of
the residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of
other existing local park and recreation land that already serves such needs.



               f.    Improvements under this section shall
be liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
development of parking lots, sidewalks, traffic signals, arterial
streets,collector streets, internal roadways, playgrounds, recreation
grounds, athletic fields, and connections with sewer, water and electrical
lines. 



               g.   Improvements shall also include the
purchase of any material, goods or equipment necessary to the development and
construction. 



               h.   Improvement shall further include the
construction of buildings and additions to existing buildings.



         (f)   Fair market value as the basis of contribution. 



            1.   The cash contributions in lieu of land shall
be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved,
as specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park sites.



            2.   It has been determined that the present fair
market value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is $45,000
per acre.



               a.   Such figure shall be used in making the
calculation for park contributions;



               b.   Unless the subdivider or developer of a
planned unit development files a written objection thereto.



            3.   In the event of any such objection:



               a.   The subdivider or developer of a
planned unit development shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market
value of such improved land in the area of his or her subdivision or planned
unit development, or other evidence thereof; and



               b.   Final determination of the fair market
value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the Village Board,
based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or developer of a
planned unit development, and from other sources that may be submitted to the
Village Board by the Park District, school districts, or others.



            4.   The current table of the estimated ultimate
tabulation per dwelling unit of population density as found in § 154.86 is
generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family
size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of
required dedication of acres of land and any combination of land dedication
and cash contribution. For purposes of this section, the current table shall
mean that most recent table of estimated ultimate tabulation per dwelling
unit published by the Illinois School Consulting Service as applied
simultaneously with the request for approval of the final plat of subdivision
or planned unit development pursuant to the ordinances of the village.



            5.   In cases where the village requires a
combination of site dedication and cash contribution, the amount of the
required cash contribution, as herein set forth, shall be reduced by the
percentage of land required to be but not dedicated.



            6.   For example, if the projected impact of a
development requires 9.0 acres of land to be dedicated and it is determined
to instead require dedication of one-half the amount of required land
(i.e.4.5 acres) and to require a cash contribution in lieu of the balance of
land, then the dollar amount required by this section shall be reduced by
one-half.



         (g)   Criteria for requiring land dedication and a cash
contribution. 



            1.   There will be situations in subdivisions or
planned unit developments when a combination of land dedication and a
contribution in lieu of land are both necessary.



            2.    These occasions will arise when:



               a.   Only a portion of the land to be
developed is proposed as the location for a park site. 



                  (i)   That portion of the land within
the subdivision or planned unit development falling within the park location
shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid; and



                  (ii)   A cash contribution in lieu
thereof shall be required for any additional land that would have been
required to be dedicated.



               b.   A major part of the park site has
already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. 



                  (i)   The remaining portions shall be
required by dedication; and



                  (ii)   A cash contribution in lieu
thereof shall be required.



      (2)   School site dedication.



         (a)   Requirement and population ratio.



            1.   The ultimate number of students to be
generated by the subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly
upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. 



            2.   The land dedication requirement shall be
determined by obtaining the ratio of estimated children to be served in each
school classification over the maximum recommended number of students to be
served in each school classification as stated herein, and then applying such
ratio to the minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of each
such school classification as stated herein. 



            3.   The product thereof shall be the acres of
land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the
estimated increased children on each such school classification.



         (b)   School classification and size of school site. 
School classifications and size of school sites within or serving the village
shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria:



 


School Classification by Grades

 

Maximum Number of Students for each School Classification

 

Minimum Number of Acres for each Such Classification




Elementary schools, grades kindergarten through 6

 

600

 

17 acres




Junior high schools, grades 6 through 8

 

900

 

30 acres




High schools, grades 9 through 12

 

1,500

 

60 acres




 



         (c)   Location. 



            1.   The location of the site to be dedicated
shall be determined by the Village Board of Trustees upon recommendation of
the Board of Education of the school district having or to have jurisdiction
of the school to be erected on the site, taking into account the
comprehensive school plan and the standards adopted by the affected school
district as a guideline in locating sites. 



            2.   The Village Board of Trustees shall not
select the site without allowing opportunity for the Board of Education of
the school district affected to make recommendations with respect thereto.



   (C)   Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of park and
school sites.



      (1)   Requirement and use of contributions.



         (a)   Where the development is "small" and the resulting
site is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate
for a school site, and it is determined by the village, after recommendation
by the affected school district, not to require the dedication of land, the
village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution
in lieu of the land dedication required.



         (b)   In considering whether a development is
“small” as used herein, the village may consider whether the total number
of proposed dwelling units will produce less than the maximum number of
students for one school of each school classification in accordance with this
section. 



         (c)   The cash contributions in lieu of school sites
shall be paid to the village prior to the issuance of building permits. 



         (d)   The village shall turn over any and all dollars
actually collected for such fees to the appropriate school districts
annually. 



         (e)   Such contributions shall be used solely for the
acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs
of children from that subdivision or development or for the improvement to
any existing school sites and buildings that already serve such needs.



         (f)   Improvements.



            1.   Improvements under this section shall be
liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
development of parking lots, sidewalks, traffic signals, arterial streets,
collector streets, internal roadways, playgrounds, recreation grounds,
athletic fields, and connections with sewer, water and electrical lines. 



            2.   Improvements shall also include the purchase
of any material, goods or equipment necessary to the development and
construction.



            3.   Improvements shall further include the
construction of buildings, additions to existing school buildings, remodeled
or renovated non-instructional spaces in classrooms, and the purchase of
prefabricated classroom units to be used at a school site.



      (2)   Fair market value as the basis of contribution.



         (a)   The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be
based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved, as
specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as school sites. 



         (b)   It has been determined that the present fair
market value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is $45,000
per acre.



            1.   Such figure shall be used in making the
calculation for school contributions;



            2.   Unless the subdivider or developer of a
planned unit development files a written objection thereto. 



         (c)   In the event of any such objection:



            1.   The subdivider or developer of planned unit
development shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such
improved land in the area of his or her subdivision or planned unit
development, or other evidence thereof; and



            2.   Final determination of the fair market value
per acre of such improved land shall be made by the Village Board, based upon
such information submitted by the subdivider or developer of planned unit
development, and from other sources that may be submitted to the Village
Board by the park district, school districts or others.



   (D)   Criteria for requiring land dedication and a contribution. 



      (1)   There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit
developments when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu
of land are both necessary. 



      (2)   These occasions will arise when:



         (a)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is
proposed as the location for a school site. 



            1.   That portion of the land within the
subdivision or planned unit development falling within the school location
shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid; and



            2.   A cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be
required for any additional land that would have been required to be
dedicated.



         (b)   A major part of the school site has already been
acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to
complete the site.



            1.   The remaining portions shall be required by
dedication; and



            2.   A cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be
required to fulfill the obligations of that development.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78;  Am. Ord. 549, passed 10-2-89;  Am. Ord. 572,
passed 5-19-90; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed 4-3-95; Am.
Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 3-21-05; Am. Ord. 1432,
passed 7-17-06; Am. Ord. 1712, passed 10-15-12)



§ 154.86  DENSITY.



   (A)   The following table of population density is generally
indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for
newly constructed residential units, as determined by the Illinois School
Consulting Service, and shall be used in calculating the amount of required
dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof, unless
a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer of the
planned unit development:



 


ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT




Type of Unit

 

Pre-School (0-4 Years)

 

Elementary Grades K-5 (5-10 Years)

 

Junior High Grades 6-8 (11-13 Years)

 

Total Grades K-8 (5-13 Years)

 

  High School Grades 9-12 (14-17 Years)

 

Adult  (18 and up)

 

Total Per Unit





Detached Single Family:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


2 Bedroom
 
0.113
 
0.136
 
0.048
 
0.184
 
0.020
 
1.700
 
2.017


3 Bedroom
 
0.292
 
0.369
 
0.173
 
0.542
 
0.184
 
1.881
 
2.899


4 Bedroom
 
0.418
 
0.530
 
0.298
 
0.828
 
0.360
 
2.158
 
3.764


5 Bedroom
 
0.283
 
0.345
 
0.248
 
0.593
 
0.300
 
2.594
 
3.770


Attached Single Family: (Townhouses, Condos, etc.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1 Bedroom
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
1.193
 
1.193


2 Bedroom
 
0.064
 
0.088
 
0.048
 
0.136
 
0.038
 
1.752
 
1.990


3 Bedroom
 
0.212
 
0.234
 
0.058
 
0.292
 
0.059
 
1.829
 
2.392


4 Bedroom
 
0.323
 
0.322
 
0.154
 
0.476
 
0.173
 
2.173
 
3.145


Apartments:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Efficiency
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
-0-
 
1.294
 
1.294


1 Bedroom
 
-0-
 
0.002
 
0.001
 
0.003
 
0.001
 
1.754
 
1.758


2 Bedroom
 
0.047
 
0.086
 
0.042
 
0.128
 
0.046
 
1.693
 
1.914


3 Bedroom
 
0.052
 
0.234
 
0.123
 
0.357
 
0.118
 
2.526
 
3.053




 



   (B)   (1)   In the event a subdivider or developer of a planned
unit development files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate
population listed herein, he or she shall submit his or her own demographic
study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the
subdivision or planned unit development.



      (2)   In that event, final determination of the density
formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the Village Board
based upon such demographic information submitted by the subdivider or
developer of the planned unit development, from other sources that may be
submitted to the Village Board by the park district, the school districts or
others, and upon consideration of such information most accurately and fairly
representing current demographic trends.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.87  RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES.



   Nothing herein contained shall limit the authority of the village to
require the designation and reservation of our recreational land, school
sites, or other public lands as a condition to approval of any plat of
subdivision or planned unit development where such land is to be acquired by
condemnation within one year from final plat approval, as set forth under
Division 12 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.88  COMBINATION WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT.



   Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than 40
acres, a park or recreational site or a school site that is to be  dedicated
should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining
subdivisions or planned unit developments in order to produce usable park,
recreational and school sites, without hardship on a particular subdivider or
developer of a planned unit development.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.89  TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING.



   (A)   The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, as
well as its surroundings, must be suitable for its intended purposes. 



   (B)   Grading on sites dedicated for park, recreational and school
uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land. 



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.90  IMPROVED SITES.



   (A)   All sites donated pursuant to this chapter shall be fully
improved by the developer or subdivider. 



   (B)   All property shall be dedicated or reserved for private space
in a fully improved condition ready for service of electricity, gas, water
and sewer service; streets, including sidewalks, enclosed drainage, curbs and
gutters, shall be installed in compliance with the ordinances of the
village. 



   (C)   To ensure the timely installation of such improvements, the
village may require the posting of a bond in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit in a form and from a financial institution that are both
acceptable to the village. 



   (D)   This letter of credit shall be in the amount of 120% of the
cost of the required public improvements, as estimated by the Village
Engineer and in accordance with all requirements of this chapter. 



   (E)   This bond or letter of credit may be reduced under the
conditions and in the same manner as is required by this chapter.



(Ord. 549, passed 10-2-89; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.91  PREREQUISITE TO ANNEXATION AGREEMENT.



   (A)   The dedications of land, cash contributions in lieu thereof,
or combination of both, as required by this chapter shall also, as a matter
of policy of the village, be required as a condition to the annexation of any
land to the village and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any
annexation agreement governing such land.



   (B)   Additionally, the village shall notify the appropriate park
districts and school districts when a party submits a proposed annexation
agreement to the village, so that the park district can discuss park
equipment and dedication issues with the party, and the school district can
discuss dedication issues with the party.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.92  TIME OF PAYMENT.



   (A)   The dedication of land shall be made at the time of final plat
approval by the Board of Trustees of the proposed subdivision or planned unit
development. 



   (B)   Cash contributions shall be made at the time of the issuance
of the building permits for the subject residential dwelling units.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.93  METHOD OF PAYMENT.



   (A)   The cash contributions required hereunder shall be made by
check payable to the village and shall be deposited with the village. 



   (B)   The Clerk shall keep a record of these receipts.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.94  INDEMNIFICATION; HOLD HARMLESS AND RELEASE.



   The village shall not collect funds under this chapter for any taxing
body that does not, prior to the effective date of this chapter, enter into
an intergovernmental agreement with the village, providing that it will hold
harmless, indemnify and release the village upon such terms and conditions as
are acceptable to the village.



(Ord. 174, passed 2-20-78; Am. Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed
4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.95  [RESERVED.]



§ 154.96  ACCOUNTING OF FUNDS.



   (A)   Each district receiving funds under this chapter shall
annually make a written report to the village, detailing the amount of funds
received and how such funds were expended. 



   (B)   This report shall be provided to the village prior to December
31 of each year.



(Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Ord. 842, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.97  PERIODIC REVIEW.



   (A)   Park lands.  The village shall review this chapter every
three years to determine whether the cash contribution herein set forth is
consistent with the current criteria.



   (B)   School sites.



      (1)    The village shall review this chapter every three years
to determine whether the land value and demographic information herein set
forth is consistent with the current values. 



      (2)   Additionally, three years after the effective date of
this section, any or all affected school districts may submit a demographic
study, based upon local information and data, for the village's consideration.



      (3)   The village may, at its sole option, adopt such local
study to be used for calculations under this chapter. 



(Ord. 841, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 842, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



§ 154.98  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The owner or occupant of any land, building, structure or any
part thereof, or any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person
who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains any violation of this
chapter, may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
village from taking such lawful action as is necessary or appropriate to
prevent any violation.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or
resists the enforcement of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for
each offense.



   (B)   Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



APPENDIX A : CERTIFICATION FORMS FOR FINAL PLAT



1.   Survey Certification:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



I,                                                 
                            , a professional land surveyor in
the State of Illinois, do hereby certify that, under the direction of the
owner thereof, I have surveyed, subdivided and platted into  (#lots)
(#streets)                                           
                                            , that part
of the  (quarter section, section, township, range)               
                                                   
                                                   
of the _________ Principal Meridian described as follows:



(Legal Description)



I do further certify that:




         1.   The accompanying plat is a true and correct
representation of said survey and subdivision as made by me.





         2.    (Flood Hazard Statement)





         3.    The property or plat is situated within the
corporate limits of the Village of Channahon.





         4.    That all regulations enacted by the subdivision
and plat ordinance of the Village of Channahon have been complied with in the
preparation of this plat.





         5.    All dimensions are given in feet and decimal parts
thereof and are correct at 65 degrees Fahrenheit.





         6.    9/16-inch-by-30-inch iron rods set at all lot
corners unless otherwise noted.




Dated at                                   , Illinois this
____________ day of ______________, 20___, A.D.



            __________________________________
            Illinois Registered Land Surveyor No.         



                  (SEAL)



2.   Certificate of Ownership:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



This is to certify that _____________ (and                       
,) is (are) the owner(s) of the land described in the foregoing certificate,
and have caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as indicated on the
plat, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and that the save above
described property is located in school district(s)
_____________________________________________ , and that I (we) hereby
acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and title thereon indicated,
as my (our) own free and voluntary act and deed. 



             (Owner)               (Owner)



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



I,                 , a Notary Public in and for said County
and State, do hereby certify that               (and 
                ), personally known to me to be the same
person(s) whose name(s) are subscribed to the above certificate appeared
before me this day in person and acknowledged that he (she, they) signed the
above certificate as his (her, their) own free and voluntary act and deed for
the uses and purposes therein set forth.  Given under my hand and notarial
seal this    ___ day of                         , 20       .



               (Seal)



(Certification if property under trusteeship)



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



This is to certify that                 as trustee on
provision dated ___________________ and known as trust no. _________ is the
holder of record title to the property described in the plat, and has caused
the same to be surveyed and subdivided as shown on the plat, for the purposes
therein set forth as allowed by the statute, and that said __________________
, not personally but as trustee, does hereby acknowledge that the same above
described property is located in school district(s) ___________________ and
adopt the same under the style and title hereon shown.



Dated this ___day of ___________, 20__, A.D.



      Attest: __________________   By: ____________________



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



I,              , a Notary Public in and for said County and
State, do hereby certify that                            
         (and                  ) , trust officer(s)
personally known to me to be the same person(s) whose name(s) are subscribed
to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that they signed and delivered the foregoing instrument as their
own free and voluntary act of the                  , as
trustee aforesaid, for the uses and purposes set forth.  Given under my hand
and notarial seal this        day of            A.D. 20     .



                                               (Seal)



3.   Engineering Approval:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



This plat has been checked for conformance to Village of Channahon standards
and requirements, and working drawings and specifications for (list
improvements) have been prepared in substantial conformance with Village of
Channahon standards and requirements, and all engineering fees due the
Village of Channahon have been paid.



   Clerk ____________________   Engineer ___________________



   Date ____________________   Date ______________________




4.   Guarantee of Improvements:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



This is to certify that provisions have been made in accordance with the
Subdivision Site Plan Requirements for the guarantee of performance in the
construction of the following improvements. (list improvements)



                                       �
�                 



   Clerk                                          
   Engineer_____________________



   Date _____________________   Date _______________________



5.   County 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System Approval:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



This plat has been checked for conformance to all ________ County 9-1-1
Emergency Telephone System requirements.



               ______________________________             
               



   Date            Chief Administrator



6.   Planning and Zoning Commission Approval:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



I,                 , Chairman of the Village of Channahon
Planning and Zoning Commission, do certify that on this          day of
          , 20     , A.D. this plat of subdivision was duly
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Village of Channahon.



Attest: __________________________   By:  ______________________



                     Chairman




7.   Corporate Authorities Approval:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



Approved by the President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Channahon,                      County, Illinois, this     
    day of           , 20     , A.D.



Attest: _______________________   By: 
___________________________   Village
Clerk               Village President



               (SEAL)



8.   County Clerk Certification:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



I, __________________, County Clerk of __________________ County, Illinois,
do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, or unpaid
current general taxes against any of the estate described in the foregoing
certificates.



Given under my hand and seal at ___________, Illinois, this ___ day of
___________, 20 ___, A.D.



         __________________________   (SEAL)



         County Clerk



9.   County Recorder Certification:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



This instrument No. _______________ was filed for record in the recorder's
office of ___________ County, Illinois, aforesaid on the  ___ day of
___________ , 20 __, A.D. at ________o'clock __.M.



         ___________________________



         County Recorder



(Certification if located in Will County)



9A.   Tax Mapping and Platting Certification:



State of Illinois         )



            )  SS



County of   _______     )



I, _______________, Director of the Taxing Mapping and Platting Office, do
hereby certify that I have checked the property described on this plat
against available county records, and find said description to be true and
correct.  The property herein described is located on Tax Map No. _________
and identified as permanent real estate tax index number (pn)
____________________________. 



Dated this ___ day of ___________, 20 __, A.D.



            ________________________________



            Director



10.   DETENTION AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS



All easements indicated as detention or drainage easements on this plat are
reserved for and granted to the Village of Channahon and to their successors
and assigns.  No buildings shall be placed on said easement, but the same
may be used for other purposes that do not adversely affect the storage/free
flow of stormwater.  Each owner or subsequent purchaser shall be equally
responsible for maintaining the easement, and shall not destroy or modify
grades or slopes without having first received written approval of the
Village of Channahon. 



In the event any owner or subsequent purchaser fails to properly maintain the
easement, the Village of Channahon shall, upon ten days prior written notice,
reserve the right to perform, or have performed on its behalf, any
maintenance work to or upon the easement reasonably necessary to ensure
adequate stormwater storage and free flow of stormwater through the easement
area.



In the event the Village of Channahon shall be required to perform, or have
performed on its behalf, any maintenance work to or upon the easement, the
cost, together with an additional sum of 10% of said cost of completion of
the work, constitutes a lien against any lot or lots created by this plan
that may require maintenance.  The lien may be foreclosed by any action
brought by or on behalf of the Village of Channahon.



(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 780, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



APPENDIX B: TABLE OF MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN



 


Type

 

Right-of-Way Width

 

Pavement Width

 

Radius Horizontal Curves

 

Length of Vertical Curves

 

Tangent between Reverse Curves






Major
Thoroughfare

 

100-200 feet

 

(Back to back of curb) State Standards

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Secondary Thoroughfare

 

80-100 feet

 

40 feet, plus median

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Collector
Thoroughfare

 

80 feet

 

37 feet

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Minor Street

 

66 feet

 

32 feet

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Business Districts

 

80-100 feet

 

36 feet

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Industrial Districts

 

66 feet

 

36 feet

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Alley-Business

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Alley-Resident

 

20 feet

 

20 feet

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Cul-de-sac

 

120 feet

 

84 feet

 

As approved by the Village Engineer





 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 











 


Type

 

Maximum Gradient

 

Minimum Gradient

 

Clear Sight Distance






Major Thoroughfare

 

5%

 

0.50%

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Secondary Thoroughfare

 

5%

 

0.50%

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Collector Thoroughfare

 

6%

 

0.50%

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Minor Street

 

6%

 

0.50%

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Business Districts, Industrial Districts

 

4%

 

0.50%

 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Alley-Business*

 


 


 

As approved by the Village Engineer




Alley-Resident*   

 


 


 

As approved by the Village Engineer




*  Standards for these streets shall be as indicated or as determined by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Engineer.  See Appendix C.










(Ord. 176, passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. 702, passed 4-6-92; Am. Ord. 1233, passed
5-20-02)



APPENDIX C:  CURB AND GUTTER SECTION









 


DRAWING
STREET 1

 

TYPICAL STREET SECTION









(Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)



APPENDIX D:  SCHOOL SITE AND PARK SITE FEES



 



 


Detached Single Family Housing





 

2 bedroom

 

3 bedroom

 

4 bedroom

 

5 bedroom




Elementary

 

$173.20

 

$469.92

 

$674.96

 

$439.36




Jr. High

 

$71.93

 

$259.24

 

$446.55

 

$371.63




Sr. High

 

$36.00

 

$331.20

 

$648.00

 

$540.00




Parks

 

$816.89

 

$1,174.10

 

$1,524.42

 

$1,526.85




 



 


Attached Single Family Housing





 

2 bedroom

 

3 bedroom

 

4 bedroom




Elementary

 

$112.07

 

$298.00

 

$410.07




Jr. High

 

$71.93

 

$86.91

 

$230.77




Sr. High

 

$68.40

 

$106.20

 

$311.40




Parks

 

$805.95

 

$968.76

 

$1,273.73




 



 


Apartments





 

Efficiency

 

1 bedroom

 

2 bedroom

 

3 bedroom




Elementary

 

$0.00

 

$2.55

 

$109.52

 

$298.00




Jr. High

 

$0.00

 

$1.50

 

$62.94

 

$184.32




Sr. High

 

$0.00

 

$1.80

 

$82.80

 

$212.40




Parks

 

$524.07

 

$711.99

 

$775.17

 

$1,236.47




 



Based on $45,000 per acre land value



(Ord. 572, passed 3-19-90; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1432,
passed 7-17-06; Am. Ord. 1712, passed 10-15-12)



APPENDIX E:  SANITARY SEWER MATERIAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS



   (A)   General.



      (1)   All developments shall be provided with sanitary sewers
and appurtenances designed in accordance with this appendix.



      (2)   All sanitary sewer improvements shall be installed in
accordance with the material installation and testing requirements of the
latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, unless otherwise modified in this section.



      (3)   Specification references made herein for manufactured
items, such as pipe, fittings and manholes, refer to designations of the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), the American Water Works
Association (AWWA) or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).



   (B)   Basic design standards.



      (1)   The design of the sanitary sewer system shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the village and of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency's latest edition of Title 35 of the Illinois
Administrative Code, Subtitle C, Chapter 11, Part 370.



      (2)   All sewers shall be designed to accommodate an ultimate
service area as defined by the Village Engineer.



      (3)   Sewers shall be placed only in public rights of way or
in easements.  The location of proposed extensions to the existing sanitary
sewer system shall be approved by the Village Engineer.



      (4)   Sewer design hydraulics.



         (a)   Sanitary gravity sewers shall be designed to
provide design flow capacity, without surcharging, using the formula
specified in the latest edition of the Illinois Administrative Code.



         (b)   Design mean velocity, flowing full, shall not be
less than two feet per second.  If velocity exceeds 15 feet per second,
erosion and shock protection measures shall be provided.



      (5)   Minimum sewer size.



         (a)   Minimum sanitary sewer size shall be eight-inch
diameter.



         (b)   Minimum building sanitary service sewer size shall
be six-inch diameter.



      (6)   Alignment.  Sewers shall be laid straight, in both
horizontal and vertical planes, between manholes.



      (7)   Sewer size changes. 



         (a)   Sanitary sewer of different diameters shall join
only at manholes.



         (b)    The invert elevations shall be adjusted to
maintain a uniform energy gradient by matching the 0.8 depth points of
different diameters.



      (8)   Sanitary sewer manholes.



         (a)   Manholes shall be provided at the following
locations:



            1.   Termination of existing and future lines;



            2.   Changes in direction, horizontal or vertical;



            3.   Changes in shaped or pipe size; and



            4.   Junctions with other sanitary sewers.



         (b)   Access spacing shall be:



 


SEWER PIPE SIZE (in inches)

 

MAXIMUM INTERVAL (in feet)




8 - 15

 

400




18 - 54

 

500




60 or larger

 

1,000




 



         (c)   A drop manhole shall be provided for manholes with
any pipe having a difference in invert elevation more than 24 inches above
the invert of the sewers leaving such manholes.



         (d)   Where flows, pipe size or other conditions
dictate, special manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and
constructed.



         (e)   Minimum manhole diameter.



 


SEWER PIPE SIZE (in inches)

 

MANHOLE DIAMETER (in inches)




8 - 18

 

48




21 - 36

 

60




For sewers greater than 36-inch diameter, manhole shall have offset riser of
48-inch inside diameter.




 



         (f)   Adjustment.  No more than two precast concrete
adjusting rings, with six inches maximum height adjustment, shall be allowed.



      (9)   Sewer depth.  Sanitary sewers shall be constructed at a
minimum depth of four feet and shall be deep enough to provide an outfall for
all sanitary sewage within the ultimate service area, both existing and
future.



   (C)   Material specifications.  All sanitary sewer system elements
shall conform to the following specifications:



   (1)   Sewer and service connection pipe.



         (a)   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe:  ASTM D-3034, SDR
26 minimum strength.



         (b)   Reinforced concrete pipe:  circular
reinforcement, minimum Class 3, Wall B, ASTM C-76.



         (c)   ABS composite pipe:  ASTM D-2680 for eight-inch
and larger, and ASTM D-2751 for six-inch.



         (d)   Ductile iron pipe:  ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C-151),
minimum thickness Class 52 per ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C-150), cement-lined.



      (2)   Sewer and service connection pipe joints.



         (a)   PVC pipe:  flexible elastomeric seal joints, ASTM
D-3212.



         (b)   Reinforced concrete pipe:  continuous O-ring
gaskets, ASTM C-361.



         (c)   ABS composite pipe:  solvent-welded joints, ASTM
D-2680.



         (d)   Ductile iron pipe:  rubber gasket joints, ANSI
A21.11 (AWWA C-111).



      (3)   Sewer and service connection pipe fittings.



         (a)   PVC:  molded PVC fittings, ASTM D-3034, SDR 26
minimum strength.



         (b)   ABS composite:  ASTM D-2680, for eight-inch and
larger, and ASTM D-2751 for six-inch.



         (c)   Ductile iron:  ANSI A21.10 (AWWA C-110).



      (4)   Casing pipes.  Steel pipe:  ASTM A-120, 3/8" minimum
thickness.     



      (5)   Manholes.         



         (a)   Concrete.  Precast reinforced concrete ASTM C-478
with tongue-and-groove joints sealed with gaskets conforming to ASTM C-443 or
bituminous jointing material.



         (b)   Pipe seals.  All pipe connection openings shall
be precast with resilient rubber water-tight pipe-to-manhole sleeves or
seals, per ASTM C-923.  Rubber gasketed manhole coupling shall be
Kor-N-Seal, A-Lok, or equal.



         (c)   Chimney seals.  External, flexible, water-tight
rubber sleeves, conforming to the applicable requirements of ASTM C-923, with
stainless steel bands; shall extend from the manhole cone to the manhole
frame and shall be provided on all sanitary manholes.  Where conditions
prohibit the use of an external seal, an internal seal shall be used.



         (d)   Top section.  Top cone shall be offset type
designed to accept an external chimney seal.  Flat slabs shall be provided
where sufficient height is not available for a cone.



         (e)   Bottom sections.  All bottom sections shall be
monolithically precast, including bases and invert flowlines.



         (f)   Steps.  Cast in place, E.J.I.W. No. 8518 or
steel-reinforced plastic, conforming to OSHA standards, 16-inch on center.



      (6)   Castings.  Manhole frame and cover:  E.J.l.W. No.
1020, with machined bearing surfaces and self-sealing Type A heavy duty lid,
embossed "SANITARY" and "VILLAGE OF CHANNAHON".



      (7)   Pipe bedding and cover material and trench backfill. 
IDOT gradation CA-7 crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the following
gradation requirements:



 


SIEVE SIZE Percent Passing




Grad No.

 

3"

 

21/2"

 

2"

 

11/2"

 

1"

 

3/4"

 

1/2"

 

3/8"

 

No. 4

 

No. 16

 

No. 50

 

No. 200



CA-7
 
 
 
 
100
 
95±5
 
 
45±15
 
 
5±5
 
 
 



 



   (D)   Installation requirements.



      (1)   Sewer system design and construction shall in all
respects be in accordance with the regulations of the Environmental
Protection Agency of the State of Illinois.  No construction shall commence
until a copy of a permit from this agency is filed with the village.



      (2)   The installation of sanitary sewer and appurtenances
shall conform to the requirements of this section and the following:



         (a)   PVC pipe and fittings:  ASTM D-2321.



         (b)   Reinforced concrete pipe:  Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.



         (c)   ABS composite pipe and fittings:  ASTM D-2321.



         (d)   Ductile iron pipe and fittings :  AWWA C-600.



      (3)   Notification.  Prior to beginning the sanitary sewer
installation, the contractor shall give the Village Engineer 48 hours notice
of his or her intended time of starting work.



      (4)   Excavation.



         (a)   The width of trench, at and below the top of pipe,
shall not exceed the widths given in Section 20-2.03 of the Standard
Specifications.



         (b)   The trench shall be excavated so that a minimum of
six inches of CA-7 can be placed as bedding material below the pipe.



         (c)   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for
the bottom of the trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy or other
unsuitable soil, such unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of
the trench, and replaced with well compacted CA-7 material, or an equal
substitute if such compacted material proves unsatisfactory. 



         (d)   Where rock in either ledge or boulder formation is
encountered, it shall be removed below grade, and replaced with a
well-compacted cushion of CA-7 material having a thickness under the pipe of
not less than eight inches.



      (5)   The contractor shall be responsible for providing a
competent individual on site during all trenching operations to insure that
all OSHA and other applicable safety standards are met by construction means
and methods.



      (6)   Pipe bedding. 



         (a)   Six inches of CA-7 material shall be used as
bedding under the pipe.



         (b)   The bedding stone shall be graded along the entire
length of pipe to provide full bearing.



         (c)   The bedding stone shall extend to the spring line
of the pipe.



      (7)   Pipe cover. 



         (a)   CA-7 shall be used as cover material for the
pipe. 



         (b)   The cover material shall extend from the spring
line to six inches above the top of the pipe.



      (8)   Backfilling. 



         (a)   Backfilling of the trench shall be accomplished by
careful replacement of the excavated material after the pipe, bedding, and
cover material have been installed.



         (b)   Any pipe installed under an existing or proposed
street pavement, or within two feet of an existing or proposed pavement edge
or curb and gutter shall be backfilled to the top of the trench with CA-7
material.



      (9)   Laying. 



         (a)   The pipe shall be laid accurately to the line and
grade as designated. 



         (b)   The lubricant, mastic, or other joint material
shall be used and installed as recommended by the pipe or joint
manufacturers' specifications.



      (10)   Separation from water main.



         (a)    The sanitary sewer pipe shall be laid at least
ten feet horizontally distant from any existing or proposed water main. 



         (b)   If the sanitary sewer must cross a water main, the
top of the sewer pipe must be laid at least 18 inches below the bottom of the
water main pipe.



         (c)    If neither of these conditions can be met, other
methods of obtaining separation, as described and illustrated in the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, shall be
followed.



      (11)   Service laterals.



         (a)   Service laterals shall consist of a tee fitting at
the sewer main, and extension of the specified service pipe to the property
line of the lot being served.



         (b)   All sewer services shall be installed in the same
manner as the sewer main.



         (c)   Where the depth of the sewer main is greater than
12 feet below the surface of the ground, a service riser shall be constructed
to an elevation of nine feet below the ground elevation, or as shown on the
plans.



         (d)   The service lateral shall slope toward the main at
the minimum rate of 1%.



         (e)   The service lateral shall be terminated at the lot
line five feet left of the center of the lot, as viewed from the street, and
plugged with a water-tight, factory-made plug.  The plug shall be backfilled
to withstand air test pressure and marked with a red 4x4 stake.



      (12)   Manhole bottoms.  Bottom fillets shall conform to
bottom half of pipe.  Where pipes enter manhole at an angle, curved flow
lines shall be formed from inlet pipe(s) to outlet pipe.



   (E)   Testing and acceptance.



      (1)   General.  All the required testing of the sanitary
sewer system shall be performed before curb and gutter or other
permanent-type surface improvement work begins.



      (2)   Cleaning.  Any pipe containing debris or sediment shall
be cleaned prior to testing and televising.



      (3)   Air test.  All sanitary sewer pipes shall be low
pressure air tested in accordance with the Standard Specifications.



      (4)   Deflection testing. 



         (a)   All flexible thermoplastic sewer main pipe shall
be deflection tested by pulling a mandrel through the pipe from manhole to
manhole. 



         (b)   Deflection testing shall be performed in
accordance with the Standard Specifications.



      (5)   Televising. 



         (a)   All sanitary sewer mains shall be televised one
year after sewer installation. 



         (b)   A written report and videotape copy of the
televised main shall be provided to the village.



      (6)   Defects. 



         (a)   Any piping with dips, cracks, improperly sealed
joints, or variations from the approved grades and alignment shall be
repaired by removing and replacing the involved sections of pipe. 



         (b)   The repaired section of pipe shall then be
re-tested. 



         (c)   The village may also request other types of
testing on the sanitary sewer installation as a condition of initial
acceptance.



      (7)   Record drawings. 



         (a)   Prior to final acceptance of work, "record"
drawings shall be submitted to the village.



         (b)   One mylar reproducible and two blueline copies
shall be submitted, along with an electronic copy, in accordance with current
village requirements.



(Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)









 



NOTES:




   1.   Manhole frame and lid shall have machined bearing surfaces. 
Sanitary manholes shall have self-sealing lids.





   2.   Maximum of two adjusting rings totaling no more than six inches
shall be used.





   3.   Sanitary manholes shall have a vertical top edge on the cone
designed to accept a chimney seal.




 


DRAWING SANITARY 1

 

TYPICAL MANHOLE TYPE A (FOR SANITARY AND STORM SEWER MANHOLES)




 



APPENDIX F:  STORM SEWER MATERIAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS



   (A)   General.



      (1)   All developments shall include provisions for the
construction of storm sewers and appurtenances designed in accordance with
this appendix.



      (2)   Storm sewer systems shall be installed in accordance
with the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction in Illinois, and the latest edition of the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, unless
otherwise modified in this appendix.



      (3)   Specification references made herein for manufactured
items, such as pipe, fittings, and manholes refer to designations of the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), the American Water Works
Association (AWWA) or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).



   (B)   Basic design standards.



      (1)   All storm sewers, streams, or channels shall be designed
to accommodate all areas that naturally flow to the area of the development
and also any additional areas, which are planned to contribute to the
drainage area as identified by the Village Engineer.



         (a)   Stormwater system design and detention shall be in
accordance with the Village of Channahon Storm Water Detention Ordinance No.
672, and subsequent amendments. 



         (b)   A minimum velocity of three feet per second shall
be maintained in pipes flowing full, in accordance with the guidelines
contained in the Illinois Department of Transportation's Drainage Manual.



         (c)   Drainage calculations shall be submitted with the
development plans.



      (2)   The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and
independent of the sanitary sewer system.



      (3)   Minimum sewer size.  Storm sewer serving inlets shall
not be less than 12-inch diameter.



      (4)   Alignment.  Sewer shall be laid straight in both
horizontal and vertical planes between manholes.



      (5)   Sewer size changes. 



         (a)   Storm sewers of different diameters shall join
only at structures. 



         (b)   The invert elevations shall be adjusted to
maintain a uniform energy gradient by matching the 0.8 depth points of the
different diameter.



      (6)   Stormwater inlets.



         (a)   Surface drainage inlets shall be provided so that
surface water is not carried across any street intersections or parking lot
drives. 



               1.   Surface runoff shall not extend a
distance of more than 400 feet along the surface of the ground, and shall not
build up a flow of more than two cubic feet per second in a ten-year storm
before being intercepted by drainage inlets. 



               2.   Inlets shall discharge into storm
sewers, which shall not discharge into side lot or rear lot drainage
ditches. 



               3.   Inlets shall be provided at all low
points.



         (b)   Size.  Inlets shall have 24-inch inside diameter.



         (c)   Adjustment.



               1.    At least one two-inch precast concrete
adjusting ring shall be used on each inlet barrel to provide a base for the
frame and grate. 



               2.   No more than two precast concrete
adjusting rings, with six-inch maximum height adjustment, will be allowed.



         (d)   Rear yard inlets having a minimum depth of two
feet shall be provided where necessary.



      (7)   Lot drainage.



         (a)   Positive drainage shall be established for each
lot, whether or not it is the intention to construct a building on that lot. 



         (b)   Sump pump connections shall be required in all
areas where storm sewer service tees are available.



      (8)   Catch basins.



         (a)   Catch basins shall be located where required to
catch debris that may enter through inlet grates before it is introduced into
the main storm sewer piping system.



         (b)   Type C catch basins shall be used for catch basins
no deeper than four feet.



         (c)   Type A catch basins shall be used for all catch
basins over four feet deep or if pipe size and configuration prohibits the
use of a Type C basin.



      (9)   Storm sewer manholes.



         (a)   Manholes shall be located as follows:



               1.   At the termination of all sewers which
do not terminate at a catch basin or inlet;



               2.   Changes in direction, horizontal or
vertical;



               3.   Changes in shape or pipe size; and



               4.   Junctions with other storm sewers.



         (b)   Access spacing shall be:



 


STORM SEWER PIPE SIZE (in inches)

 

MAXIMUM MANHOLE INTERVAL (in feet)




12 - 24

 

350




27 - 36

 

400




42 or larger

 

500




 



         (c)   Where flows, pipe size, or other conditions
dictate, special manholes or junction chambers shall be designed and
constructed.



         (d)   Manhole size. 



               1.   Manhole size shall be as required to
accommodate the intersecting sewer pipes. 



               2.   The following table contains the
minimum design sizes:



 


SEWER PIPE IN SIZE
(in inches)

 

MANHOLE DIAMETER
(in inches)




18 or less

 

48




21 - 36

 

60




For sewers greater than 36-inch inside diameter, manhole shall have an offset
riser pipe of 48-inch inside diameter.




 



         (e)   Adjustment.  No more than two precast concrete
adjusting rings, with six-inch maximum height adjustment, shall be allowed.



      (10)   Sewer depth.  Storm sewers shall be constructed
sufficiently deep so as to prevent freezing and to provide an outfall for all
stormwater  within the ultimate service area, both existing and future.



      (11)   Sewer pipe class.  Sewer pipe class shall be
determined based upon the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.



      (12)   All pipes shall be terminated with precast, reinforced
flared end sections.



   (C)   Material specifications. All storm sewer system elements shall
conform to the following specifications:



      (1)   Sewer pipe.



         (a)   Reinforced concrete pipe (12-inch diameter and
larger):  circular reinforcement, minimum Class 3, wall B, ASTM C-76.



         (b)   Non-reinforced concrete sewer pipe: minimum Class
3, ASTM C-14.



         (c)   Reinforced concrete, elliptical culvert pipe: 
minimum Class HE-III or VE-III, ASTM C-507.



         (d)   Galvanized corrugated steel culvert pipe:  AASHTO
M246, Type B, minimum wall thickness 14 gauge.  (Shall only be used for
culverts upon village approval.)



         (e)   Reinforced concrete, arch culvert pipe: 
double-line reinforcement, minimum Class 3, ASTM C-507.



         (f)   High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe may be
utilized for sump pump discharge conveyance systems when in conformance with
all applicable ASTM and AASHTO standards.



      (2)   Sewer pipe joints.



         (a)   Reinforced concrete pipe:  ASTM C-443 or ASTM
C-361 ("O" ring).



         (b)   Reinforced arch or elliptical pipe:  ASTM C-877.



      (3)   Casing pipes.  Steel pipe:  ASTM A-120, 3/8-inch
minimum thickness.



      (4)   Manholes and catch basins.



         (a)   Precast reinforced concrete:  ASTM C-478.



         (b)   Manhole bases shall be precast.



         (c)   Joints. 



            1.   Storm sewer manhole joints shall be sealed
with O-ring gaskets or mastic material.



            2.   Storm sewer pipe connections to manholes
shall be mortared.



         (d)   Steps.  Sixteen inches on center, cast in place,
E.J.I.W. No. 8518, or steel-reinforced plastic conforming to OSHA standards.



         (e)   A negative pressure vacuum test shall be required
for all sanitary manholes in accordance with ASTM C-1244-93 standard.



      (5)   Inlets.  Precast reinforced concrete:  ASTM C-478.



      (6)   Castings.



         (a)   Manhole frame and cover:  E.J.I.W. No. 1020,
embossed "STORM" and "VILLAGE OF CHANNAHON" with Type A heavy duty cover.



         (b)   Six-inch curb and gutter inlet:  E.J.I.W. No.
7210, with Type M1 grate.



         (c)   Rolled curb and gutter inlet:  E.J.I.W. No. 7525.



         (d)   Depressed curb and gutter:  E.J.I.W. No. 7210,
with Type M3 grate.



         (e)   Yard inlet:  E.J.I.W. No. 1020, with Type M2 flat
grate or Type 01 Beehive or Type 2 Beehive as approved during final
engineering review.



      (7)   Bedding stone and trench backfill.  IDOT gradation CA-7
crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the following gradation requirements:



 


SIEVE SIZE Percent Passing



Grad No.
 
   3"
 
   21/2"
 
   2"
 
   11/2"
 
   1"
 
   3/4"
 
   1/2"
 
   3/8"
 
No. 4
 
No. 16
 
No. 50
 
No. 200


CA-7
 
 
 
 
100
 
95±5
 
 
45±15
 
 
5±5
 
 
 



 



   (D)   Installation.



      (1)   Notification.  Prior to beginning the storm sewer
installation, the contractor shall give the Village Engineer 48 hours notice
of his or her intended time of starting work.



      (2)   Erosion control. 



         (a)   All soil erosion control measures are to be in
place prior to and during the installation of the stormwater piping and
detention system. 



         (b)   The soil erosion measures shall be in accordance
with the Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion Control in Illinois,
the General National Pollution Discharge Elimination (NPDES) Permit, the
project plans and specifications, or as directed by the Engineer or village.



      (3)   Excavation.



         (a)   The width of trench, at and below the top of pipe,
shall not exceed the widths given in Section 20-2.03 of the Standard
Specifications.



         (b)   The trench shall be excavated so that a minimum of
six inches of CA-7 can be placed as bedding material.



         (c)   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for
the bottom of the trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy or other
unsuitable soil, such unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of
the trench, and replaced with well-compacted CA-7 material, or an equal
substitute if such compacted material proves unsatisfactory. 



         (d)   Where rock in either ledge or boulder formation is
encountered, it shall be removed below grade, and replaced with a
well-compacted cushion of CA-7 material having a thickness under the pipe of
not less than eight inches.



      (4)   The contractor shall be responsible for providing a
competent individual on site during all trenching operations to insure that
all OSHA and other applicable safety standards are met by construction means
and methods.



      (5)   Pipe bedding. 



         (a)   Six inches of CA-7 material shall be used as
bedding under the pipe. 



         (b)   The bedding stone shall be graded along the entire
length of pipe to provide full bearing.



         (c)   The bedding stone shall extend to the springline
of the pipe.



      (6)   Backfilling. 



         (a)   Backfilling of the trench shall be accomplished by
careful replacement of the excavated material after the pipe and the bedding
material have been installed. 



         (b)   Any pipe installed under an existing or proposed
street pavement, or within two feet of an existing or proposed pavement edge
or curb and gutter shall be backfilled to the top of the trench with CA-7
material.



      (7)   Laying. 



         (a)   The pipe shall be laid accurately to the line and
grade as designated. 



         (b)   The lubricant, mastic, or other joint material
shall be used and installed as recommended by the pipe or joint
manufacturers' specifications.



      (8)   Separation from water main.



         (a)   The storm sewer pipe shall be laid at least ten
feet horizontally distant from any existing or proposed water main. 



         (b)   If the storm sewer must cross a water main, the
top of the storm sewer pipe must be laid at least 18 inches below the bottom
of the water main pipe. 



         (c)   If neither of these conditions can be met, other
methods of obtaining separation, as described and illustrated in the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, shall be
followed.



   (E)   Testing and acceptance.



      (1)   General.  All the required testing and correction of
defects of the storm sewer system shall be performed before curb and gutter
or other permanent-type surface improvement work begins.



      (2)   Cleaning.  Any pipes or manholes containing debris or
sediment shall be cleaned prior to acceptance.



      (3)   Defects.



         (a)   Any piping with cracks, improperly sealed joints,
or variations from the approved grades and alignment shall be repaired by
removing and replacing the involved sections of pipe.



         (b)   The Village Engineer may require compaction,
leakage, or other types of testing as a condition of the storm sewer system
initial acceptance.



      (4)   Drawings.



         (a)   Record drawings prior to final acceptance of work,
"record" drawings shall be submitted to the village. 



         (b)   One mylar reproducible and two blueline copies
shall be submitted, along with an electronic copy, in accordance with the
current village requirements.



(Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)









 



NOTES:



   1.   Manhole frame and lid shall have machined bearing surfaces. 
Sanitary manholes shall have self-sealing lids.



   2.   Maximum of two adjusting rings totaling no more than six inches
shall be used.



   3.   Sanitary manholes shall have a vertical top edge on the cone
designed to accept a chimney seal.



 


DRAWING STORM 1

 

TYPICAL MANHOLE TYPE A (FOR SANITARY AND STORM SEWER MANHOLES)










 



NOTES:



   1.   Maximum of two precast adjusting rings totaling no more than
six inches shall be used.  At lease  one precast adjusting ring shall be
used to provide a base for the frame and grate.



   2.   The inside corners of the inlet frame shall be grouted after
the curb and gutter have been poured.



   3.   Bituminous mastic or grout shall be used between the inlet
barrel, frame, and all adjusting rings.



 


DRAWING STORM 2

 

TYPICAL INLET TYPE A










 



NOTES:



   1.   Maximum of two adjusting rings totaling no more than six inches
shall be used.



   2.   Bituminous mastic or grout shall be used between the catch
basin, frame, and all adjusting rings.



 


DRAWING STORM 3

 

TYPICAL CATCH BASIN TYPE A










 



NOTES:



   1.   Maximum of two precast adjusting rings totaling no more than
six inches shall be used.  At lease  one precast adjusting ring shall be
used to provide a base for the frame and grate.



   2.   The inside corners of the inlet frame shall be grouted after
the curb and gutter have been poured.



   3.   Bituminous mastic or grout shall be used between the inlet
barrel, frame, and all adjusting rings.



 


DRAWING STORM 4

 

TYPICAL CATCH BASIN TYPE C




 



APPENDIX G:  WATER SUPPLY MATERIAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS



   (A)   General.



      (1)   All development shall include provisions for the
construction of water distribution facilities complete with valves, fire
hydrants, and other such appurtenances designed in accordance with this
appendix.



         (a)   As a minimum, the water distribution system shall
provide a service connection(s) near the front property line of each
individual lot or parcel within the development. 



         (b)   Where more than one building is located or planned
on one lot or parcel of property for fire protection, the proposed
construction shall also include all water main construction and appurtenances
within the lot or parcel except service lines.



      (2)   Water distribution systems shall be constructed in
accordance with the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, and the latest edition of the
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois, unless
otherwise modified in this appendix.



      (3)   Specification references made herein for manufactured
materials, such as pipe, hydrants, valves, and fittings refer to designations
of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), the American Water
Works Association (AWWA) or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).



   (B)   Basic design standards.



      (1)   System extension.



         (a)   Extension to the water distribution system shall
form a complete network extension, or part of a complete network extension
that includes all primary mains, secondary mains, and gridiron mains,
complimenting the existing distribution system network.



         (b)   Primary mains are those that form the arterial
portion of the system. 



            1.   Primary mains under construction within a
development are further defined as mains that are 16 inches or larger.



            2.   Secondary mains shall be sized, looped, and
spaced as required for fire flows and shall have a minimum diameter of eight
inches.



         (c)   Gridiron mains shall form a grid to supply water
to the local fire hydrants and service lines.



            1.   Gridiron mains shall have a minimum diameter
of eight inches. 



            2.   Dead ends shall be avoided whenever possible,
and shall not exceed 600 feet.



         (d)   The maximum number of valves to be operated for a
shut down shall be three; four may be allowed in unique cases with the
approval of the village.



      (2)   Maximum day consumption.



         (a)   For purposes of water main design, maximum day
consumption for water main design shall be based on the following table:



 


TYPE OF ESTABLISHMENT

 

UNIT

 

MAXIMUM DAY CONSUMPTION* Gal/Day/Unit






Retail ( >100,000 sq. feet)

 

Employee (one shift)

 
   105



Retail ( <100,000 sq. feet)

 

Employee (one shift)

 
   65



Office

 

Person (one shift)

 
   50



Industrial

 

Person (one shift)

 
   75



Restaurant

 

Meal served

 
   15


Theater
 
Per seat
 
   10


Hotel
 
Per guest
 
   210



* Quantities are exclusive of process water requirements which must be
estimated and added.





 



         (b)   For other than residential developments, when the
details of the development are not known, the maximum day consumption and
fire flow may be estimated by the Village Engineer. 



         (c)   Such estimate shall not relieve the owner or
developer of the responsibility of providing adequate main capacity for any
and all future needs within the development.



      (3)   Head losses. 



         (a)   Head losses due to friction shall be computed
using the Hazen-Williams formula with a "C" factor no greater than 100. 



         (b)   Head loss calculations shall be submitted to the
village for approval.



      (4)   Main capacity.  Primary mains, secondary mains, and
gridiron mains shall be sized to provide sufficient capacity to deliver the
required fire flow plus the consumption at the maximum daily rate to all
areas served by the proposed construction.



      (5)   Required fire flow and pressure. 



         (a)   A separate fire flow report shall be prepared that
indicates that at selected locations, and at any other locations that may be
selected by the village or the Village Engineer, the fire flows required, in
excess of maximum daily consumptive demands, will be supplied using a "C"
factor of 100, ignoring fittings, and with a minimum residual hydrant
pressure of 20 psi. 



         (b)   Required fire flow shall be computed as detailed
in the latest edition of the Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow ,
published by the Insurance Service Office. 



         (c)   The developer's engineer shall furnish any
necessary design calculations to ensure that all water mains are sized to
provide ISO fire protection flow rates or the rates shown in the following
table, whichever is higher:



 

Single-Family Residential
 
   1,500 GPM @25 psi


Multifamily Residential
 
   2,500 GPM @25 psi


Commercial-Industrial
 
   3,500 GPM @25 psi



 



      (6)   Fire hydrant spacing.



         (a)   The maximum distance between fire hydrants shall
be 350 feet. 



               1.   Fire hydrants shall be provided so as
to provide the required fire flows to structures as described in the latest
edition of the Fire Suppressions Rating Schedule, published by the Insurance
Service Office.



               2.    Six-inch main extensions serving
hydrants shall not be more than 100-feet long. 



         (b)   Placement on private property.



               1.   Fire hydrants shall be placed on
private property when the Fire Chief of the Fire District determines that
fire hydrants are at too great a distance to provide proper protection for
multifamily, commercial, or industrial properties. 



               2.   Easements shall be provided for all
hydrants on private property.



      (7)   Valve spacing. 



         (a)   A sufficient number of valves shall be provided so
that a break or other failure will not affect more than 32 residential units
or 1,000 feet of main in nonresidential areas. 



         (b)   All valves six inches and larger must be installed
in valve vaults (fire hydrant auxiliary exempted).



   (C)   Material specifications and details.  All water distribution
system elements shall conform to the following specifications:



      (1)   Ductile iron pipe.



         (a)   Pipe class thickness:  Class 52, minimum
thickness per AWWA C-151, or as required by AWWA C-150 for various depths.



         (b)   Joints:  push-on and mechanical, AWWA C-111.



         (c)   Polyvinyl wrap:  AWWA C-105.



         (d)   Fittings:  cast or ductile iron, AWWA C-110 and
AWWA C-111.



      (2)   Valves.



         (a)   Twelve-inch and smaller: epoxy-coated resilient
wedge, with non-rising stem gate valves, counter-clockwise to open, AWWA
C-509.



         (b)   Fourteen-inch and larger: epoxy-coated iron body,
rubber seat, butterfly valve, counter-clockwise to open, AWWA C-504.



         (c)   Joint end:  mechanical.



      (3)   Fire hydrants.



         (a)   Mueller Super Centurion 250 or Clow Medallion,
factory primed with Sherwin Williams Pro Industrial acrylic off-white
Pro-Cryl primer and factory painted with Sherwin Williams Safety Yellow Aqua
400 with UV Absorbers, FEDERAL STD. COLOR 595B NO. 13591. A protective top
coat as recommended by the manufacturer shall be factory applied.



         (b)   Valve size:  51/4-inch, counter-clockwise to open.



         (c)   Nozzles:  two at 21/2-inch, one at 41/2-inch,
with threads conforming to National Standard Specifications.



         (d)   Breakaway type with the break-line flanges located
one inch above finished grade.



         (e)   Hydrant to be installed with MJ swivel Tee, with
swivel MJ Gland.



         (f)   Auxiliary valve to be flanged attachment to the
fire hydrant, and to be of the same manufacture as the fire hydrant.



      (4)   Hydrant valve box.



         (a)   Tyler 664-S.



         (b)   Lid embossed "WATER".



         (c)   Stabilizer for box shall be used.



      (5)   Corporation stops:  Mueller H-15000, one-inch minimum.



      (6)   Service pipe.



         (a)   Copper tube.



               1.   Two-inch and smaller; Type K (one-inch
minimum). 



               2.   Continuous from corporation stop to
curb stop, and from curb stop to inside building.



               3.   Exceptions only approved by the village
or the Village Engineer.



         (b)   Ductile iron:  larger than two-inch.



      (7)   Curb stop.



         (a)   Copper service:  Mueller H-15154.



         (b)   Ductile iron service:  conform to subsections
(C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)(c) above.



      (8)   Curb box.



         (a)   Copper service:  Mueller H-10302 or H-10304.



         (b)   Ductile iron service:  four-inch and smaller,
conform to subsection (C)(4) above.



         (c)   Ductile iron service:  six-inch and larger,
conform to subsection (C)(11) below.



      (9)   Thrust restraints.



         (a)   Horizontal reactions: thrust restraints at all
tees, plugged ends, hydrants, and bends between 111/4 degrees and 90 degrees.



         (b)   Vertical reactions: individual designs for each
location shall be submitted with the development plans.



         (c)   Material:  precast or poured concrete.



         (d)   Where undisturbed earth is not available or not
likely to be available to back up pressure-type concrete thrust blocks, the
development plans shall specify Megalug retainer glands or tie rods, with or
without anchor-type thrust blocks. 



               1.   Design data shall be submitted for such
specifications. 



               2.   Care shall be taken when pouring
concrete so that the mix will not interfere with access to joints or with
hydrant drainage.



      (10)   Casing pipes.  Steel pipe ASTM A-120, 0.375-inch
minimum thickness.



      (11)   Valve vaults.



         (a)   Precast reinforced concrete:  ASTM C-478.



         (b)   Size.



               1.   For six-, eight-, ten-, and
12-inch-diameter valves, valve vaults shall have a 48-inch inside diameter.



               2.   For pressure connections and valves
16-inch and larger, valve vaults shall have a 60-inch inside diameter.



         (c)   Adjustment:  No more than two precast concrete
adjusting rings, with six-inch maximum total height adjustment, shall be
allowed.



         (d)   Valve vaults requiring offset cones shall be
positioned so that neither the inside of the cone nor the manhole steps will
interfere with the operation of the valve.



      (12)   Castings.



         (a)   Manhole frame and cover:  East Jordan Iron Works,
Inc. (E.J.I.W.) 1020 and 1020A HD, embossed "WATER" and "VILLAGE OF
CHANNAHON".



         (b)   Manhole steps:  E.J.I.W. 8518 or steel-reinforced
plastic, conforming to OSHA standards, 16 inches on center.



      (13)   Pipe bedding cover and trench backfill.  IDOT
gradation CA-7 crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the following
gradation requirements:



 


SIEVE SIZE
Percent Passing



Grad No.
 
3"
 
21/2"
 
2"
 
11/2"
 
1"
 
3/4"
 
1/2"
 
3/8"
 
No. 4
 
No. 16
 
No. 50
 
No. 200


CA-7
 
 
 
 
100
 
95±5
 
 
45±15
 
 
5±5
 
 
 



 



   (D)   Installation requirements.



      (1)   Environmental Protection Agency permit. 



         (a)   Water system design and construction shall, in all
respects, be in accordance with the regulations of the State Environmental
Protection Agency. 



         (b)   No construction shall commence until a copy of a
permit from this agency is filed with the village and Village Engineer.



      (2)   Installation.  The installation of water mains and
appurtenances, including services, shall conform to the requirements of this
appendix and, in particular,  to AWWA C-600.



      (3)   Notification.  Prior to beginning the water main
installation, the contractor shall give the village 48 hours notice of his or
her intended time of starting work.



   (E)   Water service line:  installation and location. 



      (1)   A water service line is a water pipe connected at the
water main by a brass corporation stop or a ductile iron fitting. 



      (2)   Such pipe is extended horizontally, at right angles with
the water main, to the front line of the lot or single building that it is to
serve. 



      (3)   For all service taps larger than one inch, a service
saddle designed for the size and type of water main pipe shall be used. 



      (4)   A cast iron curb box shall be installed over curb stops
or four-inch and smaller gate valves. 



      (5)   A valve vault shall be provided for gag valves larger
than four inches. 



      (6)   The water service line shall be terminated with a brass
curb stop or gate valve six and one-half feet from the lot line, and five
feet right of the center of the lot as viewed from the street.



      (7)   The end of the service line shall be marked with a
wooden four-inch-by-four-inch stake painted blue.



   (F)   Fire service line.  All fire sprinklers shall be connected to
the water system through a separate fire service line constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this appendix.



   (G)   Separation from sewers. 



      (1)   The water main pipe shall be laid at least ten feet
horizontally distant from any existing or proposed sewer pipe. 



      (2)   If the water main must cross a sewer pipe, the bottom of
the water main pipe must be laid at least 18 inches above the top of the
sewer pipe.



      (3)   If neither of these conditions can be met, other methods
of obtaining separation, as described and illustrated in the Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, shall be
followed.



   (H)   Construction requirements.



      (1)   Excavation.



         (a)   The trench shall be excavated so that the water
main shall have a minimum of five feet of cover. 



         (b)   The trench for the pipe shall be excavated at
least 12 inches wider than the external diameter of the pipe.



         (c)   The trench shall be excavated so that a minimum of
six inches of CA-7 stone be placed as bedding material. 



         (d)   The pipe shall then be covered with a minimum of
six inches of the same stone.



         (e)   Where a firm foundation is not found to exist for
the bottom of the trench at the required depth due to soft, spongy or other
unsuitable soil, such unsuitable soil shall be removed for the full width of
the trench, and replaced with well-compacted CA-7 material, or an equal
substitute if such compacted material proves unsatisfactory. 



         (f)   Where rock in either ledge or boulder formation is
encountered, it shall be removed below grade, and replaced with a
well-compacted cushion of CA-7 material having a thickness under the pipe of
not less than eight inches.



      (2)   The contractor shall be responsible for providing a
competent individual on site during all trenching operations to insure that
all OSHA and other applicable safety standards are met by construction means
and methods.



      (3)   Laying water main.



         (a)   The contractor shall keep the trench free from
water, while the water main is being placed and the pipe joint is being
sealed to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.



         (b)   Adequate provision shall be made for the safety,
storage and protection of all water pipe prior to actual installation in the
trench. 



            1.   Care shall be taken to prevent damage to the
pipe castings, both inside and out.



            2.   Provisions shall be made to keep the inside
of the pipe clean throughout its storage period and to keep mud and other
debris from being deposited therein. 



            3.   All pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned on the
inside before laying of the pipe. 



            4.   Proper equipment shall be used for the safe
handling, conveying, and laying of the pipe. 



            5.   All pipe shall be carefully lowered into the
trench, piece by piece, in such manner as to prevent damage to water main
materials and protective coatings and linings. 



            6.   Under no circumstances shall water main
materials be dropped or dumped into the trench.



         (c)   In making joints, all portions of the joining
materials and the socket and spigot ends of the joining pipe shall be wiped
clean of all foreign materials. 



            1.   The actual assembly of the jointing shall be
in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and as
directed by the Village Engineer. 



            2.   During construction, until jointing
operations are complete, the open ends of all pipes shall be at all times
protected and sealed with temporary watertight plugs.



         (d)   Poly-wrapping of all water mains is required,
unless soils are documented to be non-corrosive.



      (4)   Pipe cutting.



         (a)   The cutting of pipe for inserting valves,
fittings, or closure pieces shall be done in a neat and workmanlike manner,
without damage to the cement lining, and so as to leave a smooth end at right
angles to the axis of the pipe.



         (b)   Flame cutting of pipe by means of an oxyacetylene
torch shall not be allowed.



      (5)   Trench.



         (a)   The trench bottom shall be flat and shall provide
full bearing of the length of the pipe.



         (b)   Thrust blacks shall be used to prevent movement at
all tees, caps, valves, and hydrants.



         (c)   Backfilling of the trench shall be accomplished by
careful replacement of the excavated material after the pipe and the bedding
material have been installed. 



         (d)   Any pipe installed under an existing or proposed
street pavement, or within two feet of an existing or proposed pavement edge
or curb and gutter, shall be backfilled to the top of the trench with CA-7
material.



      (6)   Fire hydrant.



         (a)   Fire hydrants shall be placed as specified
herein. 



            1.   There shall be no obstructions within four
feet of the fire hydrant. 



            2.   All nozzles shall stand plumb, with the
steamer nozzle pointing normal to the road.



            3.   They shall conform to the established grade,
with nozzles at 18 inches above the finished grade.



         (b)   A drainage pit two feet in diameter shall be
excavated around each hydrant, and filled completely with 3/4-inch washed
gravel under and around the bowl of the drain opening. 



         (c)   No hydrant drainage pit shall be connected to a
sewer.



         (d)   Hydrant leads and extensions shall be provided, as
needed, in order to maintain adequate setback from the curb, and to provide
the proper distance from the hydrant nozzles to the final grade elevation.



      (7)   Water main installation. 



         (a)   During water main installation, to make a closure
between two pipe ends, or between pipe end fittings, or between pipe end and
valve, short lengths shall be used with proper connections or couplings.



         (b)   Repair sleeves shall not be used to make closures
during new construction.



      (8)   Dewatering. 



         (a)   Where water is encountered in the trench, it shall
be removed during pipe-laying and jointing operations. 



         (b)   Trench water shall not be allowed to enter the
pipe at any time.



      (9)   Connections to existing mains.  All connections to the
village water distribution system shall be made under full water service
pressure, unless otherwise approved by the Village Engineer at locations
approved by the Village Engineer.



   (I)   Pressure test.



      (1)   As part of the construction, the water mains shall be
pressure tested in accordance with this appendix. 



         (a)   All testing shall be performed before curb and
gutter or other permanent-type surface improvement work begins. 



         (b)   The Director of Public Works and Village Engineer
shall be notified at least 24 hours before the test. 



         (c)   The filling of the water main shall be at a rate
set by the village, with all hydrants and whips in the open position, and
slowly closed in the order in which water appears. 



         (d)   A form documenting the test procedure and results
shall be signed by the contractor and the representative for the village
witnessing the test.



      (2)   All newly laid pipe shall be subjected to a hydrostatic
pressure of 150 pounds per square inch, in accordance with the latest edition
of AWWA Standard C-600-93, Section 4: Hydrostatic Teting. 



         (a)   Allowable leakage, measured in gph (gallons per
hour) per 1,000 feet of pipeline, as specified in Table 6A of AWWA Standard
C-600-93, shall apply.



         (b)   Duration of each pressure test shall be for a
period of not less than two hours.



         (c)   Each valved section of pipe shall be filled with
water and the specified test pressure shall be applied by means of a pump
connected to the pipe. 



         (d)   Before applying the specified test pressure, all
air shall be expelled from the pipe. 



         (e)   All leaks shall be repaired until tight. 



         (f)   Any cracked or defective pipes, fittings, valves
or hydrants discovered in consequence of this pressure test shall be removed,
and replaced and the test repeated until satisfactory results are obtained.



      (3)   All testing shall be done before the installation of
service lines.



   (J)   Preliminary flushing. 



      (1)   Prior to chlorination, the main shall be flushed as
thoroughly as possible with the water pressure and outlets available. 



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall be notified
before any water is drawn from village mains. 



      (3)   Flushing shall be done after the pressure test is made. 



      (4)   Because such flushing removes only the lighter solids,
it cannot be relied upon to remove heavy material allowed to get into the
main during laying. 



      (5)   If no hydrant is installed at the end of the main, a tap
should be provided large enough to effect a velocity in the main of at least
two and one-half feet per second.



   (K)   Disinfection.



      (1)   Application of chlorinating agent.



         (a)   The preferred point of application of the
chlorinating agent shall be at the beginning of the pipeline extension, or
any valved section of it, and through a corporation stop in the top of the
newly laid pipe.



         (b)   The injector for delivering the chlorine gas into
the pipe should be supplied from a tap on the pressure side of the gate valve
controlling the flow into the pipeline extension.



      (2)   Flow of water.  Water from the existing distribution
system or any other source of supply shall be controlled so as to flow slowly
into the newly laid pipeline during the application of chlorine gas. 



         (a)   The rate of chlorine mixture flow shall be in such
proportion to the rate of water entering the pipe that the chlorine dose
applied to the water entering the newly laid pipe shall be at least 50 ppm,
or enough to meet the requirements during the retention period. 



         (b)   This may require as much as 100 ppm of chlorine in
the water left in the line after chlorination.



      (3)   Flow of chlorinating agent.



         (a)   Valves shall be manipulated so that the strong
chlorine solution in the line being treated shall not flow back into the line
supplying the water. 



         (b)   The pipe section being chlorinated shall be kept
at a lower pressure than the water system pressure.



      (4)   Retention of treated water.  Treated water shall be
retained in the pipe long enough to destroy all spore-forming bacteria.



         (a)   This retention period shall be at least 24 hours. 



         (b)   After the chlorine-treated water has been retained
for the required time, the chlorine residual at the pipe extremities and at
other representative points shall be at least 10 ppm.



      (5)   In the process of chlorinating newly laid pipe, all
valves or other appurtenances shall be operated while the pipeline is filled
with the chlorinating agent.



      (6)   All water mains shall be disinfected and tested
according to the requirements of the Standards for Disinfecting Water Mains,
AWWA C-601, as amended from time to time, and as required by this appendix. 



         (a)   All disinfection, as required by this appendix,
shall be performed by an independent firm exhibiting experience in the
methods and techniques of this operation, and shall be approved by the
village.



         (b)   Village personnel must be present during any
chlorination.



      (7)   Disinfection shall be done by the continuous-feed method.



      (8)   Installation of permanent fittings.



         (a)   All building service lines (four inches in
diameter or larger) shall be chlorinated/disinfected only after permanent
fittings have been installed. 



         (b)   Removal of any such fitting may require the
service line to be re-sampled or re-chlorinated at the discretion of the
village.



   (L)   Final flushing and testing.



      (1)   Following chlorination, all treated water shall be
thoroughly flushed from the newly laid pipeline at its extremities until the
replacement water, throughout its length shall, upon test, be approved as
safe water by the Village Engineer. 



         (a)   This quality of water delivered by the new main
should continue for a period of at least two full days, as demonstrated by
laboratory examination of samples taken from a tap located and installed in
such a way as to prevent outside contamination. 



         (b)   Samples should never be taken from an unsterilized
hose or from a fire hydrant because such samples seldom meet current
bacteriological standards.



      (2)   After disinfecting and flushing, a minimum of two water
samples shall be collected by the contractor on two successive days, with
notice given, so that the collection may be witnessed by the village.



         (a)   Bacteriological sampling and analysis of the
samples shall be performed by a laboratory approved by the State Department
of Public Health and the village. 



         (b)   Should the initial treatment result in an
unsatisfactory bacteriological test, the procedure shall be repeated until
satisfactory results are obtained. 



         (c)   The contractor or developer shall pay for the
sampling and analysis. 



         (d)   Results shall be transmitted by the laboratory
directly to the village.



         (e)   Test  results shall indicate the date the sample
was made, the exact locations at which sample were taken, the firm submitting
the sample, and the project at which the samples were collected. 



         (f)   Sufficient samples shall be collected in order to
insure that the system is bacteriologically safe.



      (3)   Village operation of valves, hydrants and other
appurtenances.



         (a)   The village shall operate the valves, hydrants and
any other appurtenances to flush the water main after the receipt of
satisfactory water samples. 



         (b)   Any operation difficulties or deficiencies shall
be noted and submitted to the developer or contractor for repair.



      (4)   All corporation stops used for testing and chlorination
purposes shall be removed and plugged with a tapered brass plug.



      (5)   Fire-flow testing will be performed by the village.



      (6)   Drawings.



         (a)   Prior to final acceptance of work, "record"
drawings shall be submitted to the village. 



         (b)   One mylar reproducible and two blueline copies
shall be submitted, along with an electronic copy, in accordance with the
current village requirements.



(Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1901,
passed 7-17-17)



 









 



 


DRAWING WATER 1

 

TYPICAL HYDRANT INSTALLATION















 



 


DRAWING WATER 2

 

TYPICAL TAP SERVICE PIPING (COPPER)










 



NOTES:




   1.   Valve vault diameter shall be 48 inches for eight-inch and
smaller valves, and 60 inches for ten-inch  and larger valves or for
pressure connections.





   2.   Bituminous mastic material shall be placed between all manhole
sections and adjusting rings.





   3.   Access opening and steps shall be positioned so as not to
interfere with valve operation from above.





   4.   Maximum of two adjusting rings totaling no more than six inches
shall be used.




 


DRAWING WATER 3

 

TYPICAL VALVE VAULT DETAIL





   WATER MAIN TESTING





SUBDIVISION                                       TEST
START TIME                              




CONTRACTOR                                       TEST END
TIME                                  



TEST DATE                                            
TEST DURATION                              



TEST PRESSURE                                     STATIC
PRESSURE                            



 



Allowable Water Loss



   Pipe Size                   inches               
inches                  inches



   Total Lengths                   feet              
        feet               feet



Allowable Calculations      FORMULA:   L= SDP



                      133,200



Where:



                           L = allowable leakage, in gallons
per hour



                           S = length of pipe tested, in feet



                           D = nominal diameter of the pipe,
in inches



                           P = average test pressure, in
pounds per square inch (gauge)



Calculations




Total Allowable Loss Per Hour (Gallons)




 


Test Number

 

Date

 

Allowable Loss

 

Actual Loss

 

Pass

 

Fail



 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 



 



Remarks:                                             
                                                   
                                                   
                             



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                       



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                           




Signatures         Village Representative                
                                                   
     



            Contractor                            
                                                   
             



APPENDIX H:  CURB AND GUTTER MATERIAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS



   (A)   General.



      (1)   All curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance
with the material installation and testing requirements of the latest edition
of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois,
unless otherwise modified in this appendix.



      (2)   Specification references made herein for manufactured
items, such as reinforcement, refer to designations of the American Society
for Testing and Materials (ASTM).



   (B)   Curb standards.



      (1)   Residential.



         (a)   Rolled-type combination curb and gutter conforming
to the dimensions shown in the rolled curb and gutter detail shall be used.



         (b)   The back of curb shall be depressed at all
sidewalk handicapped ramp locations.



         (c)   Depressing rolled curb at driveways will not be
allowed.



         (d)   The back of curb shall be stamped with the letters
"W" for water and "S" for sewer, at the location where the respective service
to each lot crosses under the curb.



      (2)   Commercial/industrial.



         (a)   Vertical face barrier-type combination curb and
gutter conforming to the dimensions shown in the vertical faced curb and
gutter detail shall be used.



         (b)   Depressed curb shall be provided at all sidewalk
handicapped ramp locations, and at all driveways whose locations are known at
the time of curb installation. 



         (c)   If the driveway location is not known at the time
of curb and gutter installation, vertical face barrier curb shall be
installed, and the driveway opening will be provided later by the lot owner.



         (d)   The back of curb shall be stamped with the letters
"W" for water and "S" for sewer, at the location where the respective service
to each lot crosses under the curb.



   (C)   Material.



      (1)   Concrete. 



         (a)   Portland cement concrete having a minimum
compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch in 28 days shall be
used. 



         (b)   Air entrainment shall be in the 3% to 6% range.



         (c)   Slump shall be two to four inches, except, if a
slipform paver is used, the slump shall be adjusted to meet the requirements
of the slip-forming process.



      (2)   Expansion joint filler.  Bituminous, preformed
expansion joint filler, 3/4-inch thick and pre-shaped to the profile of the
curb, shall be used.



      (3)   Expansion joint dowels.  Smooth steel dowels, 
3/4-inch diameter and 18 inches long with pinched stop caps on one end, shall
be used.



      (4)   Reinforcement bars.  Reinforcement bars shall be ASTM
A-615, minimum grade 40 steel.



      (5)   Joint sealant.  A cold-poured joint compound shall be
used.



      (6)   Curing compound.  Curing compound shall be Type II or
III, as specified in Section 722 of the Standard Specification for Road and
Bridge Construction.



      (7)   Curb base course.  Curb base course shall be IDOT
gradation CA-6 crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the following
gradation requirements:



 


SIEVE SIZE
Percent Passing



Grad No.
 
3"
 
21/2"
 
2"
 
11/2"
 
1"
 
3/4"
 
1/2"
 
3/8"
 
No. 4
 
No. 16
 
No. 50
 
No. 200


CA-6
 
 
 
 
100
 
95±5
 
 
75±15
 
 
43+13
 
25+15
 
 
8+4



 



   (D)   Installation.



      (1)   Base preparation. 



         (a)   The base course shall be CA-6, trimmed or filled
as necessary to provide a full depth of curb and gutter, as shown in the curb
detail. 



         (b)   Prior to concrete placement, the base course shall
be compacted and proofrolled in accordance with the testing and acceptance
requirements below.



      (2)   Reinforcement.



         (a)   Two No. 4 reinforcing bars with a minimum length
of ten feet shall be placed in all rolled curbs and gutters across utility
trenches in residential areas.



         (b)    The reinforcing bars shall extend at least two
feet beyond the edges of the trench on both sides.



         (c)   Two No. 4 reinforcing bars shall be placed
continuous, between expansion joints, in all vertical-faced barrier curbs and
gutters in industrial and commercial areas.



      (3)   Placing and finishing concrete.



         (a)   Concrete shall be thoroughly tamped to remove all
voids. 



            1.   The curb and gutter surface shall be broom
finished at right angles to the flow line of the curb and gutter. 



            2.   Any honeycombed areas along the sides of the
curb shall be pointed with mortar. 



            3.   The village shall be notified at least 24
hours before pouring the curb.



         (b)   The curb shall be depressed for handicapped ramps
at all sidewalk locations.



      (4)   Curing and protection. 



         (a)   The curb shall be sealed with curing compound as
the finishing work proceeds. 



         (b)   Protection shall be in accordance with the
standard specifications.



      (5)   Joints.



         (a)   Expansion joints shall be placed, as a minimum, at
all curb radius points and all construction joints in the curb, and shall
consist of expansion-joint filler and dowels with end caps.



         (b)   Contraction joints shall be sawcut at 20-foot
maximum intervals to a depth of two inches.



            1.    Sawing shall be done as soon as practical
before any random shrinkage cracking occurs, and no later than 24 hours after
the concrete has been placed. 



            2.   The clean joint space shall be sealed with a
cold-poured joint compound.



   (E)   Testing and acceptance.



      (1)   Proofroll. 



         (a)   The curb and gutter base course shall be
proofrolled with a fully loaded dump truck before the curb and gutter is
poured. 



         (b)   The Village Engineer shall be notified at least 24
hours before proofrolling. 



         (c)   Additional proofrolls shall be provided to verify
that any unstable areas have been repaired.



      (2)   Concrete.



         (a)   Test cylinders.



            1.   In accordance with ASTM C-31, the contractor
shall make:



               a.   At least two test cylinders from each
concrete pour less than 25 cubic yards; and



               b.   At least four cylinders for each pour
of 25 yards and above.



            2.   In accordance with ASTM C-39, the contractor
shall have the cylinders tested at 28 days by an independent testing firm,
and the test results mailed directly to the village with a copy to the
Village Engineer. 



            3.   If the materials tested fail to meet any of
the requirements of the tests, the portions of the job for which the
particular test was made may be rejected.



         (b)   The village may require that the slump and air
content of the concrete also be tested. 



            1.   All costs of testing shall be borne by the
contractor. 



            2.   Any concrete not conforming to the standard
specifications will be rejected.



   (F)   Defects.  Any curb that has been installed at the improper
line and grade that is damaged or badly cracked, or that has been installed
with improper material, shall be removed and replaced as a condition of
acceptance.



(Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02)









 



NOTES:




   1.   Depress back of curb at all sidewalk handicapped ramp locations.





   2.   Contraction joints shall be sawcut at 20-foot maximum intervals
to a depth of two inches.





   3.   Contraction joint spaces shall be sealed with a cold-poured
joint compound.





   4.   See expansion joint detail for expansion joint locations.





   5.   Concrete-curing compound shall be applied as finishing work
proceeds.




 


DRAWING CURB 1

 

ROLLED CURB AND GUTTER DETAIL RESIDENTIAL AREAS










 



NOTES:




   1.   Depress back of curb at all sidewalk handicapped ramp locations.





   2.   Contraction joints shall be sawcut at 20-foot maximum intervals
to a depth of two inches.





   3.   Contraction joint spaces shall be sealed with a cold-poured
joint compound.





   4.   See expansion joint detail for expansion joint locations.





   5.   Concrete-curing compound shall be applied as finishing work
proceeds.




 


DRAWING CURB 2

 

VERTICAL FACED CURB AND GUTTER DETAIL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS















 



NOTES:




   1.   Expansion joints shall be placed, as a minimum, at all curb
radius points and all construction joints in the curb.





   2.   Terminate any curb reinforcement bars three inches away from
expansion joints.




 


DRAWING CURB 3

 

TYPICAL EXPANSION JOINT DETAIL















 


DRAWING STREET 1

 

TYPICAL STREET SECTION















APPENDIX I:  STREET LIGHT MATERIAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS



   All subdivisions shall submit public improvement and development plans
that incorporate a proposed street lighting system to the village.  The
street lighting plan shall show the location and direction of the pole and
mast, and the proposed routing of the electric cable and duct.  The pole
size, bracket size and catalog numbers are to be shown on the street light
plans. An approved photometric drawing shall be supplied indicating proposed
street lighting coverage when developing individual parcels not subject to
the spacing requirements on roadways in accordance with Appendix I.



   (A)   Lighting standards.



      (1)   Residential.



         (a)   Placement at intersections of major streets.



            1.   A 250-watt-luminaire, high-pressure,
sodium-vapor, color-corrected lamp shall be placed at all intersections of
public street with township, county or state highway and major streets. 



            2.   A MAJOR STREET is defined as any street with
a right-of-way width greater than 66 feet.



         (b)   Placement at cross or “T” intersections, end
of streets and cul-de-sacs, mid-blocks and major curves.



            1.   A 150-watt-luminaire, high-pressure,
sodium-vapor, color-corrected lamp shall be placed at all cross or "T"
intersections and at the end of streets and cul-de-sacs. 



            2.   A 150-watt luminaire shall be placed at
mid-block of all blocks, at a distance not to exceed 340 feet between lamps. 



            3.   A 150-watt luminaire shall also be placed at
all major curves in street alignment.



         (c)   Mounting height shall be 25 feet for all poles,
except by approval of the village.



         (d)   All electric cable shall be placed underground in
a unit duct. 



            1.   Each light shall have a single feed from the
light standard to the point of connection to Commonwealth Edison electric
lines. 



            2.   The service disconnect shall be:  Square D
part number D221NRB, Series E2, rated 30 amp 240 V.A.C., and placed within
three feet of Commonwealth Edison's transformer or pedestal.



            3.   The service disconnect shall be mounted on a
service connection pedestal 204-38CPH, with mounting post 13 MHK72 that shall
be buried three feet below grade with post and pedestal projecting three feet
above grade.  Reference "Drawing Lighting 2" for detail of the disconnect
pedestal.



         (e)   Hand hole.



            1.   A hand hole shall be provided in each pole
base for splicing purposes. 



            2.   The hand hole shall be located on the side
opposite of traffic flow.



      (2)   Commercial.



         (a)   Placement at cross or “T” intersections, end
of streets and cul-de-sacs, mid-blocks and major curves.



            1.   A 250-watt-luminaire, high-pressure,
sodium-vapor, color-corrected lamp shall be placed at all cross or "T"
intersections and at the end of streets and cul-de-sacs.



            2.    The same type luminaire shall be placed at
mid-block of all blocks, at a distance not to exceed 500 feet between lamps;
and at all major curves in street alignment.



         (b)   Placement at intersections of major streets.  A
250-watt-luminaire, high-pressure, sodium-vapor, color-corrected lamp shall
be placed at all intersections of public street with township, county or
state highway and major street.



         (c)   Mounting height shall be 30 feet for all poles. 
The bracket arm shall be ten feet.



         (d)   All electric cable shall be placed underground in
a unit duct. 



            1.   Street lights shall be installed in series
when single feeds to a connection to Commonwealth Edison electric lines are
inaccessible.



            2.   The service disconnect shall be:  Square D
part number D221NRB, Series E2, rated 30 amp 240 V.A.C., and placed within
three feet of Commonwealth Edison's transformer or pedestal.



            3.   The service disconnect shall be mounted on a
service connection pedestal 204-38CPH, with mounting post 13 MHK72 that shall
be buried three feet below grade with post and pedestal projecting three feet
above grade.  Reference "Drawing Lighting 2" for detail of the disconnect
pedestal.



         (e)   Hand hole.



            1.   A hand hole shall be provided in each pole
base for splicing purposes. 



            2.   The hand hole shall be located on the side
opposite of traffic flow.



   (B)   Light standards and brackets.



      (1)   (a)   Residential pole.



         HAPCO Company or approved equal



         P.O. Box 547



         Abingdon, VA  24210    Phone #(703) 628-7171, Fax
#(703) 628-7707



         CAT. No. 31-187         



         CAT. No. 31-181 (Mid-block only)



         Valmont Industries or approved equal



         Valley, NE



         CAT. No. 31-250 12 CS 0745



         CAT. No. 31-250 08 CS 0745 (Mid-block only)



         (b)   Decorative residential pole.



         Lumec



         703 Childs



         Wheaton, IL 60187      Phone #(630) 462-0230,  Fax #
(630) 462-9077



         RAS61V-18-6N8TX



         RAS61W-18-6N8TX



      (2)   (a)   Commercial pole.



         HAPCO Company or approved equal



         P.O. Box 547



         Abingdon, VA  24210   Phone #(703) 628-7171, Fax #(703)
628-7707



         CAT. No. 31-568



         (b)   Decorative commercial pole.



         Lumec



         703 Childs



         Wheaton, IL 60187      Phone #(630) 462-0230,  Fax #
(630) 462-9077



         RASS61V-25-GN8TX



         BRACKET: VC6-2PH8/120-WDE-6NBTX, VC6-1A-PH8/120-WDE-6NBTX



      (3)   Luminaire. 



         (a)   The luminaire shall be the type manufactured by
General Electric, as noted below, or an equivalent type approved by the
village. 



         (b)   The luminaire shall be a 150- or 250-watt, cut-off
luminaire, in accordance with subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this appendix,
with attached photo cell. 



         (c)   The high-pressure sodium bulb shall be the same
type as that manufactured by General Electric, referred to as LUCALOX, as
noted below, and shall be included with the luminaries.



 


GENERAL ELECTRIC CAT. NO.

 
WATTAGE
 
BULB CAT. NO.
 
VOLTAGE





M2AC25SOA2GMC31

 

250

 

LU250

 

120V




M2AC15SOH2GMC31

 

150

 

LU150/55

 

120V



AMERICAN ELECTRIC CAT. NO.
 

WATTAGE

 


 





315-25SCAMT1R2FG4B

 

250

 


 





315-15SCAMT1R2FG4B

 

150

 


 




LUMEC (DECORATIVE)
 


 


 




Lumec Domus Series
 

250/150

 


 

120V



Lumec Ancestra Series
 

250/150

 


 

120V





 



   All decorative lighting shall be approved by the village prior to
installation.  It is recommended to consult village staff prior to the
ordering of any lighting materials.



      (4)   Vibration requirements. 



         (a)   There shall be no excessive vibrations in the
shaft, mast arms under moderate wind pressure, where damage may result to the
luminaire or its component parts, or mast arms. 



         (b)   A dampening device, as an integral part of the
shaft, shall be installed in the shaft to alleviate such excessive
vibrations. 



         (c)   The proposed vibration dampening device shall be
submitted to the Village Engineer for approval.



   (C)   Pole foundations. 



      (1)   Pole foundations shall be constructed with a
reinforced-concrete foundation, with dimensions at a minimum depth of six
feet and diameter of two feet standard, unless soil tests and borings
determine the dimensions may be increased or decreased.



      (2)   Foundations shall also contain a 3/4-inch-by-ten-foot
grounding rod, and shall be attached to the internal grounding lug located
within the pole by clamps and electrical grounding wire.



   (D)   Material. 



      (1)   The compressive strength of concrete for the foundation
shall be a minimum of 3,500 pounds per square inch in 28 days.



      (2)    The projecting portion of the anchor bolt and the nut
and washer shall be treated by the hot-dipped galvanized method. 



      (3)   The raceway shall be a two-inch straight conduit of
rigid plastic.



   (E)   Construction method.



      (1)    The foundation shall be cast-in-place and allowed to
cure a minimum of 14 days before the light pole is erected. 



      (2)   The top of the foundation shall be constructed level so
that no shims or other leveling device will be needed to set the light
standard plumb on the foundation.



      (3)   A two-foot "clear zone" shall be maintained from the
back of the curb to any aboveground obstruction.



   (F)   Materials for 600-volt, plastic-insulated electric cable.



      (1)   The conductors shall be a minimum of No. 10 AWG size in
the light standard. 



      (2)   When not within the light standard, the wire shall be a
minimum of No. 8 AWG size in a one-inch unit duct.



      (3)   The wiring in the light standard shall have Tron HEB-AA
fuse holders with a 5 amp fuse, and shall meet the specifications for
splicing of 600-volt cable and wire.



      (4)   A green ground (minimum #10) wire shall be used from
pedestal to pole with connections.



      (5)   The electric cable shall be contained within a one-inch
plastic unit duct. 



         (a)   The unit duct shall be one piece without splices.



         (b)    The unit duct may be formed by extruding it over
the insulated conductors.



         (c)   The unit duct shall have a smooth inner bore that
does not adhere to the conductor insulation.



      (6)   Additional commercial foundation specifications.



         (a)   To allow for single feed locations, two-inch
raceways shall be installed crossing perpendicular at one location.



         (b)   A transformer base may be utilized as required.



   (G)   Conductors. 



      (1)   Conductors of No.8 AWG size and smaller shall be XHHW-2
or USE, stranded, annealed copper wire that complies with ASTM Designation
B-3. 



      (2)   Conductors of No. 6 AWG size and larger shall be XHHW-2
or USE, stranded, annealed copper wire complying with ASTM Designation B-8. 



      (3)   Conductors shall be different colors to designate hot
and neutral wires with the use of black, red and white only. 



   (H)   Construction methods.



      (1)   The electric cable shall be continuous, without splices,
between service connections and light standards, and through all conduits. 



         (a)   The duct shall extend one foot into the light
standards, and the cable shall be long enough for the splices to be withdrawn
18 inches out of the light standard handholes. 



         (b)   All electric cable and electric cable unit duct
shall be buried underground at a minimum depth of 30 inches below finished
grade.



      (2)   The cable duct shall be placed in the bottom of the
trench, after all loose stones have been removed, and all protruding stones
have been removed or covered with backfill material, as directed by the
Village Engineer.



      (3)   Backfilling the trench.



         (a)   The trench shall be backfilled by placing backfill
material in uniform layers not exceeding six inches in depth (loose
measure). 



         (b)   The material in each layer shall be thoroughly
compacted to a density equal to the existing ground, or as approved by the
Village Engineer, in such a manner as not to injure the cable duct or the
bare copper wire.



      (4)   No stone or rock greater than two inches in maximum
dimensions shall be allowed in any layer of backfill.



      (5)   Materials prohibited from backfill.



         (a)   No sod, frozen material, or any material, whether
decayed or otherwise, that might cause settlement shall be placed as
backfill. 



         (b)   In any one sample of backfill material,
deleterious substances, such as coal, lignite, shells, clay lumps,
conglomerate and cemented particles, shall not exceed 5% by weight.



      (6)   Any material excavated from the trench may be used as
backfill, provided it does not conflict with the above, and the material is
approved by the Village Engineer.



      (7)   Commonwealth Edison connection.



         (a)   No splices shall be allowed between the light
standard and the connection to Commonwealth Edison electrical system. 



         (b)   If the cable has been cut during construction, the
cable and duct shall be replaced, in its entirety, from the Commonwealth
Edison connection into the light standard.



   (I)   Vibratory plowing. 



         (a)   The cable duct shall be directly buried by a
vibratory plowing method to a minimum of 30 inches. 



         (b)   Cable unit duct shall not be buried to a depth
exceeding 48 inches.



(Ord. 864, passed 11-6-95; Am. Ord. 1233, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 1589,
passed 8-3-09)









NOTES:



   1.   All work shall conform with the “National Electric Code”
requirements and the policies of Commonwealth Edison Company.



   2.   See the street light material standards and specifications for
luminaire type and other installation requirements.



*at mid-block locations only



 

DRAWING LIGHTS 1
 
STREET LIGHTING DETAIL



 



CHAPTER 155:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   155.01   Definitions



   155.02   Compliance with regulations required



   155.03   Permit required



   155.04   Permit fee



   155.05   Location restrictions



   155.06   Swimming pool barrier requirements



   155.07   Steps or ladders



   155.08   Electrical devices



 



   155.99   Penalty



§ 155.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL.  See SWIMMING POOL.



   BARRIER.  A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which
completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming
pool.



   HOT TUB.  See SWIMMING POOL.



   IN-GROUND POOL.  See SWIMMING POOL.



   RESIDENTIAL.  That which is situated on the premises of a detached
one- or two-family dwelling or a one-family townhouse not more than three
stories in height.



   SPA, NONPORTABLE.  See SWIMMING POOL.



   SPA, PORTABLE.  A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational
bathing in which all controls, water-heating and water-heating and
water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product.



   SWIMMING POOL.  Any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes
in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.



   SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR.  A swimming pool which is totally contained
within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by the walls of the
enclosing structure.



   SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR.  Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)



§ 155.02  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any
private swimming pool in the village, except in compliance with all the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall construct, install, enlarge or alter a private swimming
pool in the village without first having obtained a building permit. Each
person shall file a written application for said permit with the village. The
application shall contain information and drawings sufficient to verify
compliance with this chapter and the Building Code.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.04  PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for the issuance of a permit for the construction,
installation, enlargement or alteration of a private swimming pool within the
village shall be as determined from time to time by the Corporate Authority.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)



§ 155.05  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   No portion of a private swimming pool outside a building shall be
located at a distance less than ten feet from any side or rear property line
or building line. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment
installations shall be located at a distance not less then eight feet from
any side property line. No private swimming pool shall be constructed within
five feet of a septic absorption field. No private swimming pool shall be
constructed within four feet of a fence.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.06  SWIMMING POOL BARRIER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every person owning land on which there is situated a private
swimming pool shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure either
surrounding the property or the pool area, sufficient to make such pool
inaccessible to small children. Openings in the enclosure shall not allow
passage of a four inch diameter sphere.



   (B)   Such enclosure, including gates therein, must not be less than
four feet above the underlying ground, all gates must be self-closing and
self-latching with latches placed four feet above the underlying ground or
otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children.



   (C)   If the private swimming pool is above ground, the enclosure
must be either a property or area fence a minimum of four feet high or a
minimum 24 inch high railing on top of the pool perimeter with a locked
security ladder to make it inaccessible to small children.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.07  STEPS OR LADDERS.



   Two or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided for all in-ground private swimming pools. At least one such means of
egress shall be located on a side of the pool at the deep end and one such
means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at the shallow end of
the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of non-slip
material and shall have a handrail on both sides.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.08  ELECTRICAL DEVICES.



   All electrical devices used or connected to all private swimming pools
must be grounded and be connected to a ground-fault circuit-interrupter. No
overhead or underground electrical conductors shall cross any private
swimming pool or be located within 15 feet of any private swimming pool and
comply with the Electrical requirements of the 2006 International Residential
Code, Chapter 41.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during and on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(Ord. 1187, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 1467, passed 2-19-07)



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   156.001   Short title



   156.002   Purpose



   156.003   Method in which purposes to be fulfilled



   156.004   Definitions



   156.005   Interpretation



   156.006   Separability



   156.007   Scope of regulations



General Regulations



   156.020   Lots



   156.021   Open space



   156.022   Building height modifications



   156.023   Accessory buildings



   156.024   Agricultural exemptions



   156.025   Building lines established by the master plan



   156.026   Flood plain reservation areas



   156.027   Screening



   156.028   Use and screening of trash dumpsters in a nonsingle-family
zoned area



   156.029   Home occupations



   156.030   Use and screening of cargo containers as accessory
structures



   156.031   Ancillary uses



Zoning Districts



   156.040   Establishment of districts



   156.041   Zoning map



   156.042   Entire area zoned



   156.043   Annexed territory



Residential Districts



   156.055   Purpose



   156.056   R-1 Single Family Residence District



   156.057   R-2 Single Family Residence District



   156.058   R-3 Multifamily Residence District



Commercial Districts



   156.070   Purpose



   156.071   C-1 Local shopping district



   156.072   C-2 Community shopping district



   156.073   C-3 General business district



   156.074   C-4 Automotive service district



   156.075   C-5 Office/transitional district



   156.076   C-6 Office and research park district



   156.077   C-7 Day-care and professional office district



   156.078   TCD Town Center District



Overlay Districts



   156.080   Purpose



   156.081   Channahon Proper (CP) overlay zoning district



Industrial Districts



   156.090   Purpose of I-1 Limited Manufacturing District



   156.091   Uses within I-1 Limited Manufacturing District



   156.092   I-1 Limited Manufacturing District for industrial
subdivisions



   156.093   I-1 Limited Manufacturing District for all other
industrial zoned property



   156.094   Performance standards for I-1 Limited Manufacturing
District



   156.095   I-2 Intensive Industrial District



Public Recreation Districts



   156.100   Purpose



   156.101   PR-1 Public recreation district



Agricultural Districts



   156.110   Agricultural district



   156.111   A-2 Rural residence district



Nonconforming Uses



   156.120   Purpose



   156.121   Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses



   156.122   Nonconforming use of buildings or structures



   156.123   Nonconforming use of land



Planned Unit Development Regulations



   156.135   Purpose



   156.136   Procedure



   156.137   Location



   156.138   Specific contents



   156.139   Standards



   156.140   Findings



   156.141   Conditions and guarantees



Off-Street Parking and Loading



   156.150   Off-street parking space



   156.151   Off-street loading space



Signs



   156.160   Purpose



   156.161   Scope



   156.162   Interpretation



   156.163   Rules



   156.164   Definitions



   156.165   Limit on number of signs



   156.166   Limit on sign area



   156.167   Permits for permanent signs



   156.168   Permits for temporary signs



   156.169   Prohibited signs



   156.170   Placement of signs on corner lots



   156.171   Placement of signs on lots



   156.172   Illumination of signs



   156.173   Safety and maintenance



   156.174   Signs permitted in all districts



   156.175   Signs permitted in residential and agricultural districts



   156.176   Signs in commercial zoning districts



   156.177   Signs in industrial zoning districts



   156.177.1   Signs in public recreation-1 districts



   156.177.2   Signs in the Town Center zoning district



   156.178   Nonconforming signs



   156.179   Duties



Fences



   156.180   Definitions



   156.181   Compliance required



   156.182   Prohibited fences



   156.183   Application for permit



   156.184   General construction requirements



   156.185   Design, location and height requirements



   156.186   Fences used for specific purposes



   156.187   Maintenance



   156.188   Nonconforming fences



Administration and Enforcement



   156.190   Organization



   156.191   Office of the Building Commissioner



   156.192   Planning and Zoning Commission



   156.193   [Reserved.]



   156.194   Village Board of Trustees



   156.195   Zoning certificates



   156.196   Certificate of occupancy



   156.197   Variations



   156.198   Appeals



   156.199   Special use permits



   156.200   Amendments



   156.201   Temporary permits



   156.202   Fees



 



   156.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred as the “Channahon
Zoning Regulations.”



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.002  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent that this chapter be adopted for the following
purposes:



   (A)   To provide that adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire
and other dangers may be secured;



   (B)   To provide that the taxable value of land and buildings
throughout the municipality may be conserved;



   (C)   To provide that congestion in the public streets may be
lessened or avoided;



   (D)   To provide that the hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters may be
lessened or avoided; and



   (E)   To provide that the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare may otherwise be promoted.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.003  METHOD IN WHICH PURPOSES TO BE FULFILLED.



   (A)   In order that the purposes of this chapter may be fulfilled,
conditions, regulations and requirements are set forth in this chapter:



      (1)   To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter to be erected;



      (2)   To establish, regulate and limit the building on
set-back lines on or along any street, trafficway, drive, parkway or storm or
floodwater runoff channel or basin;



      (3)   To regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot
areas, and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces within and
surrounding buildings;



      (4)   To classify, regulate and restrict the location of
trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for specified
industrial, business, residential and other uses;



      (5)   To divide the entire municipality into districts of such
number, shape, area, and of such different classes (according to use of land
and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of lot
ares, area of open spaces, or other classification) as may be deemed best
suited to carry out the purposes of this chapter;



      (6)   To fix standards to which buildings or structures
therein shall conform;



      (7)   To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of
existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions
and limitations lawfully imposed under this chapter; and



      (8)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible
with the character of such districts.



   (B)   This chapter also, to fulfill its purpose, provides
conditions, regulations and requirements:



      (1)   To protect the character and the stability of the
residential, business and manufacturing areas and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas;



      (2)   To provide convenient access to properties;



      (3)   To provide for off-street parking and loading facilities;



      (4)   To protect against noise, vibrations, noxious fumes,
explosion hazards and other undesirable industrial and commercial hazards;



      (5)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue
concentration of structures;



      (6)   To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of
land, buildings and structures, which are incompatible and adversely
affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district;



      (7)   To define and limit the powers and duties of the
administrative officers and bodies as provided herein;



      (8)   To provide for the obtaining of permits and
certificates; and



      (9)   To prescribe penalties for the violation of the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.004  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   ABUTTING.  Having a common property line or district line.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE.  One which:



      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or
principal use.



      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the
principal building or principal use served.



      (3)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
occupants of the principal building or principal use served.



      (4)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building or principal use served with the single exception of such accessory
off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on
the same zoning lot with the building or use served.



      (5)   Occupies not more than 10% of the area of the lot on
which the main building is situated, and which is not higher than the
principal building, and which conforms to all setback requirements, and in
residentially zoned districts shall not exceed 15 feet in height.



   ACCESSORY TRUCK TERMINAL.  An accessory truck terminal is an
incidental use to the primary warehouse/distribution use. Accessory truck
terminal facilities are used for the loading and unloading of freight at a
facility where goods are transferred or stored or pending transfer, and which
may include truck dispatching, parking and minor maintenance and repair.
Minor maintenance and repair includes safety checks for lights, tire pressure
or fluid levels, excluding tire and fluid change and fueling. An accessory
truck terminal does not include overnight accommodations for truck drivers.



   ADJACENT.  Means lying near or in the immediate vicinity.



   ADJOINING.  Means touching or contiguous.



   AGRICULTURE.  The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory
uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce, provided, however, that
the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the
normal agricultural activities.  Agriculture shall not include the
commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.



   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING or STRUCTURE.  Any building or structure
existing or erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with
the exception of dwelling units.



   AIR-INFLATED STRUCTURE.  A building or tent-like structure wherein the
shape of the structure is maintained by air pressurization of cells or tubes
to form a barrel vault over the usable area. Occupants of such a structure do
not occupy the pressurized area used to support the structure. (Pool domes,
indoor sports domes, etc.)



   AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE.  A building or tent-like structure wherein
the shape or the structure is attained by air pressure and occupants of the
structure are within the elevated pressure area. Air-supported structures are
of two basic types:



      (1)   DOUBLE SKIN.  Similar to a single skin, but with an
attached liner that is separated from the other skin and provides an airspace
which serves from the outer skin and provides an airspace which serves for
insulation, acoustic, aesthetic or similar purposes.



      (2)   SINGLE SKIN.  Where there is only the single outer skin
and the air pressure is directly against that skin.



   ALLEY.  A public or private way, at the rear or side of property,
permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting
property. Frontage on the alley shall not be construed as satisfying the
requirements of this chapter related to frontage on a dedicated street.



   ALTERATION.   A change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of
a building or structure.



   ANCILLARY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR USES. Buildings, structures or uses
ancillary to a residential use which is on an adjacent lot with a
consolidated permanent index numbers that is detached and subordinate to the
main building or use.



   APARTMENT.  One or more rooms in an apartment building or combination
apartment and commercial building, arranged, intended or designed or occupied
as a dwelling unit of a single family, an individual or a group of
individuals.



   APARTMENT BUILDING.  A multiple-family dwelling originally designed
and constructed to accommodate three or more apartments, designed with more
than one dwelling unit connecting to a common corridor or entranceway, in
contrast to single or two-family dwellings converted for multiple-family use.



   AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR.  Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn
or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body,
frame or fender straightening or repair, and overall painting of vehicles.



   AUTO REPAIR, MINOR.  Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and
motor service to automobiles, but excluding any operation specified under
AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR.



   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY.  A building, or portion thereof, containing
facilities for washing more than two automobiles, using production line
methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other
mechanical devices.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.  (GAS STATION). A place where gasoline,
kerosene, lubricating oil, or grease for operation of automobiles are offered
for sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor
accessories and servicing of automobiles. Automobile service stations shall
not include sales, rental, or storage of automobiles or trailers.



   AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD.  Any place where two or more motor vehicles
not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are
not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts
thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition;
and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or
merchandise.



   BASEMENT.  A story having part but not more than one-half of its
height below grade.  A BASEMENT is counted as a story for the purpose of
height regulation if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by
janitor employed on the premises.



   BED AND BREAKFAST. A residential building containing lodging rooms
offered for rent to transient guests, for a continuous of 14 days or less,
and containing the owner's principal residence.



   BILLBOARD.  See SIGN, ADVERTISING.



   BLOCK.  Property abutting on one side of a street between two nearest
intersecting streets, railroad rights-of-way or natural barriers.  However,
where a street curves so that any two chords thereof form an angle of 120°
or less, measured on the lot side, such curve shall be construed as an
intersecting street.



   BOARD HOUSE or LODGING HOUSE.  A building or premises where meals are
regularly served by pre-arrangement for definite periods for compensation for
three or more persons, not a family, but not exceeding 12 persons, not open
to transient guests, in contradistinction to hotels or restaurants open to
transients.



   BOUNDARY LINE.  A line on the Zoning District Map designating the edge
of a use district. Such a boundary line may be a boundary line for two use
districts depending upon the particular use district located on each side of
the line.



   BUILDABLE AREA.  The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum
open space requirements of this chapter have been complied with.



   BUILDING.  A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls,
for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels; and
when separated by division walls from the ground up and without openings,
each portion of such building shall be deemed as a separate building.



   BUILDING LINE.  A line between which and any street line of a
district, lot, tract or parcel of land, no buildings or parts of buildings
may be erected, altered or maintained.



   BUILDING LINE SETBACK.  The distance between the building line and
street right-of-way line.



   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING.  See NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS. 



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A nonaccessory building in which a principal use
on the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.



   BUILDING, UNIT GROUP.  Two or more buildings (other than dwellings)
grouped upon a lot and held under one ownership, such as universities,
hospitals, institutions, churches and temples, and industrial plants and
shopping centers.



   BULK.  Indicates the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and
location of same with respect to one another and includes the following:



      (1)   Size and height of buildings.



      (2)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to
lot lines, streets, or to other buildings.



      (3)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area
(floor area ratio).



      (4)   All open spaces allocated to buildings.



      (5)   Amount of lot area per dwelling unit.



   BULK PLANT.  Any place where flammable liquids of 10,000 gallons or
more are received by tanker, barge, pipeline, tank car, tank vessel or truck
and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing such
liquids by tank truck, pipeline, tank car, tank vessel or container.



   BUSINESS or COMMERCE.  The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or
exchange of goods, wares or merchandise, or the maintenance or operation of
offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.



   CAPACITY IN PERSONS.  The maximum number of persons that can avail
themselves of the services (or goods) of an establishment, at any one time,
with reasonable comfort and safety.



   CAR WASH. A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for
washing vehicles; using automatic production-line methods with a chain



   CARGO CONTAINER.  A standardized reusable vessel that was:



      (1)   Originally, specifically or formerly designed for or
used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight,
articles, goods or commodities, and/or,



      (2)   Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a
rail car; and/or,



      (3)   Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or
bogie formovement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.



   CARPORT.  A roofed automobile shelter with one or more open sides.



   CELLAR.  A story having more than one-half of its height below the
curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A CELLAR shall
not be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.



   COMMON OPEN SPACE.  Land unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets,
rights-of-way and automobile parking lots and designed and intended for the
use or enjoyment of residents of a planned development.  COMMON OPEN SPACE
may contain structures for recreational use. No area within 30 feet of any
building or structure except a structure used for recreational use shall be
includable as COMMON OPEN SPACE.



   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE.  A group home or specialized residential care
home serving unrelated persons with disabilities in a family like atmosphere
which is licensed, certified or accredited by the appropriate state, local or
federal bodies.  COMMUNITY RESIDENCE does not include a residence which
serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or
persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or
for treatment of a communicable disease.



   COOP.An enclosed structure housing hens consisting of a covered inside
enclosure used for housing and protecting chickens from weather and predators.



   CORNER LOT.  See LOT, CORNER.



   COURT.  An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot
with a building, which is totally or partially enclosed by a building or
buildings and is completely open to the sky.



   CURB LEVEL.  The level of the established curb in front of the
building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more
than one street, the CURB LEVEL shall be the average of the levels of the
curbs at the center front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the level of the centerline of the street shall be considered
the CURB LEVEL.



   DAY CARE CENTER. A state licensed facility where a person, other than a
relative or guardian, provides care and supervision for four or more children
under seven years of age, or for four or more seniors or adults requiring
care, for less than 24 hours a day for compensation.



   DECK. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building,
without a roof, three  or more feet above grade.



   DENSITY.  The numerical value obtained by dividing the total dwelling
units in a development by the gross area of the tract of land upon which the
dwelling units are located.



   DISABILITY.  A physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one or more of a person's major life activities, impairs his or her
ability to live independently, a record of having such  an impairment, or
being regarded as having such an impairment, but such terms do not include
current use of or addiction to alcohol and/or other drugs.



   DISTRICT.  A portion of the incorporated territory of the village
within which certain uniform regulations and requirements, or various
combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this chapter.



   DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT.  Any commercial retail or
business service establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or
in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked on or moving
through the premises. Such establishments include, but are not limited to,
restaurants, banks and/or financial institutions, pharmacies, and dry
cleaning stores.



   DRIVEWAY, SIDE-LOAD. A private driveway, road, field road, or other
traveled way, giving access from a public highway or a private road in the
side yard of one or more buildings located or to be constructed on adjacent
lands.



   DRIVEWAYS. A private driveway, road, field road, or other traveled way,
giving access from a public highway or a private road to one or more
buildings located or to be constructed on adjacent lands.



   DWELLING.  A building or portion thereof, but not including a house
trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units,
and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or
lodging houses.



   DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment hotel
designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having its own
permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED, including group, row or town houses.  A dwelling
containing two or more dwelling units and joined to other dwellings by party
wall or walls, originally constructed for the purpose.



   DWELLING, CONVERTED.  Any building which was originally designed and
constructed as one, two or three-family dwelling, but which has been changed
or altered by the construction of additional dwelling units to provide for
more families than the original building.



   DWELLING, DETACHED.  A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by
open space on the same lot.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units, originally constructed for the purpose and not including
converted dwellings.



   DWELLING, SEMI-ATTACHED.  A dwelling which is joined to another
dwelling by a garage, carport, recreation structure, or other nonresidential
facility.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A dwelling containing accommodations for and
occupied by one family only.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A building designed exclusively for occupancy
by two families living independently of each other.



   DWELLING, GROUND FLOOR AREA.  The first floor area in square feet
measured from the outside of the exterior walls, but excluding cellars,
basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other infrequently used
spaces.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  A public, parochial, charitable, or
nonprofit junior college, college or university other than trade or business
schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without
living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other
incidental facilities for students, teachers and employees.



   EFFICIENCY UNIT.  A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room,
exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly
off the principal room.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than three persons (excluding
servants) not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities,
fraternities or other similar organizations.



   FENCE.  A freestanding structure of metal, masonry composition or
wood, or any combination thereof, resting on, or partially buried in the
ground, and rising above ground level, and used for confinement, screening,
decorative or partition purposes.



   FLOOR AREA.  (For determining floor area ratio).  The sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from
the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls
separating two buildings. The floor area of a building shall include the
basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above
the established curb level, off-street parking space, elevator shafts, and
stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment (except
equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof), penthouses, attic space
having headroom of seven feet, ten inches or more, interior balconies and
mezzanines, enclosed porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses. The
FLOOR AREA of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including, but
not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks, shall be
determined on the basis of the height of such structures in feet; ten feet in
height shall be deemed to be equal to one floor.  (If a structure measures
more than five feet over such floor equivalent, it shall be construed to have
an additional floor.)



   FLOOR AREA RATIO.  The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor
area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The
floor area ratio as designated for each district, when multiplied by the lot
area in square feet, shall determine the maximum permissible floor area for
the building or buildings on the lot.



   FRONTAGE.  All the property fronting on one side of a street between
the two nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street,
or if dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an
intersecting street and the dead end of the street.



   GARAGE, BUS or TRUCK.  A building which is used or intended to be used
for the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors, and commercial
vehicles exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  A building for the private use of the owner or
occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot of the principal
building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical
service or repair of a commercial or public nature.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC.  A building other than a private garage, used for the
care, incidental servicing and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor
vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the
structure, but not including trucks, tractors, truck-trailers and commercial
vehicles exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.



   GOODS. Any object, service, or commodity whose consumption increases
the utility of the consumer, for which the quantity demanded exceeds the
quantity supplied at zero price.



   GRADE, STREET.  Same as CURB LEVEL.



   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  The vertical distance from the average contact
ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.



   HEN. The female of the species Gallus domesticus, commonly known as
chickens.



   HOME DAY CARE CENTER. A family home which receives up to three
children, or up to three  seniors or adults requiring care, for less than 24
hours a day for compensation.



   HOME OCCUPATIONS.  An activity carried out for gain by a resident
conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit.



   HOTEL.  A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided
and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to
and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a
person in charge at all hours. As such it is open to the public in
contradistinction to a boarding house, a lodging house or an apartment hotel,
which are separately defined.



   HOTEL, APARTMENT.  A hotel in which at least 90% of the hotel
accommodations are occupied by permanent guests.



   HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM.  An institution devoted primarily to the
maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, or care
for not less than 24 hours in any week, of three or more nonrelated
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other
abnormal physical conditions. The term HOSPITAL as used in this chapter does
not apply to institutions operating primarily for treatment of insane
persons, drug addicts, liquor addicts or other types of cases necessitating
restraint of patients, and the term HOSPITAL shall not include convalescent,
nursing, shelter or boarding houses.



   JUNK YARD.  Any parcel of land where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags
or similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but
excluding similar uses taking place entirely within a completely enclosed
building.



   JUNKER.  An automobile, truck or other motor vehicle which has been
damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated under its own power and
will require major repairs before being made usable, or such a vehicle which
does not comply with state or village laws or ordinances.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL.  Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which
more than four dogs or cats, or other household domestic animals, over four
months of age, are kept or on which more than two such animals are boarded
for compensation or kept for sale.



   LARGE COMMUNITY RESIDENCE.  A community residence serving nine to 16
persons with disabilities.



   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY.  A trafficway, including expressways and toll
roads for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of
abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to
or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be
determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway.



   LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF- STREET.  An open, hard surfaced area
of land, other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for
the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers. 
Such space is not less than ten feet in width, 35 feet in length and 14 feet
in height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space.



   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one building and
accessory buildings and uses or a unit group of buildings and including the
open spaces required under these regulations. A lot may be land so recorded
on official records or it may include parts or a combination of such lots
when adjacent to one another, provided such ground is used for only one
improvement, or may be a parcel of land described by metes and bounds.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side
and rear lot lines.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot located at the intersection of two streets or a
lot bounded on two sides by a curving street and any two chords of which form
an angle of 120° or less measured on the lot side.



   LOT COVERAGE.  The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal
building or buildings and accessory buildings.



   LOT DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot other than a corner lot having frontage
on two or more streets. An alley shall not be considered a street.



   LOT FRONTAGE.  The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street.  For the purpose  of determining yard  requirements
on  corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets
shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under
YARD in this section.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.



   LOT, REVERSED CORNER.  A corner lot at right angles or approximately
right angles to the general pattern of the area, the street side lot line of
which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the front lot
to the rear. The rear of the corner lot is adjacent to the side of another
lot, whether across an alley or not.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  The front property line of a zoning lot.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR.  A side lot line common with another lot.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines most
nearly parallel to and most remote from the front lot line. Lot lines other
than front or rear lot lines are side lot lines.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been legally recorded.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building
line.



   MARQUEE or CANOPY.  A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way.



   MASTER PLAN.  The officially adopted Master Plan of the village.



   MOBILE PARK HOME.  A parcel or tract of land developed with facilities
for locating three or more mobile homes, provided that each mobile home
contains a kitchen, flush toilet and shower or bath and that such mobile home
park shall be for use only by nontransient dwellers remaining continuously
for more than one month, whether or not a change is made. It shall not
include a sales lot in which motor vehicles or unoccupied trailers are parked
for the purpose of inspection or sale.



   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR AND MINOR.  See AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR AND
MINOR.



   MOTEL.  An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached
living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on
a single zoning lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists. A
MOTEL furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service and laundering
of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep
of furniture. In a MOTEL less than 50% of the living and sleeping
accommodations are occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other than
transient automobile tourists.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor,
tractor-trailer, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by
mechanical power.



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING.  A building or structure or portion thereof
lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or amendment
thereto, which was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use that
does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  A use which lawfully occupies a building or land
at the time of adoption of this chapter or amendment thereto, and which does
not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.



   NURSERY, CHILD CARE.  An establishment for the part-time care of five
or more children of pre-elementary school age in addition to the members of
the family residing therein. 



   NURSING HOME.  A home for the aged, chronically ill, care of children,
infirm or incurable persons, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily
disorders in which three or more persons, not members of the immediate family
residing on the premises, are received, kept or provided with food and
shelter or care, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions
devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury,
maternity cases or mental illness.



   OPEN SALES LOT.  Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying or
selling merchandise stored or displayed out-of-doors prior to sale. (Such
merchandise includes, but is not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, motor
scooters, motorcycles, boats and monuments.)



   OUTDOOR SEATING. An area of designated size used as a seating area with
tables and chairs, associated with a contiguous restaurant and including the
sale of food to patrons.



   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE.  Space within a public or private parking
area of not less than 180 square feet (9 feet by 20 feet) exclusive of access
drives for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle
under one and one-half tons capacity.



   PATIO/TERRACE. A level plane or platform which, for the purposes of
this chapter, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal
structure, and which is constructed at or within three  feet of the finished
grade, without a permanent roof and intended for outdoor lounging, dining,
and the like.



   PAY DAY LOAN STORE.  A service to make loans against paychecks or
paycheck advances in exchange for a fee that is intended to bridge the
borrower's cash flow gap between paydays.



   PEN. An enclosure connected to a coop for the purposes of allowing
chickens to leave the coop while remaining in an enclosed, predator-safe
environment.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD.  A criterion established to control noise, odor,
smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or
glare or heat generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The
more frequently used performance criteria include:



      (1)   ACTIVE TO INTENSE BURNING.  The rate of combustion
described by materials that burn with a high degree of activity and are
consumed rapidly. Examples include sawdust, powdered magnesium and pyroxylin.



      (2)   CLOSED CUP FLASH POINT.  The lowest temperature at
which a combustible liquid, under prescribed conditions will give off a
flammable vapor which will burn momentarily.



      (3)   DECIBEL.  A unit which describes the sound pressure
level or intensity of sound. A sound level meter is calibrated in decibels.



      (4)   DETONABLE MATERIALS.  Materials which decompose by
detonation. Such materials include explosives, unstable compounds and
fissionable matter.



      (5)   EARTHBORNE VIBRATIONS.  The periodic displacement,
measured in inches, of earth.



      (6)   FIREPROOF CONTAINERS.  Enclosures of steel or concrete,
but not lead or other low-melting metals or alloys, unless the lead or low-
melting metal or alloys are completely encased in steel.



      (7)   FLASH POINT. The lowest temperature at which a flammable
liquid will momentarily burn under prescribed conditions. The tag flash point
testers shall be authoritative.



      (8)   FOOT CANDLE.  A unit of illumination; technically, the
illumination at all points one foot distance from a uniform point source of
one candle power.



      (9)   FREE BURNING.  Implies a rate of combustion described
by a material which burns actively and easily supports combustion.



      (10)   FREQUENCY.  Signifies the number of oscillations per
second in a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.



      (11)   IMPACT NOISE.  A short duration sound such as those
from a forging hammer or punch press.



      (12)   IMPULSIVE NOISE.  A sound which is no longer than two
seconds in duration, followed by no less than a two-second rest.



      (13)   INTENSE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a
material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.



      (14)   MICROCURIE.  One millionth of a curie, which is a
standard unit of radioactivity.



      (15)   MODERATE BURNING.  A rate of combustion described by a
material which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.



      (16)   NOXIOUS MATTER.  A material which is capable of
causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of
causing detrimental effects upon the physical or economic well-being of
individuals.



      (17)   OCTAVE BAND.  A prescribed interval of sound
frequencies which classifies sound according to its pitch.



      (18)   ODOR THRESHOLD.  The lowest concentration of odorous
matter in air that will produce an olfactory response in a human being.



      (19)   ODOROUS MATTER.  Any matter or material that yields an
odor which is offensive in any way.



      (20)   PARTICULATE MATTER.  Material, other than water, which
is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as
a liquid or solid.



      (21)   PREFERRED FREQUENCY OCTAVE BANDS.  A standardized
series of octave bands prescribed by U.S.A.S.I in S1.6-1967, Preferred
Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements.



      (22)   PRE-1960 OCTAVE BANDS.  A standardized series of
octave bands prescribed by the U.S.A.S.I. in Z24.10-1953, Octave Band Filter
Set.



      (23)   RINGELMANN CHART.  One which is described in the U.S.
Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888 or its successor, and on which are
illustrated graduated shades of grey for use in estimating the
light-obscuring capacity of smoke.



      (24)   SCF (Standard Cubic Feet).  The measure of the volume
of a gas, at any other conditions, reduced to 14.73 pounds per square inch
absolute and 60°F.



      (25)   SLOW BURNING or INCOMBUSTIBLE.  Materials which do not
in themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A
material which will not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an
exposure for five minutes to a temperature of 1200°F, shall be designated
INCOMBUSTIBLE.



      (26)   SMOKE.  Small gas-borne particles, other than water,
that form a visible plume in the air.



      (27)   SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER (Ringelmann Number).  The
shade of smoke as it appears on the standard Ringelmann Chart published by
the U.S. Bureau of Mines.



      (28)   SOUND LEVEL.  Of an operation or use is the intensity
of sound, measured in decibels, produced by such operation or use.



      (29)   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An electronic instrument which
includes a microphone, an amplifier and an output meter which measures noise
and sound pressure levels in a specified manner.  It may be used with the
octave band analyzer that permits measuring the sound pressure level in
discrete octave bands.



      (30)   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  The intensity of a sound
measured in decibels mathematically described as 20 times the logarithm to
the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference
pressure of 0.0002 microbar.



      (31)   TOXIC MATTER.  Materials which are capable of causing
injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small
amounts.



      (32)   THRESHOLD LIMIT VALUE.  The maximum allowable airborne
concentration of toxic material, as established by the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists.



      (33)   UNITED STATES OF AMERICA STANDARDS INSTITUTE
(U.S.A.S.I.)  A national organization promulgating authoritative standards
in many technical fields. Formerly, American Standards Association.



      (34)   VIBRATION.  The periodic displacement or oscillation
of the earth.



   PETS, HOUSEHOLD.  Animals customarily kept as domesticated pets but
excluding livestock, such as swine, sheep, goats, ponies or horses, and
poultry.



   PILOT PLANT.  A building or group of buildings in which a test, sample
or experimental manufacturing or assembling is operated until such time as
the process is perfected. This use is not to provide for the continuing
operation of a manufacturing or assembling use.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAT.  A drawing or map made to a measurable
scale upon which is presented a description and definition of the way in
which the design requirements of the planned unit development are to be met
and intended for recording with the county Recorder of Deeds.



   PORCH.  A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or wall
of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE/USE. The main structure erected on or the
main use occupying a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate)
structure or use.



   PROPERTY LINE.  An imaginary line at the edge or boundary of a zoning
lot.



   PUBLIC WAY.  Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public
thoroughfare.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Any person, firm or corporation duly authorized to
furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam,
telephone, telegraph, transportation, water or sewerage systems.



   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations,
loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car
yards.



   REST HOME or NURSING HOME.  A private home for the care of children or
the aged or infirm or any other person in need of nursing care. Such home
does not contain equipment for surgical care of for treatment of disease or
injury, and is not primarily designed for mental patients or alcoholics.



   RESTAURANT.  A business where the dispensing of edible foodstuff
and/or beverage on the premises is the principal business operation
including, but not limited to, a café, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room,
tearoom, and dining room, but not including a drive-in or drive-through
restaurant.



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN, DRIVE-THROUGH or CARRY-OUT.  A restaurant, whose
principal business of operation is the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or
beverage, ready for consumption on the premises, or to be carried off the
premises. One or the other of the following conditions shall prevail:



      (1)   Total seating area located within the enclosed portion
of the premises shall be less than 50% of the total floor area.



      (2)   Total automobile parking spaces on the premises shall
exceed the total indoor seats provided for customers.



   RETAIL or RETAIL STORE.  Sale to the ultimate consumer for direct
consumption and not for resale.



   ROOSTER. An adult male domestic chicken.



   SCHOOL.  A public or private institution which offers instruction in
any of the branches of learning and study comparable to that taught in the
public schools under the Illinois school laws, including pre-kindergarten,
kindergarten, elementary school and junior and senior high schools, but
excluding trade, business or commercial schools.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between the street wall of a
building and the street property line.



   SETBACK, ESTABLISHED BUILDING.  When 50% or more of the lots fronting
on one side of street within a block are improved, the existing building
setbacks of such improved lots shall be the ESTABLISHED BUILDING SETBACK for
determining the required setbacks for the remainder of the lots along such
street frontage, as regulated in this chapter.



   SIGN.  A name, identification, description, display or illustration
which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business.



   SIGN, ADVERTISING.  A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than
upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.



   SIGN, FLASHING.  Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, any revolving,
illuminated sign shall be considered a FLASHING SIGN.



   SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF.  The entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and in no case
passing through or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such
perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside
the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. In
the case of a sign with two visible surfaces, the gross surface area shall be
the sum of both sides of the sign.



   SMALL COMMUNITY RESIDENCE.  A community residence serving eight or
fewer persons with disabilities.



   SPECIAL USE.  A specific use of land or buildings, or both, described
and permitted herein, subject to special provisions and which, because of its
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use.



   STACKING.  The orderly lineup of automobiles within a designated lane
or area.  One stacking space shall be no less than 15 feet.



   STORAGE, OUTDOOR.  The outdoor accumulation of vehicles, equipment or
products or materials for permanent or temporary holding.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any
portion of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an
additional story for each 14 feet or fraction thereof.



   STORY, HALF.  That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard
roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are
not more than 4-1/2 feet above the finished floor of such story. In the case
of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings
less than three stories in height, a half-story in a sloping roof shall not
be counted as a story for the purposes of this chapter.  In the case of
multiple-family dwellings three or more stories in height, a half-story shall
be counted as a story.



   STREET.  All property dedicated or intended for public highway, 
freeway  or  roadway  purposes  or subject to public easements.



   STREET FRONTAGE.  All of the property fronting on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street, all of
the property along one side of a street between an intersecting street and
the end of such dead-end street.



   STREET LINE.  The division line between private property and a
dedicated street or way, usually uninterrupted from corner to corner in any
given block.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, to advertising signs, billboards, back stops for tennis courts and
pergolas.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
excepting such alterations as may be required for the safety of the building.



   TELECOMMUNICATION STATION AND TRANSMISSION TOWER. A tower, pole, or
similar structure that supports a telecommunications antenna operated for
commercial purposed above ground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or
on a building or other structure; and the land and accessory buildings and
equipment and equipment associated with said tower, pole or structure.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. A specific device, the surface of which is
used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic waves or other signals
transmitted to or from other antennas from commercial purposes.



   TEMPORARY MOBILE SIGN.  An advertising device of a not-permanent type,
used principally for commercial purposes.



   TERRACE. See PATIO .



   THROUGH LOT.  A lot having its front and rear lot lines on adjacent
and substantially parallel streets, otherwise known as a double frontage lot.



   TRAILER.  A vehicle without motive power used or adaptable for living,
sleeping, business or storage purposes, that has no foundation other than
wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting and has been or reasonably
may be equipped with wheel or other devices for transporting the structure
from place to place.  The term TRAILER shall include CAMP CAR and HOUSE
CAR.  A permanent foundation shall not change its character unless the
entire structure is erected in accordance with Chapter 151: Building Code.



   TRAILER, HOUSE or MOBILE HOME.  Any trailer as defined herein used for
residential purposes.



   TRANSSHIPMENT. The shipment of goods to an intermediate destination,
and then from there to yet another destination.



   TRUCK STOP. A truck stop is a commercial facility that provides fuel,
parking, and from time to time food and other services to long-haul
trucks/semi-trucks. They consist (at the very least) of a diesel grade
fueling station with bays wide and tall enough for modern tractor/trailer
rigs and have a large enough parking area to accommodate five or more
semi-trucks or other heavy vehicles. A convenience store is often associated
with diesel fuel sales being the primary source of retail.



   TRUCK TERMINAL.  A building or area in which trucks, including but not
limited to tractor or trailer units are parked, stored, or serviced,
including the transfer, loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include
facilities for the temporary storage of loads of such goods prior to
transshipment.



   UNIFIED CONTROL.  The combination of  two  or more tracts of land
wherein each owner has agreed that his tract of land shall be developed as
part of a planned unit development and shall be subject to the control
applicable to the planned development.



   USE.  The purposes for which land or a building thereon is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased.



   USE, PERMITTED.  A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided that it conforms with all
requirements, regulations and performance standards (if any) of such district.



   USE, PRINCIPAL.  The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.  A PRINCIPAL USE may be either a
permitted use or a special use.



   USE, SPECIAL.  See SPECIAL USE.



   USED CAR LOT.  A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or
trucks are displayed for sale or trade outside of buildings.



   VALUATION (of a building).  The assessed valuation, or where no
assessed valuation exists, its appraised valuation.



   VILLAGE PLANNER.  The individual appointed by the Village President by
and with the consent of the Board of Trustees, to function, when authorized
by ordinance or by the President, in the administrative review of the
specific planning and zoning applications.



   WAREHOUSE/DISTRIBUTION. A warehouse/distribution use includes
structures, or part thereof, or areas used principally for the storage or
distribution of goods and merchandise to retailers, non-residential users, or
to other wholesales. This use may include ACCESSORY TRUCK TERMINALS but does
not include TRUCK TERMINAL.



   WHOLESALE.  Sale for resale, not for direct consumption.



   YARD.  An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building
or group of buildings which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest
level upward, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, and which
extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width
specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is
located.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot
in accordance with the setback requirements of this chapter. (See definition
of SETBACK).



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the
side yards. Double frontage and reverse corner lots will have no rear yard.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard extending from the rear line of the front yard to
the lot line most nearly parallel to that rear line.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual appointed by the Village
President by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees, to administer and
enforce this chapter in the village.



   ZONING LOT.  A parcel of land of sufficient size to meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter concerning use, coverage, width, area, yards and
other open space and having frontage on an improved public street.



   ZONING MAP.  The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part
hereof, designating zoning districts.



   (B)   (1)   Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and
the plural the singular.



      (2)   The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary.



      (3)   The word MAY is permissive.



      (4)   The word LOT shall include the words PLOT, PIECE and
PARCEL; the word BUILDING includes all other structures or improvements of
every kind, regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase USE FOR
shall include the phrases ARRANGED FOR,DESIGNED FOR, INTENDED FOR,MAINTAINED
FOR and OCCUPIED FOR.



      (5)   The word PERSON includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an
individual.



      (6)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 632, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 819, passed
10-3-94; Am. Ord. 833, passed 12-19-94; Am. Ord. 1283, passed 4-7-03; Am.
Ord. 1451, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 1501,
passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1527, passed 3-3-08; Am. Ord. 1742, passed 5-6-13;
Am. Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



§ 156.005  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Minimum requirements.  In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety,
morals and welfare.



   (B)   Conflicting laws.  Where the conditions imposed by any
provisions of this chapter upon the use of land or buildings, bulk of
buildings, floor area requirements, lot area requirements, and yard
requirements are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter, or of any other
law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall govern.



   (C)   Existing agreements.  This chapter is not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement, provided that
where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or other private
agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern.



   (D)   Existing violations.  No building, structure, or use, not
lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, shall become
or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this chapter and to the
extent that, and in any manner that, the unlawful building, structure, or use
is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the building, structure
or use remains unlawful hereunder.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.006  SEPARABILITY.



   (A)   Authority.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
President and Board of Trustees of the village that the several provisions of
this chapter are separable,  in accordance with the provisions set forth in
this section.



   (B)   Ordinance provisions.  If any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge any provisions of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect any other provision of this chapter not specifically
included in the judgment.



   (C)   Property application.  If any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge invalid the application of any provisions of this chapter to a
particular property, building or other structure, such judgment shall not
affect the application of the provision to any other property, building or
structure not specifically included in the judgment.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.007  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Authority.  It is hereby declared that the provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all properties as hereinafter specifically provided in
this section.



   (B)   New uses.  No building or structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or
structurally altered, and no building, structure or land shall hereafter be
used, occupied or arranged or designed for use or occupancy, nor shall any
excavating or grading be commenced in connection with any of the above
matters, except as permitted by the regulations of this chapter for the
zoning district in which such building, structure or land is located.



   (C)   Existing uses.  Except as may otherwise be provided, all
structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring
hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring
hereafter shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to
the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.



   (D)   Nonconforming uses.  Any lawful building, structure or use
existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter may be continued, even
though such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions
herein for the district in which it is located, and whenever a district shall
be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, subject
to the provisions in §§ 156.120 through 156.123.



   (E)   Special uses.  Where a structure and use thereof of land
lawfully exists on the effective date of this chapter, and is classified by
this chapter as a special use in the district where it is located, such use
shall be considered a lawful special use. A special use permit issued in
accordance with procedures herein set forth shall be required only for any
expansion or major alteration of such existing legal special use.



   (F)   Lots of record.  A lot of record at the time of the adoption
of this chapter in a residence district which is unable to meet the
requirements of this chapter as to area, lot width and yard requirements may
be used for a single-family detached dwelling, provided that it shall meet
all the other requirements of this chapter.



   (G)   Contiguous parcels.  When two or more parcels of land, each
of which lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use
under the requirements of the use district in which they are located, are
contiguous and are held in one ownership, at the time of or subsequent to the
adoption of this chapter or amendment, they shall be used as one zoning lot
for such use.



   (H)   Building permits.  Where a building permit for a building or
structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date
of this chapter, and provided that construction is begun within 90 days of
such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, the building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis
of which the building permit was issued, and further may upon completion be
occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally
designated subject thereafter to the provisions of §§ 156.120 through
156.123. This section shall also control building permits lawfully issued
prior to future amendments to this chapter.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 156.020  LOTS.



   (A)   Number of buildings on a lot.  Except in the case of a
planned development, not more than one principal detached single-family
residential building shall be located on a residential lot, nor shall a
principal detached single-family residential building be located on the same
zoning lot with any other principal building.



   (B)   Division of lots.  No lot shall hereafter be divided into two
or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership, unless all lots
resulting from each such division shall conform with all the applicable
regulations required by this chapter.



   (C)   Through lots.  On vacant through lots the front lot lines
shall be along the street right-of-way designated by the Building
Commissioner, except that when a front lot line has been established on one
or more lots in the same block, and all have front lot lines established
along the same street right-of-way line, the street right-of-way line
designated as the front lot line for such lot or lots shall be the front line
on all vacant through lots in such block. Only such obstructions as herein
permitted in front yards shall be located in that part of a rear yard
adjoining a street that is equivalent in depth to a required front yard,
except for lots backing to thoroughfares in subdivisions where no-access
strips have been provided on the recorded plats.



   (D)   Corner lots.  On a corner lot the required front yard setback
shall apply to each side of a lot fronting on a public street.



   (E)   Two uses on a lot.  Where two or more permitted or special
uses, each requiring a minimum lot area, are provided in the same building or
on the same lot, the required lot area shall be the sum of the areas required
for each use individually.



   (F)   Lots without street frontage.  Every structure or group of
structures, and every use or group of uses, shall be located upon a lot.
Where unique land planning designs are employed in a subdivision or planned
development to conserve the natural character of the land or to create a
functional or compatible arrangement of structures or uses, a lot which does
not abut upon a public or private street may be permitted provided that:



      (1)   Adequate provision is made for free access to the lot
for the property owner, or in the case of a nonresidential lot, for those
persons who would normally require access to the lot.



      (2)   Adequate provision is made for the unobstructed access
of firefighting services, police protection, mail-carrier letter service,
rubbish collection and other governmental services.



      (3)   Adequate provision is made for the extension and
maintenance of public and private utility services.



      (4)   The arrangement will not contribute toward congestion in
nearby streets as a result of delivery services, lack of guest parking or
other reasons.



      (5)   The character of proposed structures and landscaping are
of a quality which will minimize maintenance.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 173, passed 1-24-78)



§ 156.021  OPEN SPACE.



   (A)   The general provisions set forth in this section dealing with
open spaces, lot coverage, yards, setbacks, vision clearance and permitted
obstructions are provided for herewith.



   (B)   Maintenance of open spaces.  The maintenance of yards,
courts, and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a
building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of
the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in existence.
Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space or minimum
lot area allocated to any building shall by virtue of change of ownership or
for any other reason  be used to satisfy yard, court, other open space or
minimum lot area requirements for any other building.



   (C)   Location of open spaces.  All yards, courts and other open
space allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the
same zoning lots as such building or group of buildings.



   (D)   Yards for existing buildings.  No yards now or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date of this chapter shall
subsequently be reduced below, if already less than, the minimum yard
requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction. However, a yard
adjoining a street may be reduced to provide right-of-way for a street
widening.



   (E)   Required setback.  Minimum setbacks on lots abutting a street
or thoroughfare shall be the distance required for a front yard, or side
yard, adjoining a street, in the districts where such lots are located,
measured from the existing right-of-way line of the street or thoroughfare,
or from the proposed right-of-way line as designated on the official map, and
as duly established by other ordinances or as established by county or state
highway authorities whichever has the greater right-of-way width requirements.



   (F)   Exceptions for established setbacks. 



      (1)   Where 50% or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have
observed (within a variation of five feet or less) a front yard greater in
depth than required herein, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the
street than the average front yard so established by the existing buildings.



      (2)   Where 50% or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have
not observed a front yard as herein required, then:



         (a)   Interior lots.



            1.   Where a building is to be erected within 100
feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a
line drawn between the closest front corners of the two existing buildings.



            2.   Where a building is to be erected within 100
feet of an existing building on one side only, it may be erected as close to
the street as the existing building.



         (b)   Corner lots.  The depth of the setback lines
shall be as normally required in the district where the lot is located.



   (G)   Vision clearance - corner lots.  On corner lots, no
structures or plant materials shall obstruct a clear path of motor vehicle
drivers' vision of approaching vehicles within 25 feet of the street
intersections.  In any business district the distance may be reduced to ten
feet and shall not apply to that part of a building above the first floor.



   (H)   Permitted obstructions in required yards.  The following
shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards
specified:



      (1)   In all yards.



         (a)   Open terraces not over four feet above the average
level of the adjoining ground, but not including permanently roofed over
terrace or porch;



         (b)   Awnings and canopies, but not projecting more than
ten feet, and at least seven feet above the average level of the adjoining
ground;



         (c)   Steps, four feet or less above grade, which are
necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot
from a street or alley;



         (d)   Chimneys projecting 18 inches or less into the
yard;



         (e)   Arbors, trellises, flag poles, fountains,
sculptures, plant boxes and other similar ornamental objects;



      (2)   In front yards.  All front yards require a 30-foot
setback. Any additions and/or projections are to be such as to avoid
infringement of this setback.



      (3)   In rear yards.  Rear yards require a ten-foot setback
and infringement by additions and/or projections is prohibited.



      (4)   In side yards.  Side yards require a ten-foot setback
and infringement by additions and/or projections is prohibited.



   (I)   Chain link security fences.



      (1)   Chain link fences may be constructed on and around
territory located in the zoning classifications C-3 General Business
District, C-4 Automotive Services District and I-1 Limited Manufacturing
District, provided that the territory is located on a major or secondary
thoroughfare and the chain link fences are necessary for security purposes. 
The fences may only be constructed in accordance with other existing
applicable ordinances of the village following the filing of the necessary
application, payment of fees and approval of the Building Inspector.  The
fences shall not be greater than eight feet in height and may contain no more
than three strands of barb wire at the top of the chain link fence.



      (2)   A major or secondary thoroughfare shall be defined as
any street in the village of considerable continuity which serves or is
intended to serve as a principal traffic artery in the village and which is
designated as such on the Comprehensive Plan of the village.  The Building
Inspector shall not approve the height of any chain link fence if the same
obstructs the visibility of automotive traffic or pedestrians.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 319, passed 7-11-83; Am. Ord. 335, passed
12-5-83)



§ 156.022  BUILDING HEIGHT MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The  requirements  set  forth  in  this  section qualify
or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in this chapter.



   (B)   Public, semi-public hospitals, institutions, schools or public
utility and service buildings, when permitted in a district, may be erected
to a height not exceeding 60 feet, provided the specified buildings shall be
set back from the front, rear and side lot lines on the ratio of two feet for
every one foot of building height greater than 40 feet.  However, the
specified requirements shall apply in addition to the other requirements for
building line setbacks and for rear and side yards specifically set forth in
this chapter.



   (C)   Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flag poles,
smokestacks, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments,
water towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers
and spires, wireless towers, necessary mechanical appurtenances, or
penthouses to house mechanical appurtenances, may be erected above the height
limits herein prescribed.



   (D)   Planned unit developments may exceed the height limits
established for the district in which the structure is located.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.023  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Authority.  Accessory buildings and uses are allowed in the
various districts as prescribed in each district and shall be compatible with
the principal use.



   (B)   Location.  When a side yard is required, no part of an
accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to the side lot line
along such side yard. When a rear yard is required, no part of an accessory
building shall be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line or to
those portions of the side lot lines abutting such required rear yard. In a
residential district, no detached accessory building shall be closer than ten
feet to the principal building, and for each foot over 20 feet in length that
the wall of an accessory structure parallels and is next to the principal
structure, the required distance between the structures shall be increased by
an additional foot.



   (C)   Time of construction.  No accessory building or structure
shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the
principal building to which it is accessory.



   (D)   Rear yard.  No accessory building or buildings shall occupy
more than 40% of the area of a required rear yard.



   (E)   Height in rear yards.  No accessory building or portion
thereof located in a required rear yard shall exceed 15 feet in height.



   (F)   Reversed corner lots.  On a reversed corner lot in a
residential district, no accessory building or portion thereof located in a
required rear yard shall be closer to the side lot line abutting the street
than the required front yard on the adjacent lot to the rear. Further, in the
above instance, no such accessory building shall be located within five feet
of any part of a rear lot line which coincides with a side lot line or
portion thereof of property in a residential district.



   (G)   Swimming pool.  Noncommercial swimming pools in residence
districts shall have a safety fence surrounding the pool.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.024  AGRICULTURAL EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be exercised so as to impose
regulations or require permits with respect to land used or to be used for
agricultural purposes or with respect to the erection, maintenance, repair,
alteration, remodeling or extension of buildings or structures used or to be
used for agricultural purposes upon such land, except that such buildings or
structures for agricultural purposes shall conform to building or setback
lines, and shall be subject to the improvement location permit requirements
of §§ 156.020 through 156.028. In the event that the land ceases to be used
solely for agricultural purposes, then and only then shall the provisions of
this chapter apply.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.025  BUILDING LINES ESTABLISHED BY THE MASTER PLAN.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no building or
structure shall be erected, constructed, structurally altered or enlarged
closer to the centerline of an existing major street or easement and/or
proposed major street or easement than one-half the right-of-way width
specified for that type of street in the trafficway standards. In addition,
front yard requirements of the districts shall  be  added  to  these
distances required by major streets.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.026  FLOOD PLAIN RESERVATION AREAS.



   (A)   In order to protect watershed areas subject to periodic
flooding or other hazards resulting from interruption of flood flow,
spreading or overflow of streams or channels, certain areas may be
established as flood plain reservation areas, and be so designated upon the
Zoning District Map. No building or portion thereof which is designed for
living purposes as a dwelling, school, hospital, institution or home for the
treatment of convalescent persons, children, aged persons or for any
combination thereof shall be built and no existing building may be altered so
as to be used in whole or in part for any one or more of such uses where the
land to be covered by such building or portion thereof is unfit for human
habitation.



   (B)   All other permitted uses within the use district designated
for such property on the Zoning District Maps shall be authorized subject to
the regulations of the district.  Any structure shall be firmly anchored to
prevent the structure from floating away and threatening river traffic,
bridge openings or other restricted sections of the stream.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.027  SCREENING.



   (A)   Authority.  When required by this chapter, screening shall be
designed, planted or constructed, and maintained in accordance with the
conditions set forth in this section.



   (B)   Front property line.



      (1)   All landscape screening shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



      (2)   Masonry wall.



         (a)   Height - not more than two feet.



         (b)   Density - solid or pierced.



         (c)   Other - as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   (C)   Side or rear property line.



      (1)   All landscape screening shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



      (2)   Masonry wall or wood fence.



         (a)   Height - at least five feet six inches.



         (b)   Density - so that vision and lights shall be
obscured.



         (c)   Other - as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   (D)   Materials.  All materials shall conform to the following
requirements:



      (1)   Plant materials shall be permanent type evergreens
hearty to state climate.



      (2)   Wood and masonry materials shall be new materials in
wood condition, properly installed and with initial maintenance materials
applied.



   (E)   Time of installation. 



      (1)   New development.  All screening shall be installed,
constructed or provided before the property is occupied or used.



      (2)   Existing uses.  All uses actually established and in
operation on the effective date of this chapter shall be made to comply with
the screening requirements within a period of three years from the effective
date of this chapter.



   (F)   Maintenance.  All screening materials shall be properly and
adequately maintained and kept free of trash and litter.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 1530, passed 4-7-08)



§ 156.028  USE AND SCREENING OF TRASH DUMPSTERS IN A NONSINGLE-FAMILY ZONED
AREA.



   (A)   Premises to be kept clean and free of debris.  All
nonsingle-family zoned property shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition free from debris, litter and other trash.



   (B)   Utilization and screening of trash dumpsters.



      (1)   Whenever trash dumpster are utilized, all garbage placed
into the trash dumpsters shall be at a height lower than the top of the trash
dumpster and lids shall be used to securely keep the trash in the dumpster at
all times.  All trash dumpsters shall be completely screened from public
view.  The screening herein required shall be effected by the erection of a
fence conforming in all respects to all ordinances of the village in addition
to any other applicable ordinance or statute.  Fencing may be used in
conjunction with other structures located upon the nonsingle-family zoned
property to effect the required screening.



      (2)   This division (B) shall not apply to the following
whenever permission is first obtained from the Village Board:



         (a)   Churches;



         (b)   Recycling operations;



         (c)   Not for profit organizations; and



         (d)   Units of local government.



   (C)   Single-family residences and construction in the village. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to single-family residences
nor to any trash dumpsters being used for construction purposes in the
village.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 570, passed 1-22-90)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.029  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Home occupations when permitted in each district shall be
subject to the following restrictions and regulations:



      (1)   The area of the dwelling utilized for the house shall be
no more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling or 400 square feet,
whichever is less.



      (2)   The home occupation shall be conducted within the
dwelling unit and not from a detached or attached garage or other accessory
structure.  Equipment, materials, samples and vehicles incidental to the
home occupation may be stored in a detached or attached garage or other
accessory structure so long as the business activity is limited to the
dwelling.



      (3)   Not more than one person other than members of the
immediate family residing in the dwelling shall be employed on the premises.



      (4)   The home occupation shall not involve the sale of goods
which are stored and delivered to the buyer on the zoning lot, except as
incidental to a permitted service.  The term "sale of goods" as used herein
does not include the sale of household goods in what is commonly known as a
garage sale, so long as the sales last for a period no longer than four
consecutive days and are held no more than four times in any calendar year.



      (5)   There shall be no exterior display or sign, except for a
single sign which satisfies the following criteria:



         (a)   The sign shall not be freestanding.  The sign
shall be mounted flush against the wall of the principal building, with no
part of the sign extending beyond the roof line.



         (b)   The sign face area shall be no more than four
square feet.



         (c)   The sign content shall be limited to the name,
address, phone number, occupation, or any combination thereof, of the
resident.



         (d)   The sign shall not be illuminated by its own
source of artificial light, either within the sign or outside of the
perimeter of the sign face, other than those lights incidental to the
residential use of the premises.



      (6)   There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or
materials used in connection with the home occupation.



      (7)   There shall be no mechanical equipment which emits an
odor, noise, radio interference or other nuisance which is discernible at the
property line.



      (8)   The home occupation shall not require or permit the
regular receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by any motor
vehicle bearing a Division of Motor Vehicles License Class "C" or higher.



      (9)   The home occupation shall not result in the simultaneous
presence on the zoning lot and the adjoining street of more than three motor
vehicles in excess of the number of vehicles attributable to the residential
use of the premises.



      (10)   No home occupation by its nature or conduct shall
generate undue traffic in excess of that normally expected in and consistent
with the character of a residential neighborhood.



      (11)   In the event that more than one home occupation is
conducted within the dwelling, the conditions established by his section
shall apply to the sum total of the activity related to the home occupations.



   (B)   Prohibited home occupations.  Permitted home occupations
shall not in any event be deemed to include the following:



      (1)   Animal hospitals.



      (2)   Clinics or hospitals.



      (3)   Dancing schools, except as permitted above.



      (4)   Mortuaries.



      (5)   Nursery schools.



      (7)   Renting of trailers.



      (8)   Repair shops or service establishments, except the
repair of small electrical appliances, typewriters, cameras, personal
computers or other similar small items.



      (9)   Restaurants.



      (10)   Stables or kennels.



      (11)   Tourist homes or bed and breakfasts.



      (12)   Any activity requiring the storage, transfer or sale of
hazardous or illegal materials or substances.



(Ord. 819, passed 10-3-94)



§ 156.030  USE AND SCREENING OF CARGO CONTAINERS AS ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Cargo containers are a prohibited use in the R-1, R-2, R-3,
A-1, A2, PR and TC Zoning Districts.



   (B)   Cargo containers are a prohibited use in all commercial
districts.



   (C)   Cargo containers are a permitted use in the I-1 Limited
Industrial District, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Cargo containers may only be stored in conjunction with
an intermodal facility, a manufacturing facility, a warehousing facility or a
distribution facility.



      (2)   Cargo containers may only be stored on a parcel of
property that is no less than 20  acres in size.



      (3)   Cargo containers may only be stored on a parcel of
property that is located adjacent to rail access.



      (4)   The area for storage of cargo containers shall be
limited to less than 30% of the buildable area of the site.



      (5)   The area for storage of cargo containers may be more
than 30%, but not greater than 60% of the buildable area of the site, subject
to a special use permit.



      (6)   Cargo containers shall not be stacked greater than three
containers in height.



      (7)   Cargo containers may be stacked more than three, but not
greater than five containers in height subject to a special use permit.



      (8)   Cargo containers shall be stored on gravel or other
comparable material.



      (9)   Cargo containers are permitted pursuant to the terms of
an existing executed annexation agreement.



      (10)   Cargo containers shall not be used as accessory
structures for the purpose of the storage of materials.



   (D)   Cargo containers are a permitted use in the I-2 Limited
Industrial District, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   Cargo containers may only be stored in conjunction with
an intermodal facility, a manufacturing facility, a warehousing facility or a
distribution facility.



      (2)   Cargo containers may only be stored on a parcel of
property that is no less than 20 acres in size.



      (3)   Cargo containers may only be stored on a parcel of
property that is located adjacent to rail access.



      (4)   Cargo containers may be located on a parcel of property
that is not located adjacent to rail access subject to a special use permit.



      (5)   The area for storage of cargo containers shall be
limited to less than 60% of the buildable area of the site.



      (6)   Cargo containers shall not be stacked greater than five
containers in height.



      (7)   Cargo containers shall be stored on gravel or other
comparable material.



      (8)   Cargo containers are permitted pursuant to the terms of
an existing executed annexation agreement.



      (9)   Cargo containers shall not be used as accessory
structures for the purpose of the storage of materials.



   (E)   Licensed and bonded contractors may use cargo containers in
any zoning district for temporary storage of equipment and/or materials at a
construction site during construction that is authorized by a village
building permit.



(Ord. 1283, passed 4-7-03)



§ 156.031  ANCILLARY USES.



   Ancillary buildings, structures or uses incidental and commonly
associated to a residential use which is on an adjacent lot with a
consolidated permanent index number that is detached and subordinate to the
main building or residential use may be permitted provided:



   (A)   The adjacent lot must be contiguous to a lot that contains a
permitted principal residential building;



   (B)   Both lots must be under single, common ownership at the time
of building permitting;



   (C)   Neither lot may be divided, transferred or conveyed in parts
as long as the ancillary buildings or structures remain intact on the empty
lot;



   (D)   Contain no driveway(s) directly or indirectly connected to the
village right-of-way;



   (E)   Structural features are consistent with the accessory uses
permitted in that zoning district and § 156.023;



   (F)   Do not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry;



   (G)   Ancillary storage buildings or sheds must be located in the
rear of the empty lot along the rear ten-foot setback line; and



   (H)   Ancillary storage buildings or sheds must be of the same or
similar material and color of the principal building.



(Ord. 1742, passed 5-6-13)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 156.040  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   The village, for the purpose of this chapter, is hereby divided into
the following districts:



   R-1 Single Family Residence District



   R-2 Single Family Residence District



   R-3 Multifamily Residence District



   C-1 Local Shopping District



   C-2 Community Shopping District



   C-3 General Business District



   C-4 Automotive Service District



   C-S Office/Transitional District



   C-6 Office and Research Park District



   I-1 Limited Manufacturing District



   PR-1 Public Recreation District



   A-1 Agricultural District (ten acres)



   A-2 Rural Residential District (five acres)



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 312, passed  -  - ; Am. Ord. 404, passed
3-3-86; Am. Ord. 1062-D, passed 9-7-99)



§ 156.041  ZONING MAP.



   (A)   Authorization.  The location and boundaries of the districts
established by this chapter are indicated upon the map entitled, “Official
Zoning Map, Village of Channahon, Illinois,” which, together with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
a part of this chapter.



   (B)   Location of map.  The Official Zoning Map shall be located in
the office of the Village Clerk and shall be the final authority as to the
current zoning status of land and buildings, subject to such authorized
amendments which may be in effect.



   (C)   Interpretation of district boundaries.  Where uncertainty
exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:



      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow
such center lines.



      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following village
limits shall be construed as following village limits.



      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall
be construed to be midway between the main tracks.



      (5)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be
construed to follow such shore lines and in the event of change in the shore
line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines.



      (6)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of
features indicated in subdivision (1) through (5) of this division (C) shall
be so construed.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Official
Zoning Map shall be determined by dimensions shown on the map, or in the
absence of dimensions, by the scale of the map.



      (7)   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot in
single ownership on the effective date of this chapter, the regulations of
this chapter for either portion of the lot, may at the owner's discretion,
apply to the entire area of the lot or 25 feet beyond the zoning district
boundary line, whichever is the lesser distance.



      (8)   All streets, alleys, public-ways, and railroad
rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to
be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys,
streets, public-ways and railroad rights-of-way.  The center line of a
street, alley, public-way or railroad right-of-way, unless otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the district boundary.



      (9)   Streets or alleys which are shown on the map and which
have heretofore been vacated, or which are vacated hereafter, shall be in the
same district as the land abutting both sides of the street or alley.  If
the land abutting each side of the street or alley was located in different
districts before the street or alley was vacated, the center line of the
vacated street or alley shall be the district boundary.



      (10)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in
other circumstances not covered by subdivision (1) through (6) of this
division (C), the Planning and Zoning Commission shall interpret the district
boundaries.



   (D)   Changes.  If by amendment to this chapter, any change is made
in any district boundary or in any other matter shown on the Official Zoning
Map, such change shall be indicated on the map promptly after the amendment
is adopted.  The date of the latest updating of the Official Zoning Map
shall be shown on the face of the map.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 795, passed 3-21-94; Am. Ord. 1544, passed
8-4-08; Am. Ord. 1737, passed 3-18-13)



§ 156.042  ENTIRE AREA ZONED.



   It is the intent that the entire area of zoning jurisdiction, including
all land and water areas, rivers, streets, alleys and railroad and other
rights-of-way, be included in the districts established by this chapter.  If
any area is not shown on the Official Zoning Map as being included in any
district, it shall be deemed to be in the R-l Single-Family Residence
District.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.043  ANNEXED TERRITORY.



   Any territory hereafter annexed shall, upon annexation, be immediately
classified as an R-1 Single Family Residence District.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 156.055  PURPOSE.



   The residential district regulations are intended to govern the
location, intensity and method of development of the residential areas of the
village. The regulations of each district are designed to provide for the
protection of existing residential areas and to provide for new residential
growth in accord with the design and density objectives of the community. The
residential uses have been grouped into the following four residential
districts:



   R-1 Single Family Residence District



   R-2 Single Family Residence District



   R-3 Multifamily Residence District



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 1062-D, passed 9-7-99)



§ 156.056  R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of district.  This district is the most
restrictive of the residential districts and is composed of certain quiet,
low-density residential areas of the village plus certain open areas where
similar residential development appears likely to occur.  It is the intent
of this district to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density
single unit dwellings plus certain additional uses such as schools, parks and
certain public facilities which serve the residents living in the district. 
All commercial activities including room renting or other home occupations
are prohibited.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Residential uses:



         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings.



         (b)   Small community residence, provided that the
residence's sponsoring agency and/or owner must first obtain an
administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a small community
residence.  No dwelling unit shall be occupied by a small community
residence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village
Administrator.



            1.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for a small community residence unless:



               a.   The small community residence is
located at least 1,000 feet from any other community residence, as measured
from lot line to lot line; and



               b.   The applicant demonstrates that it has
either obtained or is eligible for state or local licensing or certification
to operate the proposed small community residence or that the proposed small
community residence is licensed or certified or eligible for licensing or
certification.



            2.   The Village Administrator may revoke a
certificate of occupancy for a small community residence if its license or
certification, or the operator/owner's license or certification to  operate
community residences is revoked or not issued within a reasonable period of
time.  An administrative certificate of occupancy is not transferable to
another operator/owner or to another location.



      (2)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Public parks, public playgrounds, public golf
courses and public community center buildings.



         (b)   Public and parochial schools.



         (c)   Public libraries, in conjunction with schools.



         (d)   Parish houses and convents, in conjunction with
schools.



         (e)   Essential services - gas regulator stations,
telephone exchanges, electric substations.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Planning and Zoning
Commission as allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Churches and other places of worship, provided that the
property for the use fronts on a primary or secondary thoroughfare so
designated in the comprehensive plan.



      (3)   Country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools, and similar
recreational uses.



      (4)   Planned unit developments.



      (5)   Small community residences located within 1,000 feet of
another community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line.



      (6)   Large community residences.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:



      (1)   Temporary building or yard for construction materials
and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district.  Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard
and the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than six calendar months and shall not be renewed for more
than four successive periods at the same location.



      (2)   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the
sale or rental of real property.  Each permit shall specify the location of
the office and the area of permitted operation.  Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for
more than five successive periods at the same location.



      (3)   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed 100 square
feet for each face.  Sign shall be nonilluminated.  Each permit shall
specify the location of the sign.  Each such permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five
successive periods at the same location.



      (4)   Trailer, to be used during the construction of a
residence by the trailer owner and not to exceed one year.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings or other
structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a principal
or conditional permitted use may be permitted, provided that they are in
accordance with § 156.023, do not include structures or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry.  Accessory uses may include, but are not
limited to:



      (1)   Carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use
of residents or occupants of the premises.



      (2)   Living quarters for persons employed on the premises and
not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



      (3)   Swimming pools exclusively for the use of the residents
and their guests and set back from every property line at least ten feet.



      (4)   Real estate signs not exceeding 12 square feet for each
face and set back from every property line at least ten feet.



      (5)   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and
keeping of household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of
residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.



      (6)   Home occupations.



      (7)   One shed or accessory storage building not to exceed 180
square feet in size and no more than 15 feet in height. All sheds or
accessory storage buildings must be of the same or similar building material
and color of the principal building.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Mobile homes.



      (2)   Hotels and motels.



      (3)   Commercial uses.



      (4)   Industrial uses.



      (5)   Signs and billboards.



      (7)   Roomers and boarders.



      (8)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (9)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



      (10)   Detached garages.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.



         (a)   Where a private sewerage disposal system with
private well water supply are utilized, separate minimum ground area in
accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the County Health
Department in effect from time to time, but in no event less than 15,000
square feet, shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for
each residential lot used for a permitted or special use.



         (b)   Where central public water supply together with
either private sewerage disposal system or central public disposal system is
utilized, a separate minimum ground area in accordance with the ordinances
and regulations of the County Health Department in  effect from time to
time, but in no event less than 12,000 square feet, shall be designated
provided and continuously maintained for each residential lot used for a
permitted or special use, provided that in any subdivision there shall not be
less than 13,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width in accordance
with the ordinances and regulations of the County Health Department in effect
from time to time but in no event less than 100 feet where private sewerage
disposal system with private well water supply are utilized, nor 80 feet
where central public water supply together with either private sewerage
disposal system or central public sewerage disposal system is utilized, shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
30 feet from the front line.



      (4)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in from the
side lot line a distance of not less than ten feet on each side.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than ten feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No principal structure shall exceed
2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed
one story or 15 feet in height, except as provided in § 156.022.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed .3.



      (8)   Minimum size of dwelling.  Each single-family detached
dwelling and any other structure occupied in whole or in part for residential
purposes shall contain at least 1,200 square feet of liveable floor area,
exclusive of basement or garage space.



      (9)   Adjoining lots.



         (a)   In the instance whereby two adjacent and
contiguous single family zoned lots are under single ownership, it is
permissible to construct a principal structure over the interior lot line of
the two lots, while conforming to all other village ordinances to include,
but not be limited to, the remaining front, side and rear setbacks for all
other lot lines. Lot improvements must also conform to approved engineering
design standards to include, but not limited to, drainage and grading design.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the following conditions must be
met:



            1.   Any applicable easement grantee must vacate
all easements that may exist over the interior lot line; and



            2.   The owner must consolidate the Property Index
Numbers through the respective county or township.



         (b)   Both lots must remain in single continuous
ownership and may not be divided or conveyed in parts as long as the
principal structure remains intact. On behalf of the village, the Village
Administrator is authorized to vacate any village easements that are not
required for overall site utility or drainage purposes.



   (H)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Parking requirements.



         (a)   Every detached single-family dwelling unit shall
include a two-car attached garage.



         (b)   Any additional requirements in accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 through 156.151.



      (2)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (3)   Trucks.  No truck tractor of any size, semi-trailer,
stinger-steered semi-trailer, road tractor, pole trailer, converter, dolly,
apportionable trailer, apportionable semi-trailer, bus whether, privately
owned or a school bus, implement of husbandry or any diesel powered vehicle
requiring an Illinois Registration plate suffix of "H" or greater, any
gasoline powered vehicle requiring a "J" or greater registration (as both
provided by the Illinois Vehicle Code), including foreign registered
vehicles, which would require such registration, if registered in Illinois,
any vehicle required to have mileage plates of "MJ" suffix or greater, farm
plates of "VH" or greater, or tow trucks capable of towing any vehicle which
is prohibited under this section, shall at any time be parked or stored
within any residential district. Provided, however, that this prohibition
does not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility company.



      (4)   Recreational vehicles. 



         (a)   Travel trailers, pick-up campers and coaches, vans
and conversion vans, motorized dwellings, travel trailers, tent trailers,
boats, snowmobiles, trailers, dune buggies, all terrain vehicles and other
equipment designated and normally used for recreational purposes (hereinafter
referred to as “vehicle”) may be parked in the driveway of the owner of
the property or in a specially constructed parking area adjacent to the
driveway or in the rear yard, provided that the vehicle is parked no closer
than eight feet from the front lot line to provide for safe ingress or egress
and for safety of pedestrians and other vehicles.



         (b)   Any automobile, truck or recreational vehicle
undergoing repair must be repaired in the garage of the owner to permit
emergency services access to the front and rear of the residence.  No
pick-up caps or pick-up campers, trailers without wheels, or any such R.V.
equipment which cannot be easily moved can be stored in the portion of the
lot to the rear of the principle structure.



         (c)   Any bus, whether privately owned or a school bus,
shall not at any time be parked or stored within any residential district.



      (5)   Tents.  Tents shall not be erected, used, or 
maintained on any lot, except such small tents  that are customarily used
for temporary recreational purposes.



      (6)   Driveways.  The construction of all driveways shall be
in accordance with § 154.52 of this code.



      (7)   Ancillary buildings, structures or uses subject to §
156.031.



   (I)   Raising and maintaining hens is a permitted use subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Roosters are prohibited.



      (2)   In the R-l and R-2 Zoning Districts, a minimum lot size
of 12,500 square feet is required for the keeping of chickens.



      (3)   Not more than four hens are permitted on the property at
any time.



      (4)   The keeping of hens is an accessory use.



      (5)   Prior to keeping a hen on the property, a coop and a pen
must be constructed in conformance with village code.



      (6)   The hens must at all times remain in the coop or pen.



      (7)   The coop may not exceed 50 square feet and must have a
minimum of ten square feet for each hen.



      (8)   The coop must be setback a minimum of ten feet from any
lot line and must be set back at least 30 feet from any existing residence on
an adjacent or nearby lot.



      (9)   Coops are “accessory structures” under this Zoning
Code.



      (10)   Coops may not be constructed on or over municipal
easements, public utility easements or drainage easements.



      (11)   A building permit must be obtained for all coops and
pens.



      (12)   Not more than one coop is permitted on any lot.



      (13)   A pen is required for each coop. The pen must adjoin
the coop.



      (14)   The pen may not cover more than 25% of the rear yard.



      (15)   The pen must have a permanent, secure cover capable of
deterring predators.



      (16)   Pens must be setback a minimum of five feet from all
property lines.



      (17)   Pens and coops must not exceed six feet in height.



      (18)   The pen and coop must be completely surrounded by a
six-foot solid wood or PVC fence.



      (19)   Feed must be stored in a rodent proof container.



      (20)   All pens and coops shall be kept in a clean, sanitary
condition free from refuse and waste.



      (21)   Chickens are only permitted within the pen and the coop.



      (22)   No odors emanating from the pen or coop may be
detectable from an adjoining property.



      (23)   No hen slaughtering is permitted.



      (24)   Hens may not be kept in the R-l or R-2 District without
first having obtained a hen house license from the village. Applications for
a hen house license shall be on a form provided by the Village Administrator.
Such license shall be valid for one year. Licensing requirements shall be
established by the President and Board of Trustees.



      (25)   After issuance of a hen house license the applicant is
eligible to apply for a building permit for the coop and pen.



      (26)   Keeping of hens or roosters other than as permitted by
this division (I) is prohibited except in A-l and A-2 Districts as provided
in this code.



      (27)   The following are the construction standards for the
coop:



         (a)   Foundations. Any one of the following foundations
is acceptable:



            1.   Coops shall be constructed in a workmanlike
manner, to be moisture resistant and either raised off the ground or placed
on a hard surface such as concrete, patio block or gravel.



            2.   Wood posts or precast concrete posts are
acceptable foundations if they are placed at least 24 inches into the ground
and firmly tamped with dirt or gravel. Wooden or pre-cast concrete posts may
also be secured into the ground using anchor posts that are otherwise
typically used for fencing or decks. Concrete must be used to secure the
posts. All wood in contact with the ground must be pressure treated in
accordance with AWPA or be decay-resistant.



         (b)   Wall and roof construction. Coop walls and roofs
must be designed to withstand all natural forces such as wind, rain and snow.



            1.   Wall framing must consist of two-inch by
three-inch studs at 16 inches on center. Floor and roof framing must consist
of two-inch by three-foot joists and rafter at 24 inches on center.



            2.   Wall sheathing must be three-eighths inch
thick, roof sheathing three-eighths inches, floor sheathing five-eighths
inches.



            3.    Pre-fabricated coops shall be allowed when
in conformance with the building code requirements for accessory structures.



      (28)   The keeping of chickens is only allowed as an accessory
use to a residential use on a lot or parcel.



      (29)   Any person found to have violated this division (I)
shall be fined not more than $100 nor less than $75 for each offense. Each
day upon which an offense occurs is deemed a separate offense. Prosecutions
for violators may be under the Village Administrator Compliance Ticket (Act)
powers or otherwise.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 116, passed 5-7-73; Am. Ord. 173, passed
1-24-78; Am. Ord. 419, passed 10-6-86; Am. Ord. 439, passed 12-7-87; Am. Ord.
632, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 779, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 819, passed
10-3-94; Am. Ord. 856, passed 7-17-95; Am. Ord. 970, passed 2-16-98; Am. Ord.
1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1532, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 1570, passed
1-19-09; Am. Ord. 1699, passed 7-2-12; Am. Ord. 1742, passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord.
1906, passed 11-6-17)



Cross-reference:



   Backyard chicken licensing, see Ch. 99



§ 156.057  R-2 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of district.  This district provides for the
protection of certain older area of the community developed principally for
single-family uses. The purpose of this district is to stabilize and preserve
the residential character of existing areas.  Uses permitted in the R-2
district are the same as those permitted in the R-1 district, but bulk
regulations permit higher densities in conformity with existing conditions.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure, or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged,
occupied or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other
than one or more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings.



         (b)   Small community residence, provided that the
residence's sponsoring agency and/or owner must first obtain an
administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a small community
residence.  No dwelling unit shall be occupied by a small community
residence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village
Administrator.



            1.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for a small community residence unless:



               a.   The small community residence is
located at least 1,000 feet from any other community residence, as measured
from lot line to lot line; and



               b.   The applicant demonstrates that it has
either obtained or is eligible for state or local licensing or certification
to operate the  proposed  small community residence or  that  the
proposed small community residence is licensed or certified or eligible for
licensing or certification.



            2.   The Village Administrator may revoke a
certificate of occupancy for a small community residence if its license or
certification, or the operator/owner's license or certification to operate
community residences is revoked or not issued within a reasonable period of
time.  An administrative certificate of occupancy is not transferable to
another operator/owner or to another location.



      (2)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to public, quasi-public and governmental
buildings permitted in the R-1 District.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 district.



      (3)   Small community residences located within 1,000 feet of
another community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line.



      (4)   Large community residences.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:



      (1)   Temporary permit uses permitted in the R-1 district.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings or other
structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a principal
or conditional permitted use may be permitted, provided that they are in
accordance with § 156.023, do not include structures or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade or industry.  Accessory uses may include, but are not
limited to:



      (1)   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 district.



      (2)   Detached garages.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Mobile homes.



      (2)   Hotels and motels.



      (3)   Commercial uses.



      (4)   Industrial uses.



      (5)   Signs and billboards.



      (6)   Roomers and boarders.



      (7)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (8)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  A separate ground area of not less
than 7,500 square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously
maintained for each structure or land containing a permitted or special use.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width of 100 feet
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use, however
the minimum lot width shall not apply to any lots created on or before
January 1, 2005, provided that all other site and structure requirements of
this section are complied with.



      (3)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
30 feet from the front lot line.



      (4)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in from the
side lot line a distance of not less than ten feet on the least side, with
the sum of the two sides not less than 20 feet.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than ten feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No principal structure shall exceed
2-1/2 stories, or 35 feet in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed
one story or 15 feet in height, except as provided in §§ 156.020 through
156.028.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed .4.



      (8)   Minimum size of dwelling.  Each single- family detached
dwelling and any other structure occupied in whole or part for residential
purposes shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement or garage space.



      (9)   Reconstruction.  If any structure in this zoning
classification is damaged or destroyed, it may be reconstructed on the same
location without regard to the site and structure requirements listed herein
if the structure was originally constructed on or prior to the adoption of
this chapter.



      (10)   Adjoining lots. 



         (a)   In the instance whereby two adjacent and
contiguous single family zoned lots are under single ownership, it is
permissible to construct a principal structure over the interior lot line of
the two lots, while conforming to all other village ordinances to include,
but not be limited to, the remaining front, side and rear setbacks for all
other lot lines. Lot improvements must also conform to approved engineering
design standards to include, but not limited to, drainage and grading design.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the following conditions must be
met:



            1.   Any applicable easement grantee must vacate
all easements that may exist over the interior lot line; and



            2.   The owner must consolidate the Property Index
Numbers through the respective county or township.



         (b)   Both lots must remain in single continuous
ownership and may not be divided or conveyed in parts as long as the
principal structure remains intact. On behalf of the village, the Village
Administrator is authorized to vacate any village easements that are not
required for overall site utility or drainage purposes.



   (H)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Special provisions as required in the R-1 Single Family
District.



      (2)   Every detached single-family dwelling unit shall include
a two-car attached or detached garage.



      (3)   Ancillary buildings, structures or uses subject to §
156.031.



      (4)   Any additional parking requirements in accordance with
the applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



   (I)   Raising and maintaining hens is a permitted use subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Roosters are prohibited.



      (2)   In the R-l and R-2 Zoning Districts, a minimum lot size
of 12,500 square feet is required for the keeping of chickens.



      (3)   Not more than four hens are permitted on the property at
any time.



      (4)   The keeping of hens is an accessory use.



      (5)   Prior to keeping a hen on the property, a coop and a pen
must be constructed in conformance with village code.



      (6)   The hens must at all times remain in the coop or pen.



      (7)   The coop may not exceed 50 square feet and must have a
minimum of ten square feet for each hen.



      (8)   The coop must be setback a minimum of ten feet from any
lot line and must be set back at least 30 feet from any existing residence on
an adjacent or nearby lot.



      (9)   Coops are “accessory structures” under this Zoning
Code.



      (10)   Coops may not be constructed on or over municipal
easements, public utility easements or drainage easements.



      (11)   A building permit must be obtained for all coops and
pens.



      (12)   Not more than one coop is permitted on any lot.



      (13)   A pen is required for each coop. The pen must adjoin
the coop.



      (14)   The pen may not cover more than 25% of the rear yard.



      (15)   The pen must have a permanent, secure cover capable of
deterring predators.



      (16)   Pens must be setback a minimum of five feet from all
property lines.



      (17)   Pens and coops must not exceed six feet in height.



      (18)   The pen and coop must be completely surrounded by a
six-foot solid wood or PVC fence.



      (19)   Feed must be stored in a rodent proof container.



      (20)   All pens and coops shall be kept in a clean, sanitary
condition free from refuse and waste.



      (21)   Chickens are only permitted within the pen and the coop.



      (22)   No odors emanating from the pen or coop may be
detectable from an adjoining property.



      (23)   No hen slaughtering is permitted.



      (24)   Hens may not be kept in the R-l or R-2 District without
first having obtained a hen house license from the village. Applications for
a hen house license shall be on a form provided by the Village Administrator.
Such license shall be valid for one year. Licensing requirements shall be
established by the President and Board of Trustees.



      (25)   After issuance of a hen house license the applicant is
eligible to apply for a building permit for the coop and pen.



      (26)   Keeping of hens or roosters other than as permitted by
this division (I) is prohibited except in A-l and A-2 Districts as provided
in this code.



      (27)   The following are the construction standards for the
coop:



         (a)   Foundations. Any one of the following foundations
is acceptable:



            1.   Coops shall be constructed in a workmanlike
manner, to be moisture resistant and either raised off the ground or placed
on a hard surface such as concrete, patio block or gravel.



            2.   Wood posts or precast concrete posts are
acceptable foundations if they are placed at least 24 inches into the ground
and firmly tamped with dirt or gravel. Wooden or pre-cast concrete posts may
also be secured into the ground using anchor posts that are otherwise
typically used for fencing or decks. Concrete must be used to secure the
posts. All wood in contact with the ground must be pressure treated in
accordance with AWPA or be decay-resistant.



         (b)   Wall and roof construction. Coop walls and roofs
must be designed to withstand all natural forces such as wind, rain and snow.



            1.   Wall framing must consist of two-inch by
three-inch studs at 16 inches on center. Floor and roof framing must consist
of two-inch by three-foot joists and rafter at 24 inches on center.



            2.   Wall sheathing must be three-eighths inch
thick, roof sheathing three- eighths inches, floor sheathing five-eighths
inches.



            3.    Pre-fabricated coops shall be allowed when
in conformance with the building code requirements for accessory structures.



      (28)   The keeping of chickens is only allowed as an accessory
use to a residential use on a lot or parcel.



      (29)   Any person found to have violated this division (I)
shall be fined not more than $100 nor less than $75 for each offense. Each
day upon which an offense occurs is deemed a separate offense. Prosecutions
for violators may be under the Village Administrator Compliance Ticket (Act)
powers or otherwise.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 116, passed 5-7-73; Am. Ord. 506, 2-6-89;
Am. Ord. 632, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 779, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 1393,
passed 7- 18-05; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8- 20-07; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-
19-09; Am. Ord. 1699, passed 7-2- 12; Am. Ord. 1742, passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord.
1906, passed 11-6-17)



Cross-reference:



   Backyard chicken licensing, see Ch. 99



§ 156.058  R-3 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of District.  This district is composed of
certain medium-density residential areas representing compatible co-mingling
of single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, including certain
open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. 
It is the intent of this district to provide for an environment of
medium-density dwellings plus certain additional uses such as schools, parks,
churches and certain public facilities which serve the residents living in
the district.  Large apartments, with corresponding proportions of open
space, also may be developed under prescribed standards of density and open
space.  In addition to large areas allocated for this district, it has
useful application as a buffer on transition zone along highways, major
streets and bordering shopping centers.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied  and no
building, structure or premises  shall be erected, altered, enlarged,
occupied or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other
than one or more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings.



         (b)   Two-family dwellings.



         (c)   Multifamily dwellings.



         (d)   Small community residence, provided that the
residence's sponsoring agency and/or owner must first obtain an
administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a small community
residence.  No dwelling unit shall be occupied by a small community
residence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village
Administrator.



            1.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for a small community residence unless:



               a.   The small community residence is
located at least 1,000 feet from any other community residence, as measured
from lot line to lot line; and



               b.   The applicant demonstrates that it has
either obtained or is eligible for state or local licensing or certification
to operate the proposed small community residence or that the proposed small
community residence is licensed or certified or eligible for licensing or
certification.



            2.   The Village Administrator may revoke a
certificate of occupancy for a small community residence if its license or
certification, or the operator/owner's license or certification to operate
community residences is revoked or not issued within a reasonable period of
time.  An administrative certificate of occupancy is not transferable to
another operator/owner or to another location.



         (e)   Large community residences, provided that the
residence's sponsoring agency and/or owner must first obtain an
administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a large community
residence.  No dwelling unit shall be occupied by a large community
residence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village
Administrator.



            1.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for a large community residence unless:



               a.   The large community residence is
located at least 1,000 feet from any other community residence, as measured
from lot line to lot line; and



               b.   The applicant demonstrates that it has
either obtained or is eligible for state or local licensing or certification
to operate the proposed large community residence or that the proposed large
community residence is licensed or certified or eligible for licensing or
certification.



            2.   The Village Administrator may revoke a
certificate of occupancy for a large community residence if its license or
certification, or the operator/owner's license or certification to operate
community residences is revoked or not issued within a reasonable period of
time.  An administrative certificate of occupancy is not transferable to
another operator/owner or to another location.



      (2)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings
permitted in the R-1 District.



         (b)   Churches and other places of worship, provided
that the property for the use fronts on a primary or secondary thoroughfare
so designated in the comprehensive plan.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
“permitted uses” in this District.



      (2)   Country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools, and similar
recreational uses.



      (3)   Planned unit developments.



      (4)   Convalescent or nursing home.



      (5)   Private schools or colleges.



      (6)   Clubs, lodges, social or recreational buildings or
properties; not-for-profit.



      (7)   Hospitals, clinics, and sanitariums.



      (8)   Nursery school, day nursery, and child care center; at
least 150 square feet of outdoor play area must be provided for each child
that is cared for.



      (9)   Mobile home park.



      (10)   Small community residences located within 1,000 feet of
another community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line.



      (11)   Large community residences located within 1,000 feet of
another community residence.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:



      (1)   Temporary permit uses permitted in the R-1 District.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings or other
structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a principal
or conditional permitted use may be permitted, provided that they are
operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the
permitted use, do not include structures or structural features inconsistent
with the permitted uses and do not involve the conduct of any business, trade
or industry.  Accessory uses may include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 district.



      (2)   Home occupations.



      (3)   Roomers or boarders, not to exceed two by a resident
family.



      (4)   Professional office of resident in his dwelling
involving the employment of not to exceed one person not a resident of the
premises.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B) through (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Hotels and motels.



      (2)   Commercial uses.



      (3)   Industrial uses.



      (4)   Signs and billboards.



      (5)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (6)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  A separate ground area of not less
than 10,000 square feet for single-family use, 15,000 square feet for
two-family use, with at least 5,000 square feet for each additional
multifamily dwelling unit of one or two bedrooms, with an additional 500
square feet for each bedroom over two bedrooms in the multifamily units, and
6,000 square feet for other uses, shall be designated, provided and
continuously maintained for each permitted or special use.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width of 80 feet
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
30 feet from the front lot line.



      (4)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in from the
side lot line a distance of not less than ten feet on the least side, with
the sum of the two sides not less than 20 feet.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than 25 feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No principal structure shall exceed
three stories or 30 feet in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed
one story on 15 feet in height, except as provided in §§ 156.020 through
156.028.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed .5.



      (8)   Minimum size of dwelling.  Each single- family detached
dwelling shall contain at least 1,200 square feet of liveable floor area,
each two-family dwelling  shall  contain  at least 1,000  square  feet 
of  liveable floor area for each dwelling unit, and each multifamily
dwelling shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of liveable floor area for
each dwelling unit.



      (9)   Mobile home parks.  The maximum number of mobile homes
shall not exceed a density of six mobile homes per acre, and all design
standards shall conform to the Minimum Property Standards for the Mobile Home
Courts published by the Federal Housing Administration.



   (H)   Special provisions.  Special provisions as required in the
R-1 District.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 599, passed 7-2-90; Am. Ord. 632, passed
1-7-91; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS



§ 156.070  PURPOSE.



   The Commercial District regulations are intended to govern the
location, intensity, and method of development of the business and commercial
uses needed to serve the citizens of the village and its trade area.  The
regulations of each district are designed to provide for groupings of
business and commercial uses that are compatible in scope of services and
method of operations. All business uses are contained in the following seven
business district classifications:



   C-1 Local Shopping District.



   C-2 Community Shopping District.



   C-3  General Business District.



   C-4  Automotive Service District.



   C-S  Office/Transitional District.



   C-6  Office and Research Park District.



   C-7 Day-Care and Professional Office District.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-7-90)



§ 156.071  C-1 LOCAL SHOPPING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of District.  The C-1 Local Shopping District is
intended to provide areas to be used by retail or service establishments to
supply convenience goods or personal services for the daily needs of the
residents living in adjacent residential neighborhoods.  The district is
designed to encourage shopping centers with planned off-street parking and
loading and provide for existing individual or small groups of local
stores.  This district is normally located on primary or secondary
thoroughfares, is relatively small in size, and has bulk standards comparable
to the bulk standards for low-density residential districts.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Retail businesses, which supply commodities on the
premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Apparel store.



         (b)   Bakery, in which the manufacture of goods is
limited to goods retailed on the premises only.



         (c)   Book and stationery store.



         (d)   Camera store.



         (e)   Candy and confectionery store.



         (f)   Dairy products store.



         (g)   Delicatessen.



         (h)   Drug store.



         (i)   Dry goods store.



         (j)   Floral shop.



         (k)   Grocery and food store.



         (l)   Hardware store.



         (m)   Ice cream store.



         (n)   Jewelry store.



         (o)   Liquor store, package.



         (p)   Meat market.



         (q)   Restaurants, excluding drive-in and drive through
establishments.



         (r)   Shoe store.



         (s)   Sporting goods store.



         (t)   Toy store.



         (u)   Variety store.



      (2)   Personal service establishments, which perform services
on the premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Barber shop.



         (b)   Beauty parlor.



         (c)   Dancing school or studio.



         (d)   Dry cleaner, but not a central plant serving more
than one retail outlet.



         (e)   Laundry and dry cleaner, self- service only.



         (f)   Music school.



         (g)   Photographic studio.



         (h)   Shoe repair shop.



         (i)   Tailor shop.



      (3)   Business service establishments, which perform services
on the premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Bank, not including drive through establishments.



         (b)   Currency exchange.



         (c)   Financial institution.



         (d)   Insurance agency.



         (e)   Loan company (except pay day loan store).



         (f)   Real estate office.



         (g)   Savings and loan, not including drive-in
facilities.



      (4)   Professional office establishments, such as but not
limited to:



         (a)   Attorney and law office.



         (b)   Chiropodist's office.



         (c)   Chiropractor's office.



         (d)   Dentist's office.



         (e)   Doctor's, surgeon's, and/or physician's office.



         (f)   Medical and dental clinic.



         (g)   Optician's office.



         (h)   Osteopath's office.



         (i)   Private clinic.



      (5)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Church.



         (b)   Essential services - gas regulator stations,
telephone exchanges, electric substations.



         (c)   Off-street parking facility.



         (d)   Office building.



         (e)   Post office.



         (f)   Public utility establishments.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Amusement places, including swimming pools, ice skating
rinks, billiard parlors and bowling alley.



      (3)   Automobile service station, for the sale of gas,
lubricants, coolants and minor accessories only, and the performance of
incidental services such  as tire changing, battery changing and accessory
installations.



      (4)   Child care nursery.



      (5)   Home occupations.



      (6)   Residence of the proprietor of a commercial use.



      (7)   Residence, when on the second floor and secondary to the
business use of the premises.



      (8)   Theaters, indoor only.



      (9)   Outdoor general advertising device, that advertises a
group of commercial uses.



      (10)   Planned unit development.



      (11)   Automobile repair shop.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendations by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses.



      (1)   Temporary building or yard for construction materials
and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation.  Each such permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than six calendar months and shall not be renewed for more
than four successive periods at the same location.



      (2)   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the
sale or rental of real property.  Each permit shall specify the location of
the office and the area of permitted operation.  Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for
more than five successive periods at the same location.



      (3)   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed 100 square
feet for each face.  The sign shall be nonilluminated.  Each permit shall
specify the location of the sign.  Each such permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five
successive periods at the same location.



      (4)   Bazaar, dance and/or carnival, provided, however, that
each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than seven days, and
provided, further, that a period of at least 90 days shall intervene between
the termination of one permit and the issuance of another permit for the same
location.



      (5)   Christmas tree sales; each such permit shall be valid
for a period of not more than 60 days.



      (6)   Parking lot designated for a special event.  However,
each permit shall be valid only for the duration of the designated special
event.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings, or
other structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly
associated with a permitted use or special use may be permitted, provided
that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same
parcel, and do not include structures or features inconsistent with the
permitted use or special use.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Bars and cocktail lounges.



      (2)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments.



      (3)   Hotels and motels.



      (4)   Residential uses, except as a special use.



      (5)   Signs and billboards.



      (6)   Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.



      (7)   Pay day loan store.



      (8)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (9)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  None required, except that each
residential use shall have a ground area of not less than 7,500 square feet.



      (2)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
20 feet from the front lot line.



      (3)   Side yard.  None required; however, if a yard is
provided, it shall be not less than five feet adjoining a residential
district, a side yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided.



      (4)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
20 feet from the rear lot line.



      (5)   Maximum height.  No structure or portion thereof shall
exceed a height of two stories, or 25 feet.



      (6)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed 1.0.



      (7)   Design requirements. All buildings constructed in
commercial zoning districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from
below the frost line to above grade.



         (a)   Adjacent to minor streets. 



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a minor street shall be completely covered to the top of the eve
with one or more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone,
wood, stucco or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its site plan
review authority.



            2.   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Adjacent to secondary or collector thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a secondary or collector thorough-fare shall be completely covered
to the top of the eve with one or more of the following materials: masonry,
brick, stone, decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block),
architectural steel and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



            3.   Each sidewall visible from a street shall
have at least 50% covered with one or more of the above mentioned materials.



            4.   Each sidewall not facing or visible from a
street shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Adjacent to major thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a
major thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, or
decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural
steel and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



               a.   Building facades, parapet walls and
roofs shall not be colored in a manner that attracts attention to the
building.



               b.   Screening of all heating, ventilating
and air conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building
that are exposed to public view.



               c.   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided
they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the
building.



               d.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



               e.   All structures and pavement, with the
exception of ingress or egress isles, shall be setback at least 20 feet from
the front lot line.



               f.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



   (H)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Enclosure of operations.  All business, servicing or
processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:



         (a)   Off-street parking or loading.



         (b)   Accessory uses when allowed by the special
exception procedure.



      (2)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.  In addition,
the parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a permitted use shall
be limited to vehicles having not over 1-1/2 tons capacity, except for
pick-up and delivery services.



      (3)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (4)   Performance standards.  All activities shall conform
with the performance standards established for the I-l Limited Manufacturing
District.



      (5)   Scope of operations.  All business establishments shall
be retail trade or service establishments dealing directly with consumers,
and all goods produced on the premises shall be sold on the premises where
produced.



      (6)   Screening.  Where a commercial use abuts or is across
the street from a residential district, adequate screening shall be provided.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 313, passed 3-7-83; Am. Ord. 636, passed
3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1238, passed 6-17-02; Am. Ord. 1451, passed 12-18-06; Am.
Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1530,
passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



§ 156.072  C-2 COMMUNITY SHOPPING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of district.  The C-2 Community Shopping District
is intended to provide areas to be used as the primary shopping area for the
local area and other nearby communities, transients, and for the shopping
area for occupants of various business and industrial establishments. The
district permits most all types of business and  commercial  enterprises, 
offices and service establishments.  This district is normally centrally
located with respect to the shopping service area and located at the
convergence or along the major thoroughfares of the community.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses.



      (1)   Retail businesses, which supply commodities on the
premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Retail businesses permitted in the C-1 district.



         (b)   Appliance store.



         (c)   Art and school supply store.



         (d)   Art gallery.



         (e)   Automobile accessory store.



         (f)   Automobile service station, for the sale of gas,
lubricants, coolants and minor accessories only, and the performance of
incidental services such as tire changing, battery changing and accessory
installations.



         (g)   Bars, cocktail lounges and taverns.



         (h)   Bicycle store - sales, rental and repair.



         (i)   Billiard and pool hall.



         (j)   Business machines store.



         (k)   China and glassware store.



         (l)   Department store.



         (m)   Drapery store.



         (n)   Floor coverings, including rugs and carpets.



         (o)   Furniture store.



         (p)   Gift shop.



         (q)   Hobby shop.



         (r)   Leather goods and luggage store.



         (s)   Linoleum and tile store.



         (t)   Locksmith.



         (u)   Merchandising machines, sale of products.



         (v)   Newsstand.



         (w)   Notions store.



         (x)   Office supplies and stationery.



         (y)   Paint and wallpaper store.



         (z)   Pet shop.



         (aa)   Radio and television sales.



         (bb)   Record shop.



         (cc)   Tack shop.



         (dd)   Tobacco shop.



         (ee)   Toy store.



         (ff)   Trading stamp store.



      (2)   Personal service establishments, which perform services
on the premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Personal service establishments permitted in the
C-1 district.



         (b)   Clothing rental agency.



         (c)   General minor repair or fix-it shop.



         (d)   Interior decorating shop.



         (e)   Laundry.



         (f)   Tailor or dressmaker.



         (g)   Travel bureau.



         (h)   Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor.



      (3)   Business service establishments, which perform services
on the premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Business service establishments permitted in the
C-1 district.



         (b)   Better business bureau.



         (c)   Blueprinting establishment.



         (d)   Bowling alley.



         (e)   Business and management consultant.



         (f)   Business office.



         (g)   Chamber of commerce.



         (h)   Charitable organization.



         (i)   Civic association.



         (j)   Credit agency.



         (k)   Dance studio.



         (l)   Detective agency.



         (m)   Employment agency.



         (n)   Indoor skating rink or other recreation facility.



         (o)   Insurance carrier.



         (p)   Investment company.



         (q)   Labor union and organization.



         (r)   Mail order house.



         (s)   Merchants association.



         (t)   News syndicate.



         (u)   Newspaper office.



         (v)   Picture framing.



         (w)   Political organization.



         (x)   Professional membership association.



         (y)   Radio and television service and repair.



         (z)   Real estate board.



         (aa)   Security and commodity broker.



         (bb)   Social and fraternal association.



         (cc)   Taxicab stand.



         (dd)   Trade association.



         (ee)   Marina and boat storage facility.



         (ff)   Veterinary clinic/animal hospital permitting
indoor kennels for housing domestic animals; outdoor kennels and housing
facilities are prohibited.



      (4)   Professional office establishments, such as but not
limited to:



         (a)   Professional office establishments permitted in
the C-1 district.



         (b)   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping.



         (c)   Artists and industrial designers.



         (d)   Engineering and architectural services.



         (e)   Laboratories, medical and dental.



         (f)   Landscape architects.



         (g)   Land surveyors.



         (h)   Professional consultants.



         (i)   Professional offices.



         (j)   Scientific research agencies.



      (5)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings
and facilities permitted in the C-1 district.



         (b)   Bus passenger station.



         (c)   Hospital.



         (d)   Museum, art gallery.



         (e)   School and college.



         (f)   Transit and transportation facilities.



         (g)   Vocational school.



      (6)   Residential uses, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Apartment, only upon the following conditions:



            1.   Dwelling units shall not be permitted below
the third floor above ground level of the building.



            2.   No building shall contain more than 50% of
its gross floor area for multiple family dwellings.



            3.   Dwelling units shall not be located on the
same floor with any other use allowed in the C-2 District.



            4.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be
in accord with the following table:



 

Number of Bedrooms   
 
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)


Efficiency dwelling unit
 
600


One bedroom
 
800


Two bedroom
 
1,000



 



            5.   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be
in accord with the following table:



 

Number of Bedrooms   
 

Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)



Efficiency dwelling unit
 

500



One bedroom
 

650



Two bedroom
 

800




 



            6.   Apartments with more than two bedrooms shall
not be permitted.



         (b)   Apartment hotel.



         (c)   Convalescent, nursing home, rest home or
sanatorium.



         (d)   Dormitories, fraternities and club.



         (e)   Hotel and/or motel.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Antique shop.



      (3)   Child care nursery.



      (4)   Residence of the proprietor of a commercial use.



      (5)   Residence, when on the second floor and secondary to the
business use of the premises.



      (6)   Planned unit development.



      (7)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:



      (1)   C-1 temporary permit uses.



      (2)   Temporary mobile signs.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings, or
other structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly
associated with a permitted use or special use may be permitted, provided
they are operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same
parcel, and do not include structures or features inconsistent with the
permitted use or special use.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section including but not limited to:



      (1)   Residential uses, except as a special use.



      (2)   Used furniture and second-hand stores, other than
antiques.



      (3)   Used car lot.



      (4)   Automobile agencies.



      (5)   Wholesale uses.



      (6)   Pay day loan store.



      (7)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (8)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  None required, except that each
residential use shall have a ground area of not less than 7,500 square feet.



      (2)   Front yard.  None required.



      (3)   Side yard.  None required, except if a yard is
provided, it shall be not less than ten feet.  Where a C-2 property
adjoining a residential district, a side yard at least equal to that of the
residential district shall be provided.



         (a)   Outer court.  The width of an outer court shall
not be less than ten feet, or less than one-half of the height of each court,
or less than one-half the length of such court, whichever is greater.



         (b)   Inner court.  The width of an inner court shall
not be less than 20 feet, the length shall not be less than one-half the
height of such court, and the area shall not be less than twice the square of
its required least dimension.



      (4)   Rear yard.  None required. Where a C-2 property adjoins
a residential district, a rear yard at least equal to that of the residential
district shall be provided.



      (5)   Maximum height.  No structure or portion thereof shall
exceed a height of three stories or 35 feet.



      (6)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed 3.0.



      (7)   Design requirements. All buildings constructed in
commercial zoning districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from
below the frost line to above grade.



         (a)   Adjacent to minor streets. 



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a minor street shall be completely covered to the top of the eve
with one or more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone,
wood, stucco or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its site plan
review authority.



            2.   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Adjacent to secondary or collector thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a secondary or collector thorough-fare shall be completely covered
to the top of the eve with one or more of the following materials: masonry,
brick, stone, decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block),
architectural steel and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



            3.   Each sidewall visible from a street shall
have at least 50% covered with one or more of the above mentioned materials.



            4.   Each sidewall not facing or visible from a
street shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Adjacent to major thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a
major thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative
concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and
glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



               a.   Building facades, parapet walls and
roofs shall not be colored in a manner that attracts attention to the
building.



               b.   Screening of all heating, ventilating
and air conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building
that are exposed to public view.



               c.   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided
they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the
building.



               d.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



               e.   All structures and pavement, with the
exception of ingress or egress isles, shall be setback at least 20 feet from
the front lot line.



               f.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



               g.   All landscaping shall be permanently
maintained in good condition with at least the same quality and quantity of
landscaping initially installed.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



   (H)   Special provisions. 



      (1)   Enclosure of operations.  All business, servicing or
processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings except:



         (a)   Off-street parking or loading.



         (b)   Accessory uses when allowed by the special
exception procedure.



      (2)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



      (3)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (4)   Performance standards.  All activities shall conform
with the performance standards established for the I-1 Limited Manufacturing
District.



      (5)   Scope of operations.  All business establishments shall
be retail trade or service establishment dealing directly with consumers, and
all goods produced on the premises where produced.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71;  Am. Ord. 636, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 662, passed
7-15-91;  Am. Ord. 666, passed 7-15-91;  Am. Ord. 668, passed 7-15-91; Am.
Ord. 1238, passed 6-17-02; Am. Ord. 1451, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1477,
passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1530, passed 4-7-08;
Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09; Am. Ord. 1814, passed 9-21-15)



§ 156.073  C-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of district.  The C-3 General Business District
is intended to provide areas to be used for all types of retailing and
service uses that are normally associated with commercial uses. The uses
allowed are often large space uses and cater to customers who do not make
frequent purchases.  The market area for the permitted uses extends to an
area much larger than the local community. Automotive service type uses and
automobile associated uses are normally located in this district to serve
passerby traffic. The district is normally located along major thoroughfares,
where adequately sized parcels of land allow for large setbacks, clear vision
and safe ingress and egress.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Retail businesses, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Retail businesses permitted in the C-2 district.



         (b)   Antique shop.



         (c)   Automobile service station.



         (d)   Building services and supplies.



         (e)   Direct selling establishment, where products are
stored and distributed.



         (f)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments.



         (g)   Farm and garden supply store.



         (h)   Hay, grain and feed store.



         (i)   Ice cream refreshment stand.



         (j)   Lumber yard.



         (k)   Motor vehicle dealer.



         (l)   Motorcycle sales.



         (m)   Nursery stock.



         (n)   Tire, battery and accessory dealer.



         (o)   Tombstone and monument sales.



      (2)   Personal service establishments, such as but not limited
to:



         (a)   Personal service establishments permitted in the
C-2 district.



         (b)   Child care nursery.



         (c)   Furniture cleaning.



         (d)   Laundry, dry cleaning, and dyeing plant.



      (3)   Business service establishments, such as but not limited
to:



         (a)   Business service establishments permitted in the
C-2 district.



         (b)   Advertising signs.



         (c)   Automobile diagnostic center.



         (d)   Automobile driving instruction.



         (e)   Automobile rental.



         (f)   Automobile repair shop.



         (g)   Commercial greenhouse.



         (h)   Commercial swimming pool.



         (i)   Disinfecting and exterminating service.



         (j)   Retail electrical shop.



         (k)   Equipment rental and leasing service.



         (l)   Furnace supply and service.



         (m)   Furniture repair and re-upholstery.



         (n)   Golf course and/or country club.



         (o)   Lawn mower repair shop.



         (p)   Motorcycle service and repair.



         (q)   Packing and crating establishment similar to Mail
Boxes Etc.



         (r)   Retail paint shop.



         (s)   Retail plumbing and heating shop.



         (t)   Radio and television repair shop.



         (u)   Refrigerator shop.



         (v)   Repair service, large-major items.



         (w)   Retail graphics and printing service.



         (x)   Swimming pool sales and service.



         (y)   Taxidermist.



         (z)   Tennis club.



         (aa)   Tire retreading and repair shop, only in
conjunction with a service station, repair shop or automobile dealership.



         (bb)   Towing service, only in conjunction with a
service station, repair shop or automobile dealership.



         (cc)   Veterinary clinic, animal hospital, and kennels.



         (dd)   Water softener service.



         (ee)   Window cleaning firm.



      (4)   Professional office establishments  permitted in the
C-2 district.



      (5)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings
and facilities permitted in the C-2 District.



         (b)   Public service or municipal garages.



         (c)   Ambulance service.



      (6)   Residential uses, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Convalescent, nursing home, rest home or
sanatorium.



         (b)   Hotel and/or motel.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Amusement park.



      (3)   Automobile laundry.



      (4)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments of a
non-restaurant use.



      (5)   Go-kart raceway.



      (6)   Planned unit development.



      (7)   Septic tank cleaning service.



      (8)   Used furniture and second-hand store.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:  C-2 temporary permit
uses.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings or other
structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly associated with
a permitted use or special use may be permitted, provided that they are
operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same parcel, and do
not include structures or features inconsistent with the permitted use or
special use.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Bottled gas dealers, except that the sale of liquid
propane for gas grills and similar uses is allowed.



      (2)   Concrete mixing or asphalt plant.



      (3)   Contractor's yard.



      (4)   Residential uses.



      (5)   Truck stops or other fuel facilities designated for
selling fuel or other services to semi-trucks, except that a service station
shall not be prohibited from selling diesel fuel or gasoline to semi-trucks,
provided that such sale is incidental to the business of selling gasoline or
diesel fuel to passenger vehicles.



      (6)   Truck terminal.



      (7)   Wrecking, dismantling or automobile salvage yard.



      (8)   Pay day loan store.



      (9)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (10)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  None required.



      (2)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
20 feet from the front lot line.



      (3)   Side yard.  None required, except if a yard is
provided, it shall be not less than ten feet. Where a C-3 property adjoins a
residential district a side yard at least equal to that of the residential
district shall be provided.



      (4)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than
10% of the depth of the lot.  However, such rear yard need not exceed ten
feet in depth.



      (5)   Maximum height.  No structure or portion thereof shall
exceed a height of three stories or 45 feet, and no accessory structure shall
exceed one story or 15 feet in height.



      (6)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed 2.0.



      (7)   Design requirements. All buildings constructed in
commercial zoning districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from
below the frost line to above grade.



         (a)   Adjacent to minor streets. 



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a minor street shall be completely covered to the top of the eve
with one or more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone,
wood, stucco or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its site plan
review authority.



            2.   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Adjacent to secondary or collector thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a secondary or collector thoroughfare shall be completely covered to
the top of the eve with one or more of the following materials: masonry,
brick, stone, decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block),
architectural steel and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



            3.   Each sidewall visible from a street shall
have at least 50% covered with one or more of the above mentioned materials.



            4.   Each sidewall not facing or visible from a
street shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Adjacent to major thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a
major thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative
concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and
glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



               a.   Building facades, parapet walls and
roofs shall not be colored in a manner that attracts attention to the
building.



               b.   Screening of all heating, ventilating
and air conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building
that are exposed to public view.



               c.   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided
they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the
building.



               d.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



               e.   All structures and pavement, with the
exception of ingress or egress isles, shall be set back at least 20 feet from
the front lot line.



               f.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



   (H)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



      (2)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (3)   Performance standards.  All activities shall conform
with the performance standards established for the I-l Limited Manufacturing
District.



      (4)   Outdoor sales.  All outdoor sales space shall be
provided with a permanent durable and dustless surface and shall be graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water.



      (5)   Outdoor storage.  All outdoor storage facilities for
fuel, raw materials and products when within 200 feet of a residential
district shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to
conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.



      (6)   Waste materials.  No materials or wastes shall be
deposited upon a lot in such a form that they may be transferred off the
property by natural causes or forces.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 636, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1238, passed
6-17-02; Am. Ord. 1352, passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord. 1451, passed 12-18-06; Am.
Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1530,
passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



§ 156.074  C-4 AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of district.  This district is intended to
provide certain land and structures for automotive service type use and
automobile associated uses such as drive-ins.  The district is intended to
be located only along major thoroughfares where adequately sized and properly
located parcels of land will allow for adequate setbacks, clear vision and
safe ingress and egress.  Frontage roads should be provided where possible.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Retail businesses, which supply commodities on the
premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Advertising signs.



         (b)   Automobile accessories store.



         (c)   Automobile service station.



         (d)   Boat dealer.



         (e)   Camper sales.



         (f)   Mobile home dealer.



         (g)   Motor vehicle dealer.



         (h)   Motorcycle sales.



         (i)   Tire, battery and accessory dealer.



         (j)   Used car lot.



      (2)   Personal service establishments, which perform services
on the premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   General repair shop.



         (b)   Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor.



         (c)   Drive-in cleaners.



      (3)   Business service establishment, which performs services
on the premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Automobile diagnostic center or clinic.



         (b)   Automobile driving instruction.



         (c)   Automobile painting.



         (d)   Automobile rental.



         (e)   Automobile repair shop.



         (f)   Automobile undercoating service.



         (g)   Equipment rental and leasing service.



         (h)   Motorcycle service and repair.



         (i)   Repair service.



         (j)   Taxicab stand.



         (k)   Tire retreading and repair shop.



         (l)   Towing service.



      (4)   Public, quasi-public, and government buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings
and facilities permitted in the C-1 District.



         (b)   Bus passenger station.



         (c)   Public service or municipal garage.



         (d)   Ambulance service.



      (5)   Residential uses, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Hotel and/or motel.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Residence of the proprietor of a commercial use.



      (3)   Residence, when on the second floor and secondary to the
business use of the premises.



      (4)   Planned unit development.



      (5)   Automobile laundry or car wash.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:  C-2 temporary permit
uses.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings or other
structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly associated with
a permitted use or special use may be permitted, provided that they are
operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same parcel, and do
not include structures or features inconsistent with the permitted use or
special use.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section including but not limited to:



      (1)   Automotive salvage yard.



      (2)   Residential uses, except as a special use.



      (3)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments.



      (4)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (5)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum Lot Area.  None required, except that each
residential use shall have a ground area of not less than 7,500 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width of 120 feet
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
20 feet from the front lot line.



      (4)   Side yard.  None required, except if a yard is provided
it shall be not less than ten feet. Where a C-4 property adjoins a
residential district a side yard at least equal to that of the residential
district shall be provided.



      (5)   Rear yard.  There shall be a rear yard of not less than
10% of the depth of the lot.  However, such rear yard need not exceed ten
feet in depth.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No structure or portion thereof, shall
exceed a height of three stories or 45 feet, and no accessory structure shall
exceed one story or 15 feet in height.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed 2.0.



      (8)   Design requirements. All buildings constructed in
commercial zoning districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from
below the frost line to above grade.



         (a)   Adjacent to minor streets. 



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a minor street shall be completely covered to the top of the eve
with one or more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone,
wood, stucco or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its site plan
review authority.



            2.   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Adjacent to secondary or collector thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a secondary or collector thorough-fare shall be completely covered
to the top of the eve with one or more of the following materials: masonry,
brick, stone, decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block),
architectural steel and glass,  precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



            3.   Each sidewall visible from a street shall
have at least 50% covered with one or more of the above mentioned materials.



            4.   Each sidewall not facing or visible from a
street shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Adjacent to major thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a
major thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative
concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and
glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



               a.   Building facades, parapet walls and
roofs shall not be colored in a manner that attracts attention to the
building.



               b.   Screening of all heating, ventilating
and air conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building
that are exposed to public view.



               c.   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided
they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the
building.



               d.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



               e.   All structures and pavement, with the
exception of ingress or egress isles, shall be setback at least 20 feet from
the front lot line.



               f.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



   (H)   Special Provisions. 



      (1)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



      (2)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (3)   Performance standards.  All activities shall conform
with the performance standards established for the I-l Limited Manufacturing
District.



      (4)   Outdoor sales.  All outdoor sales space shall be
provided with a permanent durable and dustless surface and shall be graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water.



      (5)   Outdoor storage.  All outdoor storage facilities for
fuel, raw materials and products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant
materials adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and
the public right-of-way.



      (6)   Waste materials.  No materials or wastes shall be
deposited upon a lot in such a form that they may be transferred off the
property by natural causes or forces.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 636, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1238, passed
6-17-02; Am. Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am.
Ord. 1530, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



§ 156.075  C-5 OFFICE/TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of district.  The C-S Office /transitional
district is intended to provide land and structures used primarily to provide
office space for services to local residents some residential type
structures, for both permanent and transient occupancy and including
institutions, are permitted.  Commercial uses which conform to the pattern
of the district are also permitted. This district is characterized by large
homes suitable for use as offices or parcels of land economically desirable
for the construction of new office facilities. The uses permitted are
characterized by a low volume of traffic, and limited outdoor advertising, so
as to protect the abutting and surrounding residential districts. This
district is normally small in size and is often located as a buffer between
residential and commercial areas.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Retail businesses, which supply commodities on the
premises, limited to:



         (a)   Drug store.



         (b)   Gift shop.



         (c)   Office supplies.



         (d)   Restaurants, excluding drive-in and drive-through
establishments.



      (2)   Business service establishments, which perform services
on the premises, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Better business bureau.



         (b)   Business and management consultant.



         (c)   Business office, in which chattels or goods, wares
or merchandise are not displayed or sold on the premises.



         (d)   Chamber of commerce.



         (e)   Charitable organization.



         (f)   Civic association.



         (g)   Credit agency.



         (h)   Detective agency and/or security police.



         (i)   Insurance carrier.



         (j)   Insurance office.



         (k)   Investment company.



         (l)   Labor union and organization.



         (m)   Mail order house.



         (n)   Merchants association.



         (o)   Political organization.



         (p)   Professional membership association.



         (q)   Real estate board.



         (r)   Real estate office.



         (s)   Social and fraternal associations.



         (t)   Trade association.



      (3)   Professional office establishments, such as but not
limited to:



         (a)   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping.



         (b)   Artist and industrial designer.



         (c)   Attorney and law office.



         (d)   Chiropodist's office.



         (e)   Chiropractor's office.



         (f)   Dentist's office.



         (h)   Engineering and architectural services.



         (i)   Landscape architect.



         (j)   Land surveyor.



         (k)   Medical and dental clinics.



         (l)   Minister.



         (m)   Optician's office.



         (n)   Osteopath's office.



      (4)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities permitted in the C-2 district.



      (5)   Residential use, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Apartment hotel.



         (b)   Convalescent, nursing home, rest home or
sanatorium.



         (c)   Dormitory, fraternity and club.



         (d)   Single family home.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this District.



      (2)   Antique shop.



      (4)   Planned unit development.



      (5)   Home occupation.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:  C-1 temporary permit
uses.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings, or
other structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly
associated with a permitted use or special use may be permitted, provided
that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same
parcel, and do not include structures or features inconsistent with the
permitted use or special use.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Barber shop.



      (2)   Beauty shop.



      (3)   Health and reducing studios.



      (4)   Pay day loan store.



      (5)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments.



      (6)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (7)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements. 



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  None required, except that each
residential use shall have a ground area of not less than 7,500 square feet.



      (2)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
30 feet from the front lot line.



      (3)   Side yard.  None required, however, if a yard is
provided, it shall be not less than ten feet. Adjoining a residential
district, a side yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided.



      (4)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
20 feet from the rear lot line.



      (5)   Maximum height.  No structure or portion thereof shall
exceed a height of 2-1/2 stories, or 35 feet.



      (6)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed 1.5.



      (7)   Design requirements. All buildings constructed in
commercial zoning districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from
below the frost line to above grade.



         (a)   Adjacent to minor streets. 



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a minor street shall be completely covered to the top of the eve
with one or more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone,
wood, stucco or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its site plan
review authority.



            2.   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Adjacent to secondary or collector thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a secondary or collector thorough-fare shall be completely covered
to the top of the eve with one or more of the following materials: masonry,
brick, stone, decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block),
architectural steel and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



            3.   Each sidewall visible from a street shall
have at least 50% covered with one or more of the above mentioned materials.



            4.   Each sidewall not facing or visible from a
street shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Adjacent to major thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a
major thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative
concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and
glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



               a.   Building facades, parapet walls and
roofs shall not be colored in a manner that attracts attention to the
building.



               b.   Screening of all heating, ventilating
and air conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building
that are exposed to public view.



               c.   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided
they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the
building.



               d.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



               e.   All structures and pavement, with the
exception of ingress or egress isles, shall be setback at least 20 feet from
the front lot line.



               f.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



   (H)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Enclosure of operations.  All business, servicing or
processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:



         (a)   Off-street parking or loading.



         (b)   Accessory uses when allowed by the special
exception procedure.



      (2)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.  In addition,
the parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a permitted use, shall
be limited to vehicles having not over three quarter ton capacity, except for
pick-up and delivery services.



      (3)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (4)   Performance standards.  All activities shall conform
with the performance standards established for the I-1 Limited Manufacturing
District.



      (5)   Scope of operations.  All business establishments shall
be retail trade or service establishments dealing directly with consumers,
and all goods produced on the premises shall be sold on the premises where
produced.



      (6)   Screening.  Where a commercial use abuts or is across
the street from a residential district, adequate screening shall be provided.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 636, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1238, passed
6-17-02; Am. Ord. 1451, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07; Am.
Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1530, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 1570,
passed 1-19-09)



§ 156.076  C-6 OFFICE AND RESEARCH PARK DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of District.  The C-6 Office and Research Park
District is intended to provide land for large, attractively landscaped
sites,  often  along  major trafficways, permitted “show-place”
buildings having large setback.  The entire area is intended to create a
park-like atmosphere conducive to the quality development of international
headquarters, large office buildings, research activities, and some
specialized non-objectionable industrial activities. The low intensity and
limiting restrictions provide for permitted uses compatible with adjacent
residential and commercial developments.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied, and no
building, structure, or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged,
occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other
than one or more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Hotel and/or motel.



         (b)   Restaurants, excluding drive-in and drive-through
establishments.



      (2)   Business service and/or office establishments, such as
but not limited to:



         (a)   Bank and/or financial institutions.



         (b)   Business offices.



         (c)   Home office operations.



         (d)   Insurance company headquarters.



         (e)   International headquarters.



         (f)   Personnel training center, including dormitory
facilities.



         (g)   Professional offices of engineering and/or
architectural firms.



         (h)   Regional sales offices.



         (i)   Merchandise and product display spaces but no
direct sales.



         (j)   Medical research and clinics.



      (3)   Industrial type uses, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Design firms.



         (b)   Electronic industries.



         (c)   Experimental product develop- ment.



         (d)   Laboratories.



         (e)   Pharmaceutical industries.



         (f)   Pilot plants.



         (g)   Research firms.



      (4)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities, such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Essential services - gas regulator stations;
telephone exchanges, electric substation.



         (b)   Hospital.



         (c)   Museum, art gallery.



         (d)   Office building.



         (e)   Post office.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals as
allowed in §§ 156.190 through 156.202.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted use in this district.



      (2)   Planned unit development.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and issuance by the Village Board of a permit therefor,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:



      (1)   Temporary building, trailer, or yard for construction
materials and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in
the zoning district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building
or yard and the areas of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid
for a period of not more than six calendar months and shall not be renewed
for more than four successive periods at the same location.



      (2)   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the
sale or rental of real property. Each permit shall specify the location of
the office and the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for
more than five successive periods at the same location.



      (3)   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed 100 square
feet for each face. Sign shall be nonilluminated. Each permit shall specify
the location of the sign. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not
more than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five successive
periods at the same location.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings, or
other structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly
associated with a permitted use or special use may be permitted, provided
that they are operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same
parcel, and do not include structures or features inconsistent with the
permitted use or special use.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Residential uses.



      (2)   Commercial uses, except as listed in division (B)(1) of
this section.



      (3)   Industrial uses, except as listed in division (B)(3) of
this section.



      (4)   Drive-in and drive-through establishments.



      (5)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (6)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  A separate ground area, of not less
than ten acres shall be designated, provided, and continuously maintained for
each structure or land containing a permitted or special use.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width of 500 feet
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
200 feet from the front lot line.



      (4)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than 100 feet from the side lot line.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than 100 feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No structure or portion thereof shall
exceed a height of two stories, or 25 feet or A height equal to one-half of
the horizontal distance from the structure to any property line, whichever is
greater.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed 1.0.



      (8)   Maximum lot coverage.  Not more than 25% of the lot
area may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.



      (9)   Design requirements. All buildings constructed in
commercial zoning districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from
below the frost line to above grade.



         (a)   Adjacent to minor streets. 



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a minor street shall be completely covered to the top of the eve
with one or more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone,
wood, stucco or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its site plan
review authority.



            2.   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Adjacent to secondary or collector thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a secondary or collector thorough- fare shall be completely covered
to the top of the eve with one or more of the following materials: masonry,
brick, stone, decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block),
architectural steel and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



            3.   Each sidewall visible from a street shall
have at least 50% covered with one or more of the above mentioned materials.



            4.   Each sidewall not facing or visible from a
street shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Adjacent to major thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a
major thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative
concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and
glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



               a.   Building facades, parapet walls and
roofs shall not be colored in a manner that attracts attention to the
building.



               b.   Screening of all heating, ventilating
and air conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building
that are exposed to public view.



               c.   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided
they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the
building.



               d.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



               e.   All structures and pave- ment, with the
exception of ingress or egress isles, shall be setback at least 20 feet from
the front lot line.



               f.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



   (H)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Enclosure of operations.  All business, servicing or
processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:



         (a)   Off-street parking or loading.



         (b)   Accessory uses when allowed by the special
exception procedure.



      (2)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



      (3)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (4)   Performance standards.  All activities shall conform
with the performance standards established for the I-1 Limited Manufacturing
District.



      (5)   Screening.  Where an office, commercial or industrial
use abuts or is across the street from a residential district, adequate
screening and landscaping shall be provided.



      (6)   Minimum area.  The minimum area of a C-6 Office and
Research Park Zoning District shall be not less than 40 acres.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 636, passed 3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1238, passed
6-17-02; Am. Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am.
Ord. 1530, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



§ 156.077  C-7 DAY-CARE AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of District.  The C-7 Day-Care and Professional
Office District is intended to provide land and structures used to provide
day-care and preschool facilities as well as professional office for service
to local residents.  The uses permitted are characterized by a low overall
volume of traffic and limited outdoor advertising, so as to protect any
possible abutting and surrounding districts.  This district is normally
small in size and located near or adjacent to residential districts.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Child care nurseries, day-care and preschool facilities
which are properly licensed and maintained as provided by the village, the
state or any political subdivision thereof.



      (2)   Professional office establishments, such as but not
limited to:



         (a)   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping.



         (b)   Artist and industrial designer.



         (c)   Attorney and law office.



         (d)   Chiropodist's office.



         (e)   Chiropractor's office.



         (f)   Dentist's office.



         (g)   Doctor's surgeon's and/or physician's office.



         (h)   Engineering and architectural services.



         (i)   Landscape architect.



         (j)   Land surveyor.



         (k)   Medical and dental clinics.



         (l)   Optician's office.



         (m)   Osteopath's office.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  No special uses are permitted in the
C-7 Day-Care and Professional Office District.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and issuance by the Village Board of a permit
therefor, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:



      (1)   Temporary building or yard for construction material
and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. 



      (2)   Each permit shall specify the location of the building
or yard and the area of permitted operation..



      (3)   Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than six calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than four
successive periods at the same location.



   (E)   Accessory uses permitted.  No accessory uses are permitted.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Mobile homes.



      (2)   Home occupations.



      (3)   Hotels and motels.



      (4)   Commercial uses.



      (5)   Industrial uses.



      (6)   Signs and billboards.



      (7)   Roomers and boarders.



      (8)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (9)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (G)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.



         (a)   Where a private sewerage disposal system with
private well water supply is utilized, separate minimum ground area in
accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the County Health
Department in effect from time to time, but in no event less than 15,000
square feet, shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for
each residential lot used for a permitted or special use.



         (b)   Where central public water supply together with
either private sewerage disposal system or central public disposal system is
utilized, a separate minimum ground area in accordance with the ordinances
and regulations of the County Health Department in effect from time to time,
but in no event less than 12,000 square feet, shall be designated, provided
and continuously maintained for each residential lot used for a permitted or
special use, provided that in any subdivision there shall not be less than
13,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width in accordance
with the ordinances and regulations of the County Health Department in effect
from time to time but in no event less than 100 feet where private sewerage
disposal system with private well water supply are utilized, nor 80 feet
where central public water supply together with either private sewerage
disposal system or central public sewerage disposal system is utilized, shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
30 feet from the front line.



      (4)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in from the
side lot line a distance of not less than ten feet on each side.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than ten feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No principal structure shall exceed
2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed 2.0.



      (8)   Corner lots.  On a corner lot the required front yard
setback shall apply to each side of a lot fronting on a public street.



      (9)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (10)   Trucks.  No truck or other type of vehicular equipment
in excess of one ton rating shall be parked or stored on a lot in C-7
district, except when located in a garage or a fully enclosed structure.



      (11)   Trailers and boats.  Travel trailers, camping trailer
or boat may be parked or stored on a lot in the C-7 district, when located in
a garage or enclosed structure, within the buildable area to the rear of the
structure, or in a rear yard.



      (12)   Tents.  Tents shall not be erected, uses, or
maintained on any lot, except such small tents that are customarily used for
temporary recreational purposes.



      (13)   Design requirements. All buildings constructed in
commercial zoning districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from
below the frost line to above grade.



         (a)   Adjacent to minor streets. 



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a minor street shall be completely covered to the top of the eve
with one or more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone,
wood, stucco or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to its site plan
review authority.



            2.   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Adjacent to secondary or collector thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a secondary or collector thorough-fare shall be completely covered
to the top of the eve with one or more of the following materials: masonry,
brick, stone, decorative concrete block (excluding plain concrete block),
architectural steel and glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



            3.   Each sidewall visible from a street shall
have at least 50% covered with one or more of the above mentioned materials.



            4.   Each sidewall not facing or visible from a
street shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the above
mentioned materials as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Adjacent to major thoroughfares.



            1.   All sides of such buildings adjacent to a
major thoroughfare shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, decorative
concrete block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and
glass, precast panels, EIFS or natural materials.



               a.   Building facades, parapet walls and
roofs shall not be colored in a manner that attracts attention to the
building.



               b.   Screening of all heating, ventilating
and air conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building
that are exposed to public view.



               c.   Roof screens shall be allowed, provided
they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the
building.



               d.   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



               e.   All structures and pavement, with the
exception of ingress or egress isles, shall be setback at least 20 feet from
the front lot line.



               f.   Landscaping shall be in accordance with
Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



            2.   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71;  Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-7-90; Am. Ord. 636, passed
3-4-91; Am. Ord. 1238, passed 6-17-02; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am.
Ord. 1530, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



§ 156.078 TCD TOWN CENTER DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the TCD - Town Center District  is
to create a traditional town center; a center of energy for the whole
village. Recalling the characteristics that typically made up a mid-1800's
Midwestern town, the Town Center will offer something unique to the
Chicagoland area.



      (1)   The Town Center will be the vibrant heart of Channahon,
the community's "living room", with parks, shops, offices, entertainment, a
government center, churches, a library and post office. It will also
incorporate a variety of housing types, such as apartments above retail, town
homes and single-family homes. It is intended to be a people place, one where
the pedestrian comes first, with accommodations for the automobile.



      (2)   The design of all elements of the Town Center will be of
utmost importance. Typical of a Midwestern town, the vehicular circulation
will include streets connected to each other and narrower than today's
counterpart. Buildings may be built right up to the public sidewalk, and will
have rich, detailed architectural character. Front porches will likely be
found on many of the houses and garages will most likely be located towards
the rear property line, where an alley would serve them.



      (3)   Mixed land-uses and higher densities are allowed in the
Town Center for the purpose of creating urban people spaces and "walkability"
within the Center.



      (4)   Please see the Channahon Town Center Design Standards
and Town Center plans for a more thorough explanation of the purpose as well
as all aspects of the Town Center.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the TCD,
however each use is only allowed in certain areas of the Town Center. Please
see the Channahon Town Center Design Plans and Standards for more detailed
information.



      (1)   Retail.



         (a)   Antique shops.



         (b)   Appliance stores.



         (c)   Art galleries.



         (d)   Art and school supplies.



         (e)   Bakeries, in which the manufacture of goods is
limited to goods retailed on the premises only.



         (f)   Bicycle sales and repairs.



         (g)   Book stores.



         (h)   Bridal shops.



         (i)   Business machine sales and service.



         (j)   Brewpub.



         (k)   Butcher shops.



         (l)   Camera stores.



         (m)   Camping equipment sales and rental (excluding
trailers and similar campers).



         (n)   Candle shops.



         (o)   Candy and confectionery stores.



         (p)   Card shops.



         (q)   Carpet stores.



         (r)   Children's apparel shops.



         (s)   China and glassware stores.



         (t)   Christmas shops.



         (u)   Compact disc, cassette tape and phonograph record
stores.



         (v)   Computers, sales and service.



         (w)   Drug stores and pharmacies.



         (x)   Florist shops.



         (y)   Food stores, including grocery, convenience and
specialty (coffee, fudge, health, etc).



         (z)   Furniture stores.



         (aa)   Gift shops.



         (bb)   Handmade crafts.



         (cc)   Hardware stores.



         (dd)   Hearing aid stores.



         (ee)   Hobby shops.



         (ff)   Ice cream stores or stands.



         (gg)   Jewelry stores.



         (hh)   Ladies apparel stores.



         (ii)   Leather goods and luggage stores.



         (jj)   Linen and bath shops.



         (kk)   Men's apparel stores.



         (ll)   Millinery and haberdasheries.



         (mm)   Musical instrument sales and repairs.



         (nn)   Office supply stores.



         (oo)   Orthopedic and medical appliance stores.



         (pp)   Paint and wallpaper sales.



         (qq)   Physical culture and health services.



         (rr)   Pottery shops.



         (ss)   Retail, mail-order stores.



         (tt)   Sewing machine sales and services.



         (uu)   Shoe stores.



         (vv)   Special import stores.



         (ww)   Sporting goods.



         (xx)   Sports card stores.



         (yy)   Tobacco shops.



         (zz)   Toy stores.



         (aaa)   Variety and notion stores (dime stores.



      (2)   Business services.



         (a)   Artists and design studios.



         (b)   Banks and/or financial institutions, excluding
drive-in and drive-through establishments (excluding drive-up and pay day
loan store).



         (c)   Beauty and barber shops.



         (d)   Bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Brokerage houses.



         (f)   Business schools.



         (g)   Catering services.



         (h)   Chambers of Commerce.



         (i)   Charitable organizations.



         (j)   Civic associations.



         (k)   Clothing and costume rental stores.



         (l)   Clubs and lodges, private, fraternal or religious.



         (m)   Commercial or trade schools (dance studios, music
schools or martial arts).



         (n)   Credit agencies.



         (o)   Currency exchanges.



         (p)   Data processing centers.



         (q)   Delicatessens.



         (r)   Dry cleaning shops.



         (s)   Employment agencies.



         (t)   Electrical and household appliance sales and
repair.



         (u)   Funeral parlors.



         (v)   Furniture repair.



         (w)   Furrier shops, storage and conditioning.



         (x)   General repair shops.



         (y)   Gift wrapping and mailing services.



         (z)   Interior decorating shops.



         (aa)   Laundries.



         (bb)   Libraries.



         (cc)   Locksmiths.



         (dd)   Merchants' associations.



         (ee)   Newspaper offices.



         (ff)   Pawn shops.



         (gg)   Photocopying and printing.



         (hh)   Photographic and art studio.



         (ii)   Picture framing.



         (jj)   Radio and television: service, repair and studios.



         (kk)   Real estate offices.



         (ll)   Restaurants, excluding drive-in and drive-through
establishments.



         (mm)   Security and commodity brokers.



         (nn)   Shoe repair shops.



         (oo)   Tailor or dressmaker shop.



         (pp)   Travel agency.



         (qq)   Upholstery stores.



         (rr)   Video rentals.



      (3)   Professional offices.



         (a)   Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping offices.



         (b)   Attorney and law offices.



         (c)   Business and management consultants.



         (d)   Engineering and architectural services.



         (e)   Insurance agencies.



         (f)   Investment companies.



         (g)   Land surveyors.



         (h)   Landscape architects.



         (i)   Professional consultants.



      (4)   Medical offices.



         (a)   Chiropractor's offices.



         (b)   Dentist's offices.



         (c)   Doctor's, surgeon's and/or physician's offices.



         (d)   Opticians.



         (e)   Opthomologists.



         (f)   Osteopath's offices.



         (g)   Podiatrist's offices.



      (5)   Residential.



         (a)   Single Family Housing.



         (b)   Town Center Single-Family Housing.



         (c)   Senior Housing.



         (d)   Town homes.



         (e)   Flats.



         (f)   Carriage Housing.



      (6)   Institutional.



         (a)   Churches.



         (b)   Civic buildings.



         (c)   Community centers.



         (d)   Museum.



         (e)   Post office.



         (f)   Public parking garages.



         (g)   Theatres and auditorium.



   (C)   Special uses.



      (1)   Drive-through facilities for a bank and/or financial
institution as described in the Channahon Town Center Design Standards. This
special use listed may be permitted by the adoption of a Special Use
Ordinance by the Village Board of Trustees, upon recommendation from the Town
Center Architectural Review Committee and the Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (2)   Planned unit developments.



   (D)   Accessory uses. For the purpose of this section, accessory
uses shall include buildings or other structures customarily incidental to,
and commonly associated with a permitted or special use. These uses shall be
permitted, provided they:



      (1)   Are operated and maintained under the same ownership and
are located on the same lot as the permitted or special use.



      (2)   Do not include structures or structural features
inconsistent with these uses.



   (E)   Interpretation of uses. The Director of Development, or
appointed designee, may allow a land use to be considered as a permitted or
special use which, though not identified by name in a zoning district list of
permitted or special uses, is deemed to be similar in nature, and clearly
compatible with the listed uses. The Director of Development shall consult
the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code to determine similarity or
compatibility.



   (F)   Site development requirements.  Properties hereinafter zoned,
developed or redeveloped with permitted or special uses in a TC -Town Center
District are subject to the provisions of the Town Center Design Standards
and Plans. The Town Center Design Standards and Town Center Plans shall mean
the design standards prepared by Lincoln Street Studio dated August 2, 2002
and the Town Center Master Site Plan prepared by Arete 3, Ltd. dated May 13,
2005 together with all exhibits to each and additionally, those amendments
approved to the aforementioned materials. Each proposed improvement will be
reviewed by the Channahon Town Center Architectural Review Committee. The ARC
will recommend approval or denial to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
their approval. Appeals of a decision may be made to the Channahon Village
Board. The following requirements are addressed in detail in the Town Center
Design Standards:



      (1)   Building and parking lot setbacks.



      (2)   Lot sizes.



      (3)   Structure heights.



      (4)   Building design/materials.



      (5)   Landscape requirements.



      (6)   Lighting.



      (7)   Parking requirements. In the commercial core, parking
shall be provided as indicated on the Channahon Town Center approved by the
Village Board. If additional parking is necessary, it shall be provided at a
rate of 3.6 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of nonresidential space. In the
residential neighborhoods, required off street parking shall be two spaces
per unit (garage parking counts). See TCD design guidelines for compliance.



      (8)   Sidewalks and bicycle paths.



      (9)   Sign requirements.



      (10)   Street configuration.



      (11)   Outdoor sales. All outdoor sales space shall be
provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water.



      (12)   Outdoor storage. Storage of goods or materials shall be
limited to the interior side or rear yard. A minimum six-foot tall screen
wall or fence shall be required. Where the screen wall or fence is visible
from a public street or otherwise visible to the general public from the
interior of the lot, it shall be softened by landscaping.



      (13)   Roof mounted mechanical equipment.



         (a)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air
conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that
are exposed to public view. Roof screens shall be allowed, provided they are
designed to blend with the architectural style and color of the building.



         (b)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment that is
mounted on the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



      (14)   Refuse screening. Bins used to store trash outside the
building shall be enclosed by a fence or masonry wall which is at least equal
to the height of the enclosure. A concrete pad and approach apron shall also
be required, to bear the weight of receptacles.



      (15)   Seasonal sales. All outdoor seasonal sales will be
required to have a building permit.



   (G)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in this
section, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (2)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



(Ord. 1257, passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 1383, passed 6-6-05; Am. Ord. 1451,
passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07; Am. Ord. 1501, passed
8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09; Am. Ord. 1835, passed 3-7-16)



OVERLAY DISTRICTS



§ 156.080  PURPOSE.



   In addition to the zoning districts listed and their associated
regulations set forth in this chapter, additional regulations and
requirements are imposed through Overlay Zoning Districts of the village in
which the village desires to protect life and property from losses, hazards
and related affects cause by the occupancy and use of flood hazard areas by
buildings, structures, or activities, which may increase the effects of
flooding. The Overlay Zoning Districts are also established to facilitate
growth and development of specific geographical areas within the Village of
Channahon. If the regulations and restrictions for the Overlay Zoning
Districts set forth in this chapter impose greater standards or more
restrictive requirements than are required in any other chapter or section of
this chapter, or other local, state or federal regulation, the regulations or
requirements made under this chapter shall supersede and govern. To fully
carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter, the following Overlay
Zoning Districts are established:



   (A)   Channahon Proper Overlay Zoning District.



(Ord. 1594, passed 9-21-09)



§ 156.081  CHANNAHON PROPER (CP) OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of district. The Channahon Proper (CP) Overlay
District is the oldest part of the village and was not subject to the
subdivision and development regulations or the zoning regulations during its
development stages. Due to this development, the CP Overlay District is
unique in nature and subject to regulations that may be over burdensome and
too restrictive in the underlying zoning districts. The subject area also
holds the most historic value of the village and is the gateway to a village
state park and the I & M Canal. The CP Overlay District's intent is to lessen
the burden of the zoning regulations while also upholding or enhancing the
Channahon Proper character by instituting exclusive regulations for this
particular area.



   (B)   Boundaries. The boundaries of the CP Overlay District shall be
defined in accordance with the Official Zoning Map.



   (C)   Uses permitted. Any use permitted in the underlying zoning
district of the subject parcel.



   (D)   Special uses. Any use permitted by special use in the
underlying zoning district of the subject parcel.



   (E)   Temporary permit uses permitted. Any temporary permit uses
permitted in the underlying zoning district of the subject parcel.



   (F)   Accessory uses permitted. Any accessory uses permitted in the
underlying zoning district of the subject parcel.



   (G)   Prohibited uses. Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning
district of the subject parcel.



   (H)   Residential site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. A separate ground area of not less
than 7,500 square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously
maintained for each structure or land containing a permitted or special use.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. A minimum lot width of 100 feet shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use, however the
minimum lot width shall not apply to any lots created on or before January 1,
2005, provided that all other site and structure requirements of this section
are complied with.



      (3)   Front yard. All structures shall be set back at least 30
feet from the front property line.



      (4)   Side yard.  All primary structures shall be set back at
least ten feet from the side property line.  All accessory structures shall
be set back at least six feet from the side property line. In this instance,
and this instance only, the accessory structure setback shall be measured
from nearest point of the structure, including roof overhangs or any other
extension that may protrude closer to the property line than the base of the
structure.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than ten feet from the rear property line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No principal structure shall exceed
two and one-half stories, or 35 feet in height, and no accessory structure
shall exceed one story or 15 feet in height, except as provided in
§§156.020 through 156.028.



      (7)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed .4.



      (8)   Accessory structures. The maximum number of accessory
structures allowed on any parcel shall be no more than three.



      (9)   Minimum size of dwelling. Each single- family detached
dwelling and any other structure occupied in whole or part for residential
purposes shall contain at least 1,000 square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement or garage space.



      (10)   Reconstruction. If any structure in this zoning
classification is damaged or destroyed, it may be reconstructed on the same
location without regard to the site and structure requirements listed herein
if the structure was originally constructed on or prior to the adoption of
this chapter.



   (I)   Parking requirements.



      (1)   Every detached single-family dwelling unit shall include
a two-car attached or detached garage located on the same lot or parcel.



      (2)   Any additional requirements in accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 through 156.151.



   (J)   Special provisions. Additional special provisions as required
in the underlying zoning district.



(Ord. 1594, passed 9-21-09)



INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS



§ 156.090  PURPOSE OF I-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   The I-1 Limited Manufacturing District is intended to provide for:



   (A)   High quality, nuisance-free manufacturing, transportation,
warehousing, and wholesaling uses that are compatible with a variety of
office and service uses.




   (B)   The processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
storage of materials, goods, or products, except those that may be injurious
or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of emission or
creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic
materials odors, fire or explosion hazards or glare.




(Ord. 1218, passed 3-18-02)



§ 156.091  USES WITHIN I-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   Permitted and special uses listed below are generally less intensive
than those allowed in the I-2 Intensive Industrial District, and can be
accommodated, if they are so located and are regulated as to avoid adverse
impacts on the residential uses and less intense nonresidential uses that
define the essential character of the village.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Industrial uses.



         (a)   Apparel manufacturing.



         (b)   Assembly, with or without fabrication of parts.



         (c)   Beverage distribution.



         (d)   Boat builder.



         (e)   Business machine manufacturing.



         (f)   Computer and electronic product manufacturing.



         (g)   Dairy products processing.



         (h)   Dyeing and cleaning plants.



         (i)   Electrical motor and generator manufacturing.



         (j)   Electronic equipment, appliance and component
manufacturing.



         (k)   Furniture and related product manufacturing.



         (l)   Glass container manufacturing.



         (m)   Ice manufacturing.



         (n)   Laboratories and research firms involved in the
research, experimentation or testing of materials, goods or products.



         (o)   Machinery manufacturing.



         (p)   Machine shops.



         (q)   Metal plating.



         (r)   Paper products made from finished paper and paper
box manufacturing.



         (s)   Plastic processing.



         (t)   Photo processing (non-retail).



         (u)   Pottery and ceramics manufacturing.



         (v)   Printing and related support activities.



         (w)   Research and development laboratories.



         (x)   Restaurant supply.



         (y)   Sheet metal fabrication.



         (z)   Structural steel manufacturing.



         (aa)   Tool and die shops.



         (bb)   Woodworking and wood products manufacturing.



      (2)   Wholesale and warehouse uses.



         (a)   Direct selling establishments, where products are
stored and distributed.



         (b)   Wholesale and warehousing.



      (3)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Service retail businesses.



            1.   Automobile service station.



            2.   Automobile rental agency.



            3.   Animal clinic.



            4.   Bank, not including drive-in facilities.



            5.   Barber shop.



            6.   Car wash.



            7.   Currency exchange.



            8.   Delicatessen.



            9.   Dry cleaner.



            10.   Health clinic/office.



            11.   Hotel and/or motel.



            12.   Meeting hall.



            13.   Office and professional service.



            14.   Rental, sales and service for boats,
campers, equipment manufactured homes or motorcycles.



            15.   Restaurant.



         (b)   Business establishments.



            1.   Assembly firms.



            2.   Automobile diagnostic center.



            3.   Automobile repair/body shop.



            4.   Bottled gas dealer.



            5.   Bottling works.



            6.   Building services and supplies.



            7.   Commercial testing laboratory.



            8.   Contractor's yard.



            9.   Dairy products manufacture.



            10.   Fuel/ice dealer.



            11.   Fuel/oil dealer.



            12.   Furniture repair and re-upholstery.



            13.   Industrial launderer.



            14.   Lumberyards.



            15.   Motor vehicle dealer.



            16.   Monument work.



            17.   Septic tank cleaning.



            18.   Sewer cleaning and rodding.



            19.   Sheet metal shop.



            20.   Tire retreading and repair shop.



            21.   Welding shop.



      (4)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities.



         (a)   Animal pounds and shelters.



         (b)   Essential services, including fully automated
gas-regulating stations, telephone exchanges and electric substations.



         (c)   Hospital.



         (d)   Office building.



         (e)   Public service or municipal garage.



         (f)   Public utility establishment.



         (g)   Vocational school.



         (h)   Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations,
filtration plants and wells.



   (B)   Special uses.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Airports and heliports.



      (3)   Bakeries  exceeding 5,000 square feet of building area.



      (4)   Brick and structural clay products manufacturing.



      (5)   Cartage, express and parcel delivery.



      (6)   Chemical processing.



      (7)   Concrete and clay works.



      (8)   Drive-in banking facilities.



      (9)   Filling of holes, pits or lowlands with noncombustible
material free from refuse and/or food wastes.



      (10)   Food manufacturing, packaging and processing.



      (11)   Mining, loading and hauling of sand, gravel, topsoil or
other aggregate or minerals, including equipment, building or structure for
screening, crushing, mixing, washing or storage, provided that:



         (a)   No open pit or shaft is less than 200 feet from
any public road or 50 feet from any side and rear property line;



         (b)   All buildings or structures are located not less
than 200 feet from any property line;



         (c)   The borders of the property fenced with a fence or
wall at least six feet in height shall have a six-foot-high earthen berm and
a six-foot-high chain link fence, either in front of or behind the berm;



         (d)   A plan of development of the reclamation of the
land is provided as part of the application for special use; and



         (e)   The use of blasting or other uses of explosives
are permitted, provided it conforms to the following standards:



            1.   The use, handling, and detonation of
explosives (sometimes referred to as "blasting") in connection with said
quarrying operations:



               a.   Shall be under the direct supervision
of persons having the requisite experience and knowledge to conduct such
operations with safety; and



               b.   All such persons hereafter required to
be licensed by a federal agency, the state or the village shall meet such
requirements and obtain such license.



            2.   The storage of explosives shall be in
accordance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, and
shall be stored in magazines, buildings or structures that meet the safety
requirements of such laws and regulations.



            3.   Blasting procedures shall be:



               a.   In accordance with modern techniques,
generally accepted in the quarrying industry, whereby a shot shall consist of
a series of drill holes containing quantities of explosives fired or
detonated in a sequence of multiple delays at intervals of milliseconds, so
as to counteract and reduce the detonation (sometimes referred to as
"short-period delay blasting");



               b.   Designed, on the basis of maximum
charge per delay (that is, quantity of explosives, in pounds per detonation)
and distances in feet, so that the maximum ground vibration intensity shall
not exceed 0.5 inches per second of ground particle velocity resulting from
any shot or blast measured by any one of the three mutually perpendicular
planes of ground motion, as recorded at the nearest existing building;



               c.   Subject to and in compliance with the
applicable lawful requirements of the Illinois Pollution Control Board,
Illinois Department of Mines and Minerals, Mine Enforcement and Safety
Administration (MESA) of the United States Department of the Interior, and
any governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof; and



               d.   In conformity with approved safety
regulations, customs, and practices generally accepted in the quarrying
industry and the safety regulations of governmental agencies having
jurisdiction thereof.



            4.   Compliance with the provisions of these
regulations governing blasting procedures and quarrying operations shall be
subject to review and inspection, from time to time, by authorized village
officials, upon reasonable prior notice and during reasonable business hours.



            5.   The actual detonation of any blast will be
restricted to the local time period between 1:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday
through Saturday of each week.



               a.   No blasting shall take place on Sunday.



               b.   No blasting shall take place on the
following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.



      (12)   Paint and wallpaper manufacturing.



      (13)   Pharmaceutical and cosmetic manufacturing.



      (14)   Plastic manufacturing.



      (15)   Planned unit developments.



      (16)   Public utility and service uses, including but not
limited to:



         (a)   Towers and antennas for commercial radio-,
television- and telephone-transmitting, receiving or relay stations; and



         (b)   Wastewater treatment plant.



      (17)   Radio and television studios or stations.



      (18)   Railroad yards.



      (19)   Recycling center.



      (20)   Refuse company.



      (21)   Residence of the proprietor, caretaker, or watchperson,
when located on the premises of the commercial or industrial use.



      (22)   Stone products manufacturing.



      (23)   Towing service.



      (24)   Transit and transportation facilities.



      (25)   Truck terminal.



      (26)   Pay day loan store.



   (C)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to the
Director of Development and issuance of a permit therefore, the following
uses may be operated as temporary uses.



      (1)   Temporary building or yard for construction materials
and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district.



         (a)   Each permit shall specify the location of the
building or yard, and the area of permitted operation.



         (b)   Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than six calendar months, and shall not be renewed for more than
four successive periods at the same location.



      (2)   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the
sale or rental of real property.



         (a)   Each permit shall specify the location of the
office and the area of permitted operation.



         (b)   Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year, and shall not be renewed for more than five
successive periods at the same location.



      (3)   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed 100 square
feet for each face.



         (a)   The sign shall be nonilluminated.



         (b)   Each permit shall specify the location of the sign.



         (c)   Each such permit shall be valid for a period of
not more than one year, and shall not be renewed for more than five
successive periods at the same location.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.  The following accessory uses shall
be permitted, provided however, they comply with standards for screening in
§ 156.093(E)(2).



      (1)   Exterior vehicle storage or loading.



      (2)   Outdoor storage.



      (3)   Overnight storage of vehicles on premises.



   (E)   Prohibited uses .  All uses not expressly authorized in
divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section.



      (1)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



      (2)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Chapter 115.



   (F)   Interpretation of uses. 



      (1)    The Director of Development, or appointed designee, may
allow a land use to be considered as a special use that, though not
identified by name as a special use, is deemed to be similar in nature and
clearly compatible with the listed special uses.



      (2)   The Director of Development shall consult the Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) Code to determine similarity or compatibility.



(Ord. 1218, passed 3-18-02; Am. Ord. 1352, passed 9-7-04; Am. Ord. 1451,
passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



§ 156.092  I-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT FOR INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all industrial subdivisions
for which a plat of subdivision has been approved prior to January 1, 2002.



   (A)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. A separate ground area of not less
than 10,000 square feet shall be designated, provided, and continuously
maintained for each structure or land containing a permitted or special use.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. A minimum lot width of 100 feet shall
be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front yard. All structures shall be set back at least 50
feet from the front lot line.



      (4)   Side yard. All structures shall be set in from the side
lot line a distance of not less than ten feet on the least side, with the sum
of the two sides not less than 25 feet.



      (5)   Rear yard. All structures shall be set in a distance of
not less than 50 feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.



         (a)   No structure shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet
in height when within 200 feet of any residential district.



         (b)   Otherwise, no structure shall exceed in height one
half the distance measured to the center line of any street or residential
district line.



      (7)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed 2.0.



      (8)   Maximum lot coverage. Not more than 60% of the lot area
may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.



      (9)   Foundations.



         (a)   All buildings constructed in industrial zoning
districts shall have continuous concrete foundations from below the frost
line to above grade.



         (b)   In addition, all sides of such buildings facing or
fronting a street:



            1.   Shall be at least 50% covered with one or
more of the following materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone, wood, stucco
or other siding with similar materials and appearances, as may be approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or Site Plan Committee pursuant to its
site plan review authority; and



            2.   The remaining 50% may be covered with metal
or aluminum siding.



         (c)   Each sidewall (wall not facing or fronting a
street) shall have at least 10% covered with one or more of the following
materials: brick, masonry, glass, stone, wood, stucco or other siding with
similar materials and appearances, as may be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or Site Plan Committee pursuant to its site plan review
authority.



   (B)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Parking requirements. In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



      (2)   Sign requirements. In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



      (3)   Outdoor sales. All outdoor sales space shall be provided
with a permanent durable, and dustless surface, and shall be so graded and
drained as to dispose of all surface water.



      (4)   Lighting. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent
residential districts.



      (5)   Outdoor storage. All outdoor storage facilities for
fuel, raw materials and products within 200 feet of a residential district
shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal
such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.



      (6)   Enclosure of use. All industrial operations shall take
place within completely  enclosed buildings, unless otherwise specified.



(Ord. 1218, passed 3-18-02)



§ 156.093  I-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT FOR ALL OTHER INDUSTRIAL
ZONED PROPERTY.



   The following regulations shall apply to all other industrial zoned
property.



   (A)   Lot size regulations.



      (1)   Minimum lot size.  Not less than 20,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  Not less than 100 feet shall be
maintained at the building setback line.



   (B)   Yard and setback regulations.  Every building hereafter
erected or enlarged in this district shall provide and maintain a setback in
accordance with the following.



      (1)   Setback from the boundary lines of the district.  Not
less than 75 feet from streets forming the boundary line of the I-1 District.



      (2)   Minimum front and corner side yards. Not less than 50
feet from a front or corner side lot line of a public or private street that
is interior to the I-1 District.



      (3)   Minimum interior side yards. 



         (a)   Not less than 25 feet from an interior side lot
line.



         (b)   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or
rear lot line of a residential or institutional use or district, or forms the
boundary line of the I-1 District, the interior side requirement shall be
increased to 75 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yards. 



         (a)   Not less than 50 feet from a rear lot line, unless
the lot line forms the boundary line of the I-1 District.



         (b)   In that case, not less than 75 feet shall be
provided.



   (C)   Maximum lot coverage.



      (1)   No more than 80% of a lot shall be occupied with
buildings, accessory structures and impervious surfaces.



      (2)   When assessing a special use application, the building
footprint must cover at least 35% of the total impervious surface allowed.



      (3)   The building, itself, or the landscape should be the
dominant feature on the site.



   (D)   Structure height. Not more than 35 feet.



   (E)   Other standards.



      (1)   Minimum pavement setbacks. Pavement constructed for
parking, drive aisles, off-street loading and other accessory uses, including
outdoor storage, shall comply with the following.



         (a)   Front/corner side. 



            1.   Not less than 25 feet, unless the front
corner side lot line from the boundary line of the I-1 District.



            2.   In that case, the pavement shall be setback
at least 40 feet.



         (b)   Interior side. Not less than ten feet, unless
either of the following apply:



            1.   Where driveways are shared between two
properties in this district, no pavement setbacks shall be required; or



            2.   If pavement used for parking, loading, drive
aisles, outdoor storage or other accessory uses is proposed to be located
next to an existing, planned or zoned residential or institutional use, the
required setback shall be increased to 50 feet.



         (c)   Rear yard.



            1.   Not less than 10 feet.



            2.   Pavement setbacks shall be increased to 50
feet, when pavement in a rear yard that is used for drive aisles, parking,
loading or accessory uses abuts properties planned, zoned or for residential
or institutional use, or is located in the rear yard that forms the boundary
line of the I-1 District.



      (2)   Landscape screening.  Landscaping shall be in
accordance with Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



      (3)   Unenclosed loading.



         (a)   Unenclosed loading shall be allowed in interior
side and rear yards only. Where such loading is visible from an adjacent
property or public right-of-way outside the I-1 Limited Manufacturing
District, it shall be screened by the building, construction of wing walls,
or landscaping.



         (b)   Loading shall be allowed in the front yard, only
if it is enclosed and overhead doors are painted the same color as the
adjacent walls. Where provided, the intensity of landscaping in the front
yard shall be increased.



      (4)   Building design/materials.



         (a)   Buildings in the 1-1 District shall be constructed
primarily of masonry, brick, stone,  decorative concrete block (excluding
plain concrete block), architectural steel and glass, or precast panels.



         (b)   Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed,
unless approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (c)   Walls that exceed a length of 200 feet shall be
articulated through changes in the plane of the facade, installation of
windows, installation of landscaping, or any combination thereof.



      (5)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment.



         (a)   Screening of all heating, ventilating and air
conditioning equipment shall be provided on all sides of the building that
are exposed to public view.



         (b)   Roof screens shall be allowed in this district,
provided they are designed to blend with the architectural style and color of
the building.



         (c)   Flues, goosenecks or other equipment mounted on
the roof shall also be screened when heights exceed four feet.



      (6)   Landscape requirements.  Landscaping shall be in
accordance with Chapter 158: Landscape Ordinance.



            2.   Interior side/rear yards.



               a.   One three-inch-caliper
(four-inch-caliper for special uses)  shade tree and six shrubs for every 40
lineal feet of front yard.



               b.   Where evergreen or ornamental trees are
used in addition to, or in lieu of shade trees, they shall be at least
six-feet (eight-feet tall for special uses) tall.



            3.   Parking lot.



               a.   One curbed, landscaped island, planted
with one three-inch-caliper shade tree for each 50 spaces (12,000 square feet
of paved lot).



               b.    Trees shall be high-branched to
maintain a clear line of sight not less than five feet above grade.



         (b)   Additional landscaping may be required, where
appropriate, to soften large expanses of building facades or screen
unenclosed loading from public rights-of-way.



         (c)   All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in
good condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping
initially installed.



      (7)   Tree preservation/mitigation. Tree
preservation/mitigation shall be in accordance with Chapter 158: Landscape
Ordinance.



      (8)   Outdoor storage. 



         (a)   Outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be
limited to the interior side or rear yard.



         (b)   A screen, wall or fence with a minimum height of
six feet shall be required.



         (c)   Where the screen, wall or fence is visible from a
public street, it shall be softened by landscaping.



      (9)   Waste materials.  No materials or wastes shall be
deposited upon a lot in such a form that they might be transferred off the
property by natural causes or forces, such as water, wind or snow.



      (10)   Trash enclosure.



         (a)   Bins used to store trash outside the building
shall be enclosed by a fence or masonry wall at least equal to the height of
the enclosure.



         (b)   A concrete pad and approach apron shall also be
required, to bear the weight of receptacles.



      (11)   Lighting.  Parking and security lighting shall comply
with the following:



         (a)   Footcandles shall average from 1.0 to 3.0, and be
evenly distributed in the parking lot and drive aisles;



         (b)   Luminaries shall be designed to avoid glare and
confine light to the property; and



         (c)   Excess spillage shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles
at any property line.



      (12)   Special provisions.



         (a)   Parking requirements. In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



         (b)   Sign requirements. In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



   (F)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding temporary
inflatable playground structures.



(Ord. 1218, passed 3-18-02; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1530,
passed 4-7-08



§ 156.094 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR I-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   Noise, glare, vibration, odor, etc. shall be regulated according to
standards established by the Illinois Pollution Control Board of the
Environmental Protection Agency, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 1218, passed 3-18-02)



§ 156.095  I-2 INTENSIVE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To provide lands for use by heavy or intense industries.



      (2)   To provide lands for manufacturing, assembling, and
fabricating activities, including large scale or specialized operations whose
external effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts.



      (3)   To provide lands for certain uses with established
functions in the economy, but having a well-known nuisance potential through
the use of a special use permit.



   (B)   Policy.



      (1)   To achieve the purpose of the I-2 Intensive Industrial
District and the purpose of this section, it shall be the policy of the
village.



      (2)   To provide lands to be used for a full range of
industrial uses and provide and protect the tax base and thereby the tax
revenue to the village and to provide employment for the public benefit.



      (3)   To govern the location, intensity, and method of
development of industrial areas of the village and grouping together of
industries that are compatible to one another and that are not objectionable
to the community as a whole.



      (4)   To preserve lands for industrial and allied uses and
prohibit the intrusion of residential and other non-compatible uses into the
industrial area.



   (C)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
buildings, structures, or premise shall be erected, altered, enlarged,
occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter for other
than one or more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Industrial type uses:



         (a)   All manufacturing uses permitted in the I-1
District.



         (b)   Acid manufacturing.



         (c)   Cement block manufacturing.



         (d)   Chemicals manufacturing and compounding.



         (e)   Drop forge.



         (f)   Foundry.



         (g)   Incinerator.



         (h)   Industrial farms and/or feed yards, farming, crop
and tree farming, truck farming, horticulture, forestry, gardening, dairy
farming, stock raising, domestic animals and poultry breeding and raising,
together with the operation of any machinery or vehicles incidental to the
above uses.



         (i)   Meatpacking, but not stockyards or slaughter
houses.



         (j)   Petroleum, natural gas or flammable or combustible
products, and production, fractionation, extraction, refining, and storage.



         (k)   Power plant.



         (l)   Railroad yard, including switching, storage,
product transfer and maintenance facilities.



         (m)   Sawmill.



         (n)   Stamping mills.



         (o)   Steel and aluminum production and fabrication.



         (p)   Vocational schools.



         (q)   Product transfer and packaging.



      (2)   Wholesale and warehouse uses:



         (a)   Wholesale and warehouse uses permitted in the I-1
District.



         (b)   Storage yard for building supplies and equipment.



         (c)   Concrete products storage.



      (3)   Commercial uses:



         (a)   Service retail businesses permitted in the I-1
District.



         (b)   Business establishments:



            1.   Business establishments permitted in the I-1
District.



            2.   Establishments manufacturing monuments and
tombstones.



            3.   Exterminators.



            4.   Truck terminal, equipment repair, maintenance
and cleaning facilities.



            5.   Fuel and coal company.



            6.   Sign contractor.



         (c)   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in
Chapter 115, provided that any such business complies with the requirements
relating to  sexually oriented businesses set forth in Chapter 115.



      (4)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities permitted in the I-1 District.



      (5)   Industrial firms involved in the fabrication,
processing, production, compounding and/or manufacturing of materials, goods
or products.



      (6)   Firms involved in the servicing, packaging, cleaning,
repair or storage of materials, goods or products.



      (7)   Laboratories and research firms involved in the
research, experimentation or testing or materials, goods or products.



   (D)   Special uses permitted.



      (1)   Special uses permitted in the I-1 District.



      (2)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
“permitted uses” in this district.



      (3)   Automotive and scrap salvage yard, including wrecking
and dismantling, provided all operations are conducted within an area
enclosed on all sides with an acceptable solid wall or fence not less than
eight feet high so that such operation is not visible from the nearest street
or adjacent property. Such operation shall be properly maintained and kept in
acceptable appearance.



      (4)   Stockyards or slaughter houses.



      (5)   All pollution control facilities including, but not
limited to, landfill, injection, incineration and/or compaction operations,
used in the disposal, recycling, storage and/or transfer of wastes,
classified as “hazardous, special wastes,” by appropriate state and/or
federal governmental agencies.



      (6)   Landfills.



      (7)   Mining and/or the extraction of minerals, sand, gravel,
topsoil or other aggregates, including equipment, buildings or structures for
screening, crushing, mixing, washing, or storage, provided that:



         (a)   No open pit or shaft is less than 200 feet from
any public road or 50 feet from any side and rear property line.



         (b)   All buildings or structures are located not less
than 200 feet from any property line.



         (c)   The borders of the property fenced with a fence or
wall at least six feet in height shall have a six foot high earthen berm and
a six foot high chain link fence either in front of or behind the berm.



         (d)   A plan of development of the reclamation of the
land is provided as part of the application for special use.



         (e)   The use of blasting or other uses of explosives
are permitted, provided it conforms to the following standards:



            1.   The use, handling, and detonation of
explosives (sometimes referred to as “blasting”) in connection with said
quarrying operations shall be under the direct supervision of persons having
the requisite experience and knowledge to conduct such operations with
safety. All such persons are hereafter required to be licensed by any federal
agency, by the State of Illinois, or Village of Channahon, such persons shall
meet the licensing requirements and obtain such license.



            2.   The storage of explosives shall be in
accordance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and
shall be stored in magazines, buildings, or structures, which shall meet the
safety requirements of such laws an regulations.



            3.   Blasting procedures shall be in accordance
with modern techniques, generally accepted in the quarrying industry, whereby
a shot shall consist of a series of drill holes containing quantities of
explosives fired or detonated in sequence of multiple delays at intervals of
milliseconds, so as to counteract and reduce the detonation (sometimes
referred to as “short-period delay blasting”). Blasting procedures shall
be designed, on the basis of maximum charge per delay (that is, quantity of
explosives in pounds per detonation) and distances in feet, so that the
maximum ground vibration intensity shall not exceed 0.5 inches per second of
ground particle velocity resulting from any shot or blast measured by any one
of the three mutually perpendicular planes of ground motion as recorded at
the nearest existing building.



            4.   Blasting procedures shall be subject to and
comply with the applicable lawful requirements of the Illinois Pollution
Control Board, Illinois Department of Mines and Minerals, Mine Enforcement
and Safety Administration (MESA) of the United States Department of the
Interior, and any governmental agency having jurisdiction thereof.



            5.   Blasting procedures shall be in conformity
with approved safety regulations, customs, and practices generally accepted
in the quarrying industry and the safety regulations of governmental agencies
having jurisdiction thereof.



            6.   Compliance with the provisions of these
regulations governing blasting procedures and quarrying operations shall be
subject to review and inspection from time-to-time by authorized Village
officials, upon reasonable prior notice and during reasonable business hours.



            7.   The actual detonation of any blast will be
restricted to the local time period between 1:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. Monday
through Saturday of each week. No blasting shall take place on Sunday or on
the following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.



      (8)   Concrete and asphalt mixing.



      (9)   Rendering plants.



      (10)   Dynamite storage.



      (11)   Pay day loan store.



   (E)   Temporary uses permitted.  Temporary permit uses permitted in
the 1-1 District.



   (F)   Accessory uses.  Buildings, or other structures and devices
customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or
special use may be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under
the same ownership, on the same parcel, and do not include structures or
features inconsistent with the permitted use or special use.



   (G)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized as
permitted uses, special uses, temporary use or accessory uses in this chapter.



   (H)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  A minimum ground area of not less
than five acres shall be designated, provided, and continuously maintained
for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width of 300 feet
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front Yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
100 feet from the front lot line on dedicated roads and 150 feet from the
center line on non-dedicated roads.



      (4)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in from the
side lot line a distance of not less than 20 feet on either side, with the
sum of the two sides not less than 50 feet.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than 40 feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No structure shall exceed 35 feet in
height when within 200 feet of any residential district. Beyond 200 feet from
a residential district, one additional foot in height may be added for each
of the one foot of horizontal distance beyond 200 feet.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed 1.5.



      (8)   Maximum lot coverage.  Not more than 70% of the lot
area may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings.



   (I)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in § 156.150.



      (2)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in § 156.160.



      (3)   IEPA Regulations Adopted by Reference.  The standards,
specifications, and regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency are hereby incorporated into this section and made a part thereof by
this reference. Such standards, specifications, and regulations shall include
those as required by the following:



         (a)   Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and
Regulations; Public Water Supplies;



         (b)   Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and
Regulations; Livestock Waste Regulations;



         (c)   Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and
Regulations; Solid Waste.



         (d)   Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and
Regulations; Air Pollution Regulations;



         (e)   Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and
Regulations; Noise Pollution Control Regulations;



         (f)   Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and
Regulations; Water Pollution;



         (g)   State of Illinois; the Environmental Protection
Act; and Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and Regulations; Mine Waste
Regulations.



      (4)   Outdoor storage.  The outdoor storage of materials,
products, and goods is permitted if completely screened from adjacent
properties and the public right-of-way. Outdoor storage of uncontained bulk
materials is prohibited, except as a special use.



(Ord. 1020, passed 12-21-98; Am. Ord. 1245, passed 7-15-02; Am. Ord. 1451,
passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 1-19-09)



PUBLIC RECREATION DISTRICTS



§ 156.100  PURPOSE.



   The public recreation district regulations are intended to govern the
location, intensity and method of the development of public recreational
areas in the village.  The regulations of this district are designed to
provide for park areas and conservation districts and prohibit residential,
commercial and industrial uses.  All public recreation uses are contained in
the PR-1 Public Recreation District.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 312, passed 2-21-83)



§ 156.101  PR-1 PUBLIC RECREATION DISTRICT.



   (A)   Description of District.  The PR-1 Public Recreation District
is intended to provide lands for public recreation without interference from
residential, commercial or industrial uses.  The district is normally
located near rivers, streams, lakes or bodies of water in addition to parks,
golf courses, playgrounds and other open spaces not used for agricultural
purposes.



   (B)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used except as otherwise provided in this chapter for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and
facilities such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Public parks, playgrounds, golf courses and
recreational uses.



         (b)   Rivers, streams, lakes, bodies of water and
general aquatic purposes.



      (2)   Marina, recreational club, boat storage, condominium
slips and all other necessary, incidental and related purposes.



   (C)   Special uses permitted.  There shall be no special uses
permitted in a PR-1 District.



   (D)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  There shall be no temporary
permit uses permitted in a PR-1 District.



   (E)   Accessory uses.  There shall be no accessory uses permitted
in a PR-1 District.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
division (B) of this section shall be prohibited uses in a PR-1 District.



   (G)   Site and Structure Requirements.  The site and structure
requirements in the R-1 District shall be applicable to the PR-1 District.



   (H)   Special Provisions.



      1.   Parking Requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 and 156.151.



      2.   Sign Requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.179.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 312, passed 2-21-83; Am. Ord. 566, passed
1-22-90)



AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS



§ 156.110  AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. 



      (1)   To establish a zoning district in which agriculture and
certain related uses are encouraged as principal and primary uses of the land.



      (2)   To preserve fertile tillable soils as a most valuable
natural resource.



      (3)   To guard and protect sociological relationships that are
a necessary part of the lives and well-being of rural people in partnership
with nature.



      (4)   To preserve and protect the fundamental relationship
that exists between successful agricultural efforts and the inherent natural
and man-made characteristics of the land.



      (5)   To provide vast open areas which contribute to the
stability of the environment; relief from urban blight and enhance air and
water quality.



      (6)   To preserve a continuing food supply close to markets
for residents of the village and region as well as the world.



   (B)   Policy.  To achieve the purposes of the agricultural
district, it shall be the policy of the village:



      (1)   To allow only those uses of land which are clearly and
primarily best suited for agricultural purposes within the A-1 Zoning
District.



      (2)   To prevent admixtures of urban and rural land uses which
create or tend to create conflicts and incompatibilities which directly or
indirectly impose unbalanced tax loads on agriculture and which require urban
services which in turn contribute to the premature termination and eventual
elimination of agricultural uses.



   (C)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied, and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or uses, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:



      (1)   Agricultural uses.



         (a)   Farming, crop and tree farming, truck farming,
horticulture, forestry, gardening, dairy farming, stock raising, domestic
animals and poultry breeding and raising, together with the operation of any
machinery or vehicles incidental to the above uses.



         (b)   Research and/or experimental farm.



         (c)   Greenhouses, sale of products produced on premises.



         (d)   Nurseries, sale of products produced on premises.



      (2)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Farm homestead and one additional dwelling for the
immediate family of the farm owner or operator of the same parcel.



         (b)   Two family dwellings of the farm owner or operator
and his or her immediate family.



         (c)   Single-family detached dwelling.



         (d)   Monasteries, nurseries, religious retreats.



      (3)   Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and
facilities.



         (a)   Public parks, public playgrounds, public golf
courses and public community center buildings.



         (b)   Parish houses and convents.



         (c)   Churches.



         (d)   Cemeteries.



         (e)   Forest preserves.



         (f)   Governmental military reservations.



         (g)   Essential services - gas regulatory stations,
telephone exchanges, electric substations and cable television antennas.



         (h)   Man-made lakes, waterways and hydraulic power
plants.



      (4)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Sale of farm supplies by farmers as agents where
elevators or similar commercial facilities are not maintained on the farm
premises.



         (b)   Agricultural implement sales and services on ten
acres or less but not on less than five acres.



   (D)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses may be permitted
only if specifically authorized by the Village Board as allowed in § 156.199.



      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.



      (2)   Convalescent or nursing home.



      (3)   School or colleges.



      (4)   Hospitals, clinics and sanitariums.



      (5)   Airports, public or private, in conformance with the
Federal Aviation Agency standards.



      (6)   Mining and/or the extraction of minerals, sand, gravel,
topsoil or other aggregates, including equipment, buildings or structures for
screening, crushing, mixing, washing or storage provided that:



         (a)   No open pit or shaft will be less than 200 feet
from any public road or 50 feet from any side and rear property line.



         (b)   All buildings or structures shall be located not
less than 200 feet from any property line.



         (c)   The borders of the property shall be fenced with a
solid fence or wall at least six feet in height when the property is adjacent
to or across the street from any district other than an industrial district.



         (d)   A plan of development of the reclamation of the
land shall be provided as part of the application for special use as required
by state law.



         (e)   No blasting or other uses of explosives is
permitted.



      (7)   Grain storage, when not accessory to the pursuit of
agriculture.



      (8)   Fertilizer and seed sales, including bulk storage and
mixing.



      (9)   Animal feed - preparation, grinding, mixing and storage.



      (10)   Feed yards.



      (11)   Hunting, fishing, game preserves and recreational clubs
or camps.



      (12)   Manufacture, storage, sale or utilization of detonable
materials in excess of five pounds.



      (13)   Central sewage treatment plant.



      (14)   Sale barn.



      (15)   Railroad right-of-way and passenger stations, but not
including railroad yards and shops.



      (16)   Flood plaint development.



      (17)   Riding stable.



   (E)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to and
issuance by the Village Board of a permit thereof, the following uses may be
operated as temporary uses.



      (1)   Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction
materials and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in
the zoning district.  Each permit shall specify the location of both
building, or trailer yard and the area of permitted operation.  Each such
permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six calendar months and
shall not be renewed for more than four successive periods at the same
location.



      (2)   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the
sale or rental of real property.  Each permit shall specify the location of
the office and the area of permitted operation.  Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for
more than five successive periods at the same location.



      (3)   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed 100 square
feet for each fact.  Each permit shall specify the location of the sign.
Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than one year and
shall not be renewed for more than five successive periods at the same
location.



      (4)   Residential trailer to be used during the construction
of a residence and not to exceed one year with permits required every six
months not to exceed one year.



      (5)   Bazaar or dance, provided, however, that each permit
shall be valid for a period of not more than seven days, and provided,
further, that a period of at least 90 days shall intervene between the
termination of one permit and the issuance of another permit for the same
location.



      (6)   Christmas tree sales; each permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than 60 days.



   (F)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings or other
structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly associated with
a permitted or special use may be permitted, provided that they are operated
and maintained under the same ownership, on the same parcel, and do not
include structural features inconsistent with the permitted use for special
use.  Accessory uses may include:



      (1)   Garages, carports or other parking spaces for the
exclusive use of residents or occupants of the premises.



      (2)   Home occupations.



      (3)   Living quarters for persons employed on the premises,
and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



      (4)   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents
and their guests, and set back from every property line at least ten feet and
not located in the front yard.



      (5)   Real estate signs, not exceeding 12 square feet for each
face and set back from every property line at least ten feet.



      (6)   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and
keeping of household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of
residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.



      (7)   Roadside stands, for the sale of produce and poultry
grown and raised on or in the immediate area of the premises, but not
including dead animals, and provided that such stand shall contain not more
than 200 square feet of floor area.  Such stands or produce offered for sale
shall be located not less than 25 feet from the nearest edge of pavement,
provided that they shall be placed at such location only during the harvest
season of produce offered for sale.  Each roadside stand shall have
facilities, approved by the Village Board, for vehicular ingress and egress,
and adequate off-street parking.



      (8)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.



   (G)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
division (C), (D), (E) and (F) of this section.



   (H)   Site and structure requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  A separate ground area of not less
than ten acres shall be designated, provided, and continuously maintained for
each structure of land containing a permitted or special use.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width of 660 feet
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.



      (3)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
75 feet from the front lot line.



      (4)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than 50 feet.



      (5)   Rear yard.  All structure shall be set in a distance of
not less than 50 feet from the rear lot line.



      (6)   Maximum height.  No principal structure shall exceed 35
feet in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed 20 feet in height
above principal structure.



      (7)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed .2.



      (8)   Minimum size of dwelling.  Each single family detached
dwelling and any other structure occupied in whole or in part for residential
purposes shall contain at least 1,200 square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement or garage space.



   (I)   Special provisions.



      (1)   Parking requirements.  In accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 through 156.151.



      (2)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.177.



      (3)   Farm buildings.  Farm buildings and structures, except
for residences and garages on parcels over ten acres in size shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter when used for the agricultural purposes
intended.  However, the front yard requirements shall be adhered to.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 404, passed 3-3-86; Am. Ord. 1352, passed
9-7-04; Am. Ord. 1501, passed 8-20-07)



§ 156.111  A-2 RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To provide use of lands optimally suited to neither
prime agricultural nor urban uses because of location, topography, soil
characteristics, wetness, vegetation or other natural or man-induced factors.



      (2)   To provide single family uses at locations providing a
rural type of environment of spacious parcels in areas which may not be
served by public sewer, water or other municipal amenities, on land
characterized by a physical and natural environment differing from that of
more typical urban population centers within a metropolitan region.



      (3)   To provide large acreage residential uses where part of
the parcels satisfy the requirements for a domicile, while other parts may be
kept open to protect and conserve hilly areas, wetlands, prairies, wood
regions and other unique areas for the public benefit and perpetuation of the
diversity of the natural ecological systems.




      (4)   To provide lands for the opportunity to keep horses or
other large animals and the right to practice, in a limited manner,
agriculture, floriculture, horticulture, silviculture, cultivation of field
or garden crops or similar related uses.





   (B)   Policy.  To achieve the purpose of the agricultural district,
it shall be the policy of the village;





      (1)   To allow a minimum five acre lot for single-family
residential and other permitted compatible uses where each domicile may be
served by an on-site sewage disposal system and where the need for customary
community utility services is minimal.





      (2)   To zone as A-2 only land least adaptable for sustained
long term agriculture uses and/or least suitable for organized development
because of the location, topography, geology, soil types, hydrologic
characteristics, or other natural features of the land or combinations of any
or all of these.





   (C)   Uses permitted.  No land shall be used or occupied, and no
building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied
or used, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for other than one or
more of the following specified uses:





      (1)   Residential uses.





         (a)   Single family detached dwelling.





      (2)   Public, quasi-public and governmental





buildings and facilities.





         (a)   Public parks, public playgrounds, public golf
courses and public community center buildings.





         (b)   Public and parochial schools.





         (c)   Public libraries.





         (d)   Parish houses and convents, in conjunction with
schools.





         (e)   Essential services - gas regulator stations,
telephone exchanges and electric substations.





      (3)   Agricultural uses.





         (a)   Gardening and general farming.





         (b)   Nurseries.





         (c)   Greenhouses.





         (d)   Riding stables or horse breeding farms, not nearer
than 500 feet to any zoned residential district or 500 feet from any existing
dwelling other than the dwelling of the owners or lessee of the site, but not
less than 50 feet from any property line of the owner or lessee.





   (D)   Special uses permitted.  The following uses may be permitted
only if specifically authorized by the Village Board as allowed in § 156.199.





      (1)   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.





      (2)   Churches and other places of worship, provided the
property for the use fronts on a primary or secondary thoroughfare so
designated in the comprehensive plan.





      (3)   Clubhouse, country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools
and similar recreational uses.





      (4)   Planned unit developments.





      (5)   Railroad right-of-way and passenger stations, but not
including railroad yards and shops.





   (E)   Temporary permit uses permitted.  Upon application to and
issuance by the Village Board of a permit thereof, the following uses may be
operated as temporary uses.





      (1)   Temporary building, residential, trailer or yard for
construction materials and/or equipment, both incidental and necessary to
construction in the zoning district.  Each permit shall specify the location
of both building, trailer or yard and the area of permitted operation.  Each
such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six calendar months
and at the same location.





      (2)   Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the
sale or rental of real property.  Each permit shall specify the location of
the office and the area of permitted operation.  Each such permit shall be
valid for a period of not more than one year and shall not be renewed for
more than five successive periods at the same location.





      (3)   Real estate subdivision sign not to exceed 100 square
feet for each fact.  Each permit shall specify the location of the sign.
Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than one year and
shall not be renewed for more than five successive periods at the same
location.





   (F)   Accessory uses permitted.  Accessory uses, buildings or other
structures and devices customarily incidental to and commonly associated with
a permitted or special use may be permitted, provided that they are operated
and maintained under the same ownership, on the same parcel, and do not
include structures or structural features inconsistent with the permitted use
for special use and do not involve the conduct of any business, trade or
industry.  Accessory uses may include:





      (1)   Garages, carports or other parking spaces for the
exclusive use of residents or occupants of the premises.





      (2)   Living quarters for persons employed on the premises,
and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.





      (3)   Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents
and their guests, and set back from every property line at least ten feet and
not located in the front yard.





      (4)   Real estate signs, not exceeding 12 square feet for each
face and set back from every property line at least ten feet.





      (5)   Gardening (the raising of vegetables and fruits) and
keeping of household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of
residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.





      (6)   Home occupations.





      (7)   Air-inflated and air-supported structures, excluding
temporary inflatable playground structures.





   (G)   Prohibited uses.  All uses not expressly authorized in
division (C), (D), (E) and (F) of this section.





   (H)   Site and structure requirements.





      (1)   Minimum lot area.  A separate ground area of not less
than five acres shall be designated, provided, and continuously maintained
for each structure of land containing a permitted or special use.





      (2)   Minimum lot width.  A minimum lot width of 200 feet
shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.





      (4)   Front yard.  All structures shall be set back at least
50 feet from the front lot line.





      (5)   Side yard.  All structures shall be set in from the
side lot line with a distance of not less than 20 feet on the least side,
with the sum of the two sides not less than 45 feet.





      (5)   Rear yard.  All structures shall be set in a distance
of not less than 80 feet from the rear lot line.





      (7)   Maximum height.  No principal structure shall exceed
2-1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed
one story or 20 feet in height above principal structure.





      (8)   Floor area ratio.  Not to exceed .3.





      (9)   Minimum size of dwelling.  Each single family detached
dwelling and any other structure occupied in whole or in part for residential
purposes shall contain at least 1,200 square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of basement or garage space.





   (I)   Special provisions.





      (1)   Parking requirements.





         (a)   Every detached single-family dwelling unit shall
include a two-car attached or detached garage located on the same lot or
parcel.




         (b)   Any additional requirements in accordance with the
applicable regulations set forth in §§ 156.150 through 156.151.




      (2)   Sign requirements.  In accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in §§ 156.160 through 156.177.





      (3)   Trucks.  One commercial vehicle/equipment may be parked
and must be owned or legally controlled by the residents or occupants of the
principal use and located with in the buildable area.  Small pick-up trucks
and/or vans used principally as passenger cars re excluded from this
requirement.





      (4)   Tents.  Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained
on any lot, except such tents as are customarily used for temporary
recreational purposes.




      (5)   Horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats and poultry are
permitted as general farming. These animals may not be housed or stabled
closer than 50 feet from any adjoining property line. These animals shall
only be permitted in conjunction with village fence requirements.
Furthermore, residents are permitted no more than four animals, excluding
chickens and household pets, per five acres. Not more than four chickens are
permitted per five acres. Additional animals will only be permitted based
upon five-acre increments.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71;  Am. Ord. 404, passed 3-3-86; Am. Ord. 424, passed
4-6-87;  Am. Ord. 487, passed 11-7-88; Am. Ord. 741, passed 12-7-92; Am.
Ord. 779, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 833, passed 12-19-94; Am. Ord. 1501,
passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1906, passed 11-6-17)



NONCONFORMING USES



§ 156.120  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming uses, buildings, structures and to specify those circumstances
and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures, and
uses may be continued, in accordance with  the  authority  granted  by 
ILCS  Ch.  65,  Act 5 § 11-13-1.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.121  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.




   (A)   Authority.  Any nonconforming building, structure or use
which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this chapter and which
remains nonconforming, and any such building, structure or use which shall
become nonconforming upon the adoption of this chapter or of any subsequent
amendment thereto, may be continued only in accordance with the regulations
which set forth in this section.





   (B)   Repairs and alterations.  Ordinary repairs and alterations
may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no
structural alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure, all
or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted
in the district in which it is located, except those required by law, or
except to make the building or structure, and use thereof, conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located.





   (C)   Additions and enlargements.





      (1)   A nonconforming building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, shall not be added to or enlarged in any
manner unless such nonconforming building or structure, and use thereof,
including all additions and enlargements thereto is made to conform to all
the regulations of the district in which it is located.





      (2)   A nonconforming building or structure, which is
nonconforming only as to bulk, shall not be added to or enlarged in any
manner unless such additions and enlargements thereto are made to conform to
all regulations of the district in which it is located.





   (D)   Moving.  No building or structure, which does not conform to
all of the regulations of the district in which it is located, shall be moved
in whole or in part to any other location unless every portion of such
building or structure is moved, and the use thereof is made to conform to all
regulations of the district into which it is moved.





   (E)   Restoration of damaged nonconforming building.  A building or
structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a
use which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which
is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God, to the
extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which  it was
before  the occurrence will exceed 50% of the cost of restoration of the
entire building or structure new, shall not be restored unless the building
or structure, and the use thereof, shall conform to all regulations of the
district in which it is located. In the event that such damage or destruction
is less than 50% of the cost of restoration of the entire building or
structure new, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such
restoration is started within one year from the date of the partial
destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.





   (F)   Discontinuance of use of nonconforming building or
structure.  A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially
all of which is designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the
district in which it is located, and which is vacant, unoccupied, and not
used on the effective date of this chapter or thereafter becomes vacant and
remains unoccupied, or is not used for a continuous period of one year, shall
not thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located.





   (G)   Expansion of use in nonconforming building or structure.  The
nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure may be expanded within
the building or structure in which the use is presently located, but no
changes or structural alterations shall be made unless such changes or
structural alterations, and the use thereof, conform to all the regulations
of the district in which the building or structure is located.




   (H)   Change of use in nonconforming building or structure.  The
nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to any other
nonconforming use allowed within the same or more restrictive zoning district
that allows the existing nonconforming use, but no change shall extend or
otherwise modify any provision made in this chapter for elimination of such
nonconforming building or structure, and the use thereof.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.122  NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.




   (A)   The lawfully existing nonconforming use of part or all of a
building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or
structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in
which it is located, may be continued subject to the provisions set forth in
this section.





   (B)   Expansion of nonconforming use.  The nonconforming use of
part of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building
or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in
which it is located, shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion
of such building or structure, nor changed to any other nonconforming use.





   (C)   Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use of a building or
structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is
designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, is discontinued for a period of six months, it shall not be renewed,
and any subsequent use of the building or structure shall conform to the use
regulations of the district in which the premises are located.





   (D)   Change of a nonconforming use.  No nonconforming use shall be
changed to another nonconforming use when such nonconforming use is located
in a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or
structure is designed or intended for a permitted use.




   (E)   Elimination of a nonconforming use.  In all residence
districts, any use which lawfully exists at the adoption of this chapter but
is permitted only in a business district, and which is located in a building,
all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a residential
purpose, shall be entirely discontinued and shall thereafter cease operation
within two years from the date of the adoption of this chapter.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.123  NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND.




   (A)   Authority.  The nonconforming use of land not involving a
building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure
thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, may be
continued subject to the provisions set forth in this section.





   (B)   Expansion.  A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded
or extended beyond the area it occupies.





   (C)   Discontinuance.  If a nonconforming use of land is
discontinued for a period of three consecutive months, it shall not
thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent use of land shall conform to the
regulations of the district in which the land is located.





   (D)   Change of use.  A nonconforming use of land may  be 
changed  to  any  other  nonconforming use allowed within the same or
more restrictive zoning district that allows the existing nonconforming use.





   (E)   Elimination of nonconforming use of land.  The nonconforming
use of land shall be discontinued and cease in accordance with the following:





      (1)   Where no building or structure is employed in connection
with such use, discontinued within one year.





      (2)   Where the only buildings or structures or other physical
improvements employed are accessory or incidental to such use and have an
assessed valuation on the effective date of this chapter of not more than
$2,000, discontinued within two years.





      (3)   Where the improvements, underground or substantially at
ground level, which comprise all or substantially all of the improvements
employed in a nonconforming use of land and which have an assessed valuation
on the effective date of this chapter of more than $2,000, discontinued
within five years.




      (4)   Where a nonconforming use of land is accessory to the
nonconforming use of a building or structure, discontinued on the same date
on which the nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)  Penalty, see § 156.999



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



§ 156.135  PURPOSE.




   (A)   The purpose of the planned unit development is to permit:





      (1)   A maximum choice in the types of environment available
to the public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the
strict application of the other sections of this chapter.





      (2)   Permanent preservation of common open space and
recreation areas end facilities.





      (3)   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
topographic and geologic features.





      (4)   A creative approach to the use of land and  related 
physical  facilities  that  results    in





better development and design and the construction of aesthetic amenities.





      (5)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic
networks of utilities, streets and other facilities.





      (6)   A land use which promotes the public health, safety,
comfort, morals and welfare.




   (B)   The planned unit development is intended to provide for
developments incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses which
are planned and developed as a unit. The planned unit development may provide
amenities not otherwise required by law and should establish facilities and
open space greater than the minimums required by law. Such development may
consist of conventionally subdivided lots or provide for development by a
planned unit development plat which establishes the location and extent of
the features of the planned unit development in keeping with the purpose of
the plan.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.136  PROCEDURE.




   (A)   Requirements.  A planned unit development shall be granted as
a special use in accord with the procedures set forth in this section and may
depart from the normal procedure, standards, and other requirements of the
other sections of this chapter.  Applications shall be made on forms
provided by the village and shall be accompanied by the required plats and
documents.  The application at each step shall be reviewed and certified by
the Village Planner as being in accordance with the planned unit development
requirements.





   (B)   Pre-application procedure.





      (1)   Pre-application conference.  Prior to the filing of an
application for approval of a planned unit development, the developer may
request of the Planning and Zoning Commission an informal meeting to discuss
the development of their land in conjunction with the village plan.  The
meeting shall be a part of a regularly scheduled meeting, shall be open to
the public, and included on their agenda in advance of the meeting.





      (2)   The pre-application conference is not mandatory and does
not require formal application, fee, or filing of a planned unit development
plat.





   (C)   Approval of preliminary plat.  A preliminary plat of the
planned unit development shall be submitted to the President and Board of
Trustees who shall refer same to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
public hearing, report, and recommendation as to whether or not the President
and Board of Trustees should issue the special use permit applied for. The
required procedure for approval of the preliminary plat shall be:





      (1)   Submission of the following:





         (a)   Written application for approval of a planned unit
development shall be made on forms and in the manner prescribed by rules of
the village.





         (b)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee
which shall be established by the President and Board of Trustees.





         (c)   The preliminary plat and supporting data shall be
in accord with the stipulations of § 156.138.





      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the application for a planned unit development, giving notice of
the time and place not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before the
hearing by publishing a notice thereof at least once in a newspaper published
or having general circulation within the village.





      (3)   Copies of the preliminary planned unit development plat
and supporting data shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for their review and recommendations. The report of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days
and preceding the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation.





      (4)   Copies of the preliminary planned unit development plat
and supporting data shall be submitted to the Village Planner for
certification as to conformity with these regulations, recommendations, and
suggestions regarding the overall design, if any.





      (5)   (a)   Following the public hearing and review of the
preliminary planned unit development plat and supporting data for conformity
to these regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within 60
days, recommend approval, modification or disapproval, and the reasons
therefor, or indicate why a report cannot be rendered to the President and
Board of Trustees.





         (b)   As a condition to the approval of the preliminary
plat, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall set forth in a separate
communication to the President and Board of Trustees, findings of fact, in
accord with § 156.140, on which they  base their approval and describing
how the proposal meets the standards of § 156.139.





      (6)   The President and Board of Trustees after receipt of the
preliminary unit development plat from the Planning and Zoning Commission,
shall approve, modify or disapprove the preliminary plat. In the case of
approval, or approval with modification, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall pass an ordinance granting the special use and indicate their approval
upon the plat, and arrange zoning map modifications as necessary. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may require such special conditions as they
may deem necessary to insure conformance with the intent of all comprehensive
plan elements and the stated purposes of the planned development.





      (7)   (a)   Approval of a preliminary planned unit
development plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it
shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the
preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will
be submitted for approval of the village and subsequent recording upon the
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and conditions of the
preliminary approval, if any. The final plat shall be approved as the final
land use and zoning plat if it conforms with the preliminary land use and
zoning plat.





         (b)   The preliminary and final plat may be filed and
improved simultaneously, or the final plat may be filed and approved without
a preliminary plat, if all of the land is to be developed at one time and if
all requirements hereof are met;





         (c)   No building permit shall be issued for any
structure until the approval of the final plat.





   (D)   Approval of final plat. The final planned unit development
plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if
desired by the developer, it may be submitted in stages with each stage
reflecting the approved preliminary plat which is proposed to be recorded and
developed provided, however, that the portion conforms to all requirements of
these regulations. The required procedure for approval of a final plat shall
be:





      (1)   (a)   A final planned unit development plat and other
supporting data required for approval shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission in accord with the provisions of § 156.138.





         (b)   The final plats must be submitted for approval in
accordance with agreed to scheduling, but not later than five years from the
approval of the preliminary plat; in the event that same is not done, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall initiate such zoning changes as it deems
necessary to preserve the public interest.





         (c)   Final plats and supporting data shall show in
detail the design, location and use of all buildings and overall land
development as well as such additional information as the Planning and Zoning
Commission may require.





      (2)   The final plat and supporting data shall be submitted to
the Village Planner for certification that the final plat is in conformity
with these regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary plat.





      (3)   After review of the final plat, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall, within 30 days, recommend approval or disapproval, and the
reasons therefor, to the President and the Board of Trustees.





      (4)   (a)   The President and Board of Trustees after
receipt of the final plat from the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall
approve, or disapprove the final plat and shall pass an ordinance authorizing
the planned unit development as a special use and allowing the issuance of a
zoning certificate and all other necessary permits.





         (b)   Permits are to be issued only after the final
planned unit development plat and supporting data have been recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds, and shall be issued in full compliance with §§ 156.190
through 156.202.





   (E)   Recording the final plat. 





      (1)   The ordinance authorizing construction of the planned
unit development shall be effective only upon recording of the final planned
unit development plat and supporting data with the County Recorder of
Deeds.  No permit allowing construction of a building or other development
shall be granted until the required recording of the final plat, and proof of
filing provided to the village.





      (2)   The purpose of the final plat is to designate with
particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the
division of other lands, not so subdivided, into common open areas and
building sites. The preliminary plat shall generally locate buildings,
whereas the final plat shall show the exact location of each building. All
streets and easements shall be shown on the final plat.





      (3)   The recording of the final plat shall inform all who
deal with the planned unit development of the restrictions placed upon the
land and act as a zoning control device.





   (F)   Changes in the Planned Unit Development.  The planned unit
development project shall be developed only according to the approved and
recorded final plat and all supporting data. The recorded final plat and
supporting data together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the
applicants, their successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and
control the use of premises and location of structures in the planned unit
development project as set forth therein.





      (1)   Major changes.





         (a)   Changes which alter the concept or intent of the
planned unit development including increases in density, increases in the
height of buildings, reductions of proposed open space, changes in the
development schedule, changes in road standards, or changes in the final
governing agreements, provisions or covenants, or other changes, may be
approved only by submission of a new preliminary plat and supporting data and
following the preliminary approval steps and subsequent amendment of the
final planned unit development plat.





         (b)   All changes to the final plat shall be recorded
with the County Recorder of Deeds as amendments to the final plat or
reflected in the recording of a new corrected final plat.





      (2)   Minor changes.  The Village Planning and Zoning
Commission may approve minor changes, errors, or omissions in the planned
unit development which do not change the concept or intent of the
development, without going through the preliminary approval steps. Minor
changes shall be any change not defined as a major change.




   (G)   Schedule.  The President and Board of Trustees shall consider
the planned unit development subject to relocation if construction falls more
than two years behind the schedule filed with the final plat. Extensions in
the building schedule may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.137  LOCATION.




RESERVED.




§ 156.138  SPECIFIC CONTENTS.




   (A)   The planned unit development plats and supporting data shall
include the information set forth in this section, unless waived by the
Planning and Zoning Commission:





   (B)   Pre-application state.





      (1)   Data regarding site conditions, available community
facilities and utilities, existing covenants and other related information.





      (2)   A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed
location and extent of the land uses, streets, lots and other features.





      (3)   A property survey and legal description of the site
proposed for development.





   (C)   Preliminary plat stage.





      (1)   Detailed plan.  A drawing of the planned unit
development shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one-inch equals 100
feet and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and
private), all buildings and their use, common open space, recreation
facilities, parking areas, service areas and other facilities to indicate the
character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one
or more sheets and drawings and shall include:





         (a)   Boundary lines.  Bearings and distances.





         (b)   Easements.  General location, width and purpose.





         (c)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract.  Street
name, right-of-way width, existing or proposed centerline elevations,
pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts and the like.





         (d)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract. 
Location, size and invert elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers;
location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants,
electric and telephone lines, and street lights; direction and distance to
and size of nearest useable water mains and sewers adjacent to the tract
showing invert elevation of sewers.





         (e)   Ground elevations on the tract.  For land that
slopes less than 1/2%, show one foot contours; show spot elevations at all
breaks in grates, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected
points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes
more than 1/2%, show two-foot contours.





         (f)   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.  Location and results of tests made to
generally ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions; depth
to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet; location
and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems
are proposed.





         (g)   Other conditions on the tract.  Water courses,
flood plains, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas isolated preservable trees
one foot or more in diameter, houses, barns, accessory buildings, and other
significant features.





         (h)   Other conditions on adjacent land.  Approximate
direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or
retaining walls; character and location of major buildings, railroads, power
lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse
influences, owners of adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land
refer to subdivision plat by name, and show approximate percent built-up,
typical lot size and dwelling type.





         (i)   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.





         (j)   Proposed public improvements.  Highways or other
major improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on
or near the tract.





         (k)   Open space. All parcels of land intended to be
dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with
the purpose indicated.





         (l)   General location, purpose, and height, in feet or
stories, of each building other than single-family residences on individually
platted lots.





         (m)   Map data.  Name of development, north point, and
scale, date of preparation, and acreage of site.





         (n)   Miscellaneous.  Such additional information as
may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission.





      (2)   Character.  Explanation of the character of the planned
development and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of
the flexibility of these regulations.





      (3)   Ownership.  Statement of present and proposed ownership
of all land within the project, including present tract designation according
to official records in offices of the County Recorder.





      (4)   Names.  The names and addresses of the persons to whom
the notice of the hearing to be held by the planning agency should be sent
(the subdivider, the designer of the subdivision, and the owners of the land
immediately adjoining the land to be platted).





      (5)   Schedule.  Development schedule indicating:





         (a)   Stages in which project will be built with
emphasis on area, density, use and public facilities such as open space to be
developed with each stage. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the
plat and through supporting graphic material.





         (b)   Estimated dates for beginning and completion of
each stage.





         (c)   If different land use types are to be included
within the planned unit development, the schedule must include the mix of
uses to be built in each stage.





      (6)   Covenants.  Proposed agreements, provisions, or
covenants which will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of
the planned development and any of its common open space.





      (7)   Density.  Provide information on the density of
residential uses and the number of dwelling units by type.





      (8)   Nonresidential use.  Provide information on the type
and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential development.





      (9)   Service facilities.  Provide information on all service
facilities and off-street parking facilities.





      (10)   Architectural plans.  Preliminary architectural plans
for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit
an understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building,
and the number, size and type of dwelling units.





      (11)   Facilities plans.  Preliminary plans for:





         (a)   Roads including classification, width of
right-of-way, width of pavement and typical construction details.





         (b)   Sanitary sewers.





         (c)   Storm drainage.





         (d)   Water supply system.





         (e)   Lighting program.





      (12)   Need.  Provide an economic feasibility study of the
proposed development, including information on land utilization and marketing
potential if required by Zoning Board.





   (D)   Final plat state.





      (1)   Final detailed plan.  A final Planned Unit Development
Plat, suitable for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds shall be
prepared. The purpose of the planned unit development plat is to designate
with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the
division of other land, not so treated, into common open areas and building
areas. The final planned unit development plat shall include, but not be
limited to:





         (a)   An accurate legal description of the entire area
under immediate development within the planned development.





         (b)   If subdivided lands are included, a subdivision
plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the
requirements of a normal subdivision plat.





         (c)   An accurate legal description of each separate
unsubdivided use area, including common open space.





         (d)   Designation of the exact location of all buildings
to be constructed.





         (e)   Certificates, seals and signatures required for
the dedication of lands, and recording the document.





         (f)   Tabulations on separate unsubdivided use area,
including land area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units and
dwelling units per acre.





      (2)   Common open space documents.  All common open space
shall be either conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, conveyed to a
not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of
benefitting the owners and residents of the planned development or retained
by the developer with legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the
Village Attorney, that the common open space will be permanently preserved as
open area. All land conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or like entity,
shall be subject to the right of the corporation to impose a legally
enforceable lien for maintenance and improvement of the common open space.





      (3)   Public facilities.  All public facilities and
improvements made necessary as a result of the planned unit development shall
be either constructed in advance of the approval of the final plat or escrow
deposits or performance bonds posted to guarantee construction of the
required improvements.





      (4)   Guarantee deposit.  A deposit shall be made to the
village in cash, or maintenance bond equal to 15% of the estimated cost of
public facility installations. This deposit shall be a guarantee of
satisfactory performance of the facilities constructed within the planned
unit development and shall be held by the village for a period of  18
months.  After such 18





months, the deposit shall be refunded if no defects have developed, or if any
defects have developed, then the balance of such deposit shall be refunded
after reimbursement for amounts expended in correcting defective facilities.





      (5)   Delinquent taxes.  A certificate shall be furnished
from the County Collector that he finds no delinquent taxes and that all
special assessments constituting a lien on the whole or any part of the
property of the planned unit development have been paid.




      (6)   Covenants.  Final agreements, provisions or covenants
which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the
planned unit development.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.139  STANDARDS.




   The planned unit development must meet the following standards:





   (A)   Comprehensive plan. - A planned unit development must conform
with the intent and spirit of the proposals of the comprehensive plan.





   (B)   Size.  The site of the planned unit development must be under
single ownership and/or unified control.





   (C)   Compatibility.  The uses permitted in a planned unit
development must be of a type and so located so as to exercise no undue
detrimental influence upon surrounding properties.





   (D)   Need.  A clear showing of need must be made.





   (E)   Space between buildings.  The minimum horizontal distance
between buildings shall be:





      (1)   Fifteen feet between one story, two story, two and
one-half story buildings or combinations thereof.





      (2)   Equal to the height of the taller buildings in the case
of free-standing unattached buildings other than one, two, or two and
one-half story buildings.





   (F)   Yards.  The required yards along the periphery of the planned
unit development shall be at least equal in width or depth to that of the
adjacent zoning district.  Buildings of more than 24 feet in height shall
provide a setback from any property line of not less than equal to the height
of such buildings.





   (G)   Parking requirements.  Adequate parking shall be provided,
and in no event shall the parking be less than that provided for in other
sections of this chapter.





   (H)   Traffic.  That adequate provision be made to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets.





   (I)   Density.  The density of any planned unit development shall
not exceed by more than 15% the density allowed in the district in which the
planned unit development is located. Land within the planned unit development
which is used for industrial purposes, commercial purposes, and open space
may be included as gross area for calculations of density.




   (J)   Other standards.  The planned unit development may depart
from strict conformance with the required density, dimension, area, bulk, use
and other regulations for the standard zoning districts and other provisions
of this chapter to the extent specified in the preliminary land use and
zoning plat and documents authorizing the planned unit development so long as
the planned unit development will not be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 1655, passed 8-1-12)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.140  FINDINGS.




   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide findings of
fact setting forth the reasons for the recommendation, and the findings shall
set forth with particularity in what respects the proposal would be in the
public interest including but not limited to findings of fact on the
requirements set forth in this section.





   (B)   In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the
stated purpose of the planned unit development regulations.





   (C)   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements
and standards of the planned unit development regulations.





   (D)   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including but not limited to the density, dimension, area, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest.





   (E)   The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in
which the design makes adequate provision for public services, provides
adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated
common open space, and furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment.





   (F)   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the
adjacent properties and neighborhood.





   (G)   The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development,
tax base and economic well-being of the entire community.




   (H)   The conformity with the intent and spirit of the Comprehensive
Plan.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.141  CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES.



   Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village Board may stipulate such
conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout,
height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other
elements of the planned unit development as deemed necessary for the
protection of the public interest, improvement of the development, protection
of the adjacent areas, and to secure compliance with the standards specified
in § 156.139.  In all cases in which planned unit developments are granted,
the Village Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem
necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are
being and will be complied with.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 156.150  OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE.




   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall apply and govern
in all zoning districts.





   (B)   General requirements. 





      (1)   The duty to provide and maintain off- street parking
space shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and/or
owner of the use and/or land for which off-street parking space is required
to be provided and maintained.





      (2)   For land, structures or uses actually used, occupied or
operated on the effective date of this chapter, there shall be provided such
off-street parking space as was required for such land, structures or uses by
any previous ordinance. If such land, structures or uses are enlarged,
expanded or changed there shall be provided, for that increment of expansion
only, at least the amount of off-street parking space that would be required
hereunder if the increment were a separate land, structure or use established
or placed into operation after the effective date of this chapter.





      (3)   For all uses established or placed into operation after
the effective date of this chapter there shall be constructed, provided,
preserved and maintained the amount of off-street parking space hereinafter
set forth.





      (4)   Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or
premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross
floor area, seating capacity, additional employment, or other unit of
measurement, such additional parking as required herein to provide for the
expanded use shall be provided.





      (5)   Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or
land area is changed to a new use, parking facilities shall be provided as
required by the new use.  However, if the use existed prior to the effective
date of this chapter, parking is required only in the amount that the new use
would exceed the requirements for the existing use if the latter were subject
to the parking provisions of this chapter.





      (6)   Parking in existence on the effective date of this
chapter or that was provided voluntarily after such effective date shall not
hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not further be
reduced below, the requirements of this chapter for a new use.





      (7)   All off-street parking space, whether or not required by
this chapter and when provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or in accordance with the provisions of any former ordinance, shall
be used, maintained and operated as hereinafter required.





      (8)   Parking for all types of uses may be provided either in
garages or open parking areas conforming with the provisions of this chapter.





      (9)   Where sufficient existing public parking facilities are
located so as to provide or supplement part or all of the required parking
space, the Planning and Zoning Commission may reduce the number of spaces
required for a particular use or group of uses.





      (10)   Parking may be with or without charge.





      (11)   No vehicle shall be parked in any front yard except
upon a regularly constructed driveway. Parking lots may be allowed in the
front yard if authorized by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and provided
that the district does not require that the front yard be landscaped and
devoted to no other use, and further provided that the parking is in accord
with the other provisions of this chapter.





   (C)   Off-street parking space shall be located on the same lot as
the use for which provided, except as otherwise specifically provided:





      (1)   Special location plan.  Pursuant to the procedure
hereinafter set forth, either part or all of the required off-street parking
space may be located off the lot of the use for which the space is
provided.  Also, two or more uses may share the same off-street parking
space and each of such uses may be considered as having provided such shared
space individually.  The following limitations shall apply to the special
location plan.





      (2)   Separation for use.  Off-street parking shall be
located as hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such
distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the
parking facility to the nearest point of the building that such facility is
required to serve.





         (a)   In all residential districts, parking facilities
shall be located on the same lot or lots with the building they are required
to serve.





         (b)   In all commercial districts, parking facilities
shall be located within 300 feet of the building they are required to serve.





         (c)   In all industrial districts, parking facilities
shall be located within 600 feet of the building they are required to serve.





      (3)   Sharing of space.  Two or more uses may share the same
off-street parking space if the schedules of operation of all such uses are
such that none of the uses sharing the space requires the off-street parking
space at the same time as any other use sharing the space. Each such use that
is sharing space shall be considered as having provided such shared space
individually.





      (4)   Application.  All applications for approval of special
location plan hereunder shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning
Commission by the owners of the entire land area to be included within the
special location plan, the owner or owners of all structures then existing on
the land area and all encumbrances of the land area and structures; shall
contain sufficient evidence to establish to the satisfaction of the Planning
and Zoning Commission that the applicants are the owners and encumbrances of
the designated land and structures; shall contain such information and
representations required by this chapter or deemed necessary; and shall
include plans showing the following details:





         (a)   The location of the uses or structures for which
off-street parking space is required.





         (b)   The location at which the off- street parking
space is to be provided.





      (5)   Procedure.





         (a)   All applications shall be reviewed and approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any approval may establish necessary
conditions and limitations.





         (b)   Upon approval of a special location plan, a copy
of such plan shall be registered and recorded among the records of the
village.





         (c)   All special location plans registered and recorded
hereunder shall be binding upon the applicants for such special plans, their
successors and assigns; shall limit and control the issuance and validity of
all zoning permits and zoning certificates; and shall restrict and limit the
use and operation of all land and structures included within such special
plans to all conditions and limitations specified in such plans and the
approvals thereof.





         (d)   All special location plans registered and recorded
hereunder may be amended pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the
same limitations and requirements by which such plans were approved,
registered and recorded.





         (e)   Upon application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission by the owner or owners of the entire land area included within any
special location plan registered and recorded hereunder, the owner or owners
of any structures then existing thereon and all encumbrances of the land and
structures, any such plan may be withdrawn, either partially or completely,
from registration and released from recording if all uses, land and
structures remaining under such plan can be made to comply with all
conditions and limitations of the plan and all uses, land and structures
withdrawn from such plan can be made to comply with all regulations
established by this chapter and unrelated to any special location plan.





   (D)   Combined facility.  Off-street parking space shall be
provided for each use. However, two or more uses may jointly provide for one
combined parking facility:





      (1)   Where off-street parking space is combined and used
jointly by two or more uses having different standards for determining the
amount of off-street parking space required, the parking space shall be
adequate in area to provide the sum total of off-street parking space
requirements of all such uses.





      (2)   Where off-street parking space is combined and used
jointly by two or more uses having the same standard for determining the
amount of off-street parking space required, all such uses, for the purposes
of this  section,  shall be considered  a single unit and the gross floor
area of all such uses in all structures on the same lot or the number of
employees of all such uses in all structures on the same lot as fixed by the
applicable standard, shall be taken as a single total for the purpose of
determining the amount of off-street parking space required.





   (E)   Design, development and maintenance.  Every parcel of land
hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial
parking lot, and also an automobile or trailer sales lot, shall be designed,
developed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:





      (1)   In the residential districts, unless fully enclosed,
parking areas shall be used only by vehicles up to 3/4-ton manufacturer's
capacity rating.





      (2)   Shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or
servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies, except when the
zoning district allows such use.





      (3)   Shall be provided with an all-weather surfacing
maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent the release of dust
and to be free of dust, trash and debris. If such surfacing would be
detrimental because of the excessive runoff of storm water, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may direct such area to be left unpaved and designed to
remain dust-free and attractive.





      (4)   Shall be pitched and drained so as to prevent the flow
of water from such areas onto adjoining property or onto streets or alleys
that have no drainage facilities.





      (5)   Off-street parking areas for more than four vehicles
that adjoin or are across the street from property zoned for any residential
use shall have a dense evergreen planting, fence, masonry wall and/or such
other screening as may be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.





      (6)   Shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than
12 feet or more than 35 feet in width and so located as to minimize traffic
congestion.





      (7)   Shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards so
located that no part of parked vehicles will extent beyond the parking space.





      (8)   Where hazards exist which can be eliminated or lessened
by lighting, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require lighting at such
hours and in such manner as deemed necessary in the interest of public safety
and security. Such lighting facilities shall be so arranged that they neither
unreasonably disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties nor
interfere with traffic.





      (9)   May have not more than one attendant shelter building
conforming to all set back requirements for structures in the district in
which it is located.





      (10)   Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not
less than 180 square feet exclusive of access drives or alleys and shall be
of usable shape and conditions.





      (11)   All open or unused areas shall be landscaped and
continuously maintained.





   (F)   Units of measurement. For purposes of this section the
following units of measurement shall apply:





      (1)   Floor area.  In the case of offices, merchandising or
service types of uses, FLOOR AREA shall mean the gross floor area or gross
leasable area designed for tenant or owner occupancy and exclusive use,
including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, if any, expressed in square
feet measured from the centerlines of joint partitions and exteriors of
outside walls. It shall not include areas used principally for utilities and
space incidental to the management or maintenance of the building.





      (2)   Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit shall mean one room, or
a suite of two or more rooms, designed for or used by one family for living
and sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.





      (3)   Seat or bench.  A seat shall be the space intended for
one individual, in places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or
other seating facilities, each 20 inches of such seating facilities shall be
counted as one seat.





      (4)   Employees.  Employees shall be based on the maximum
number of persons on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one
time.





      (5)   Fractions.  When units of measurement result in the
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking
space.





   (G)   Space required.  At least the following numbers of usable
off-street parking spaces shall be provided; also adequate provision for
ingress, egress and maneuvering shall be provided.





      (1)   Residential uses.





         (a)   One-family dwellings and two- family dwellings. 
Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.





         (b)   Multiple-family dwellings.  Two parking spaces
shall be provided for every dwelling unit.





         (c)   Hotels, motels, inns and auto courts.  One
parking space shall be provided for each guest or sleeping room or suite,
plus one additional space for the owner or manager.





         (d)   Lodging, rooming and boarding houses.  One
parking space shall be provided for each lodging room, plus one space for the
owner or manager.





         (e)   Mobile home parks.  Two parking spaces shall be
provided for each mobile home space.





         (f)   Fraternities, sororities and dormitories.  One
parking space shall be provided for each five active members, plus one
parking space for the managers thereof.





      (2)   Commercial uses.





         (a)   Automobile laundry.  Stacking spaces shall be
provided to accommodate waiting automobiles equal in number to five times the
maximum capacity of the automobile laundry for each wash rack, plus one
parking space for each two employees. Maximum capacity, in this instance,
shall mean the greatest number of automobiles undergoing some phase of
laundering at the same time.





         (b)   Automobile service stations.  Two parking spaces
shall be provided for each island of pumps and each service stall, plus one
parking space for each two employees.





         (c)   Banks.  One parking space shall be provided for
each 200 square feet of floor area. Drive-in establishments shall provide six
stacking spaces per teller or customer service window.





         (d)   Barber shop.  Three parking spaces shall be
provided for each barber chair, plus one per each employee.





         (e)   Beauty parlor.  Two parking spaces shall be
provided for each 150 square feet of floor area, plus one for each employee.





         (f)   Bowling alleys.  Three parking spaces shall be
provided for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required
herein for affiliated uses, such as bars and restaurants.





         (g)   Furniture and appliance stores, household
equipment or furniture repair shops.  One parking space shall be provided
for each 600 square feet of floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet.





         (h)   Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales.  One
parking space shall be provided for each 800 square feet of floor area.




         (i)   Restaurants or establishments dispensing food
and/or beverages for consumption on the premises (not including drive-in or
drive-through restaurants).  One parking space shall be provided for each
100 square feet of floor area, or one parking space for each three seats,
plus one parking space for each three employees, whichever is greater.



         (j)   Restaurants (carry-out).  One parking space shall
be provided for each 50 square feet of floor area.



         (k)   Restaurants (drive-in) and/or refreshment stand
(where food and/or beverage is consumed in a vehicle).  One parking space
shall be provided for each 20 square feet of floor area, but not less than
ten spaces.



         (l)   Restaurants (drive-through). One parking space per
80 square feet of gross floor area, one parking space for every two employees
on the work shift with the largest number of employees, and the stacking
space of four vehicles at each ordering station, bay window, or lane.



         (m)   Retail stores.  One parking space shall be
provided for each 180 square feet of floor area.



         (n)   Theaters (indoor).  One parking space shall be
provided for each four seats up to 400 seats, plus one for each six seats
over 400 seats.



         (o)   Theaters (outdoor).  Reservoir parking spaces at
the entrance to the theater shall be provided equal to 10% of the vehicle
capacity of the theater.




         (p)   Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors.  Six
parking spaces shall be provided for each chapel or parlor, or one for each
50 square feet of floor area used for services, whichever is greater, plus
one parking space for each funeral vehicle kept on the premises.





      (3)   Office uses. 





         (a)   Business or professional offices.  One parking
space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.





         (b)   Medical or dental clinics.  Two parking spaces
shall be provided for each office, examining room or treatment room, plus one
for each employee.





      (4)   Industrial uses.





         (a)   Manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged
in production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products.  One parking space shall be provided for each
two employees, plus one parking space for each vehicle used in the conduct of
the enterprise.





         (b)   Truck terminals.  One parking space shall be
provided for each two employees, plus one for each truck.





         (c)   Warehouses and storage buildings.  One parking
space shall be provided for each two employees, plus one space for each
vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.





         (d)   Wholesale establishments (but not including
warehouses and storage buildings other than accessory.  One parking space
shall be provided for each 600 square feet of floor area in excess of 4,000
square feet.





      (5)   Schools, institutions and places of assembly.





         (a)   Auditoriums, gymnasiums, convention halls, and all
places of assembly.  One parking space shall be provided for each five seats
or parking spaces equal to one-fifth the capacity of the facility in persons.





         (b)   Churches.  One parking space shall be provided
for each four seats in the main auditorium.





         (c)   Colleges, universities, trade schools.  One
parking space shall be provided for each five students (based on the maximum
number of students that the facilities is designed to handle at any one
time), plus one for each two employees.





         (d)   Elementary school.  Two parking spaces shall be
provided for each classroom. However, if a place of assembly is provided in
the school and the parking spaces provided for the place of assembly is equal
to or in excess of the requirement for the classrooms, the classroom
requirement need not be provided.





         (e)   Hospitals.  One parking space shall be provided
for each two beds, plus one for each staff doctor or visiting doctor, plus
one for each two employees.





         (f)   Junior high and high school.  One parking space
shall be provided for each eight students (based on the maximum number of
students that the facility is designed to handle at any one time), plus one
for each two employees.





         (g)   Nursery school.  One parking space shall be
provided for each employee.





         (h)   Nursing home, convalescent home and similar type
establishments.  One parking space shall be provided for each three beds,
plus one for each two employees.





         (i)   Library.  One parking space shall be provided for
each 1,000 square feet of floor area.





         (j)   Private clubs and lodges.  Parking spaces equal
to one-fifth the capacity of the facility in persons shall be provided.





      (6)   Other uses.  For uses not listed heretofore in this
schedule of parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the
same basis as required for the most similar listed uses, or as determined by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.





   (H)   Plot plan.  Any application for a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned, showing all parking facilities required by this
chapter.




   (I)   Modifications.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may
authorize on appeal a modification, reduction, or waiver of the foregoing
requirements, if it should find that, in the particular case appealed the
peculiar nature of the residential, business, trade, industrial or other use,
or the exceptional shape or size of the property or other exceptional
situation or condition, would justify such action.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 1477, passed 3-19-07)  Penalty, see §
156.999



§ 156.151  OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE.




   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall apply and govern
in all districts.





   (B)   When required. Off-street loading space shall be required and
maintained in connection with any building or part thereof, hereafter erected
or altered which is to be occupied by uses requiring the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise.





   (C)   Location.  Off-street loading space shall be located on the
same lot as the structure for which provided.





   (D)   Duty to provide.  The duty to provide the off-street loading
space herein required shall be the joint and several responsibility of the
operator and owner of the structure or structures for which off-street
loading space is required to be provided.  No structure shall be designed,
erected, altered, used or occupied unless the off-street loading space herein
required is provided in at least the amount herein set forth.  However,
off-street loading space need not be provided for structures actually used,
occupied and operated on the effective date of this chapter unless, after the
effective date of this chapter, such structures are enlarged, expanded or
changed, so as to require a greater amount of off-street loading space than
the amount of off-street loading space  not required  to  be furnished by
reason of the foregoing exclusion, in which event, the structures hereby
excluded shall not be used, occupied or operated unless there is provided for
the increment only of such structures, and maintained as herein required, at
least the amount of off-street loading space that would be required hereunder
if the increment were a separate structure.





   (E)   Design, development and maintenance.  Every parcel of land
hereafter used for off-street loading space shall be designed, developed and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:





      (1)   Shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or
servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.





      (2)   Shall be graded for proper drainage and provided with an
all-weather surfacing maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent
the release of dust and to be free of dust, trash and debris.





      (3)   Off-street loading spaces that adjoin or are across the
street from property zoned for any residential use shall have a dense
evergreen planting, fence masonry wall, or such other screening, as may be
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall also determine the height, location and density of screening
used to provide adequate protection to adjoining property.





      (4)   Shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than
12 feet or more than 35 feet in width and so located as to minimize traffic
congestion.





      (5)   No portion of a vehicle shall project into a street or
alley while being loaded or unloaded.





      (6)   Each off-street loading space shall be not less than ten
feet in width, 25 feet in length, and 12 feet in height, exclusive of access
drives. When more than three spaces are required, the spaces other than the
first three shall be 12 feet in width, 65 feet in length, and 15 feet in
height.





      (7)   Off-street loading space may occupy all or any part of
any required yard space, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter.





   (F)   Amount of space required.  At least the following amounts of
off-street loading space shall be provided, plus an area or means adequate
for maneuvering, ingress and egress:




 




Gross Floor Area (Square Feet)

 

Required Number of Spaces




Up to 20,000

 

1




20,001 to 40,000

 

2




40,001 to 70,000

 

3




70,001 to 120,000

 

4




120,001 to 200,000

 

5






 






For each additional

 






  100,000 square feet

 

1 additional





 



   (G)   Modifications.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may
authorize on appeal modification, reduction, or waiver of the foregoing
requirements, if it should find that, in the particular case appealed, the
peculiar nature of the business, trade, industrial or other use, or the
exceptional shape or size of the property or other exceptional situation or
condition, would justify such action.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)  Penalty, see § 156.999



SIGNS



§ 156.160  PURPOSE.



   Signs should be regulated within the village for the following reasons:



   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort,
morals, convenience and general welfare of the residents of the village;



   (B)   To enhance the physical appearance of the village by
preserving the scenic and natural beauty of the area;



   (C)   To promote the safety and recreational value of public travel;



   (D)   To protect the public investment in streets and highways by
reducing sign or advertising distractions that may increase traffic accidents;



   (E)   To assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses;



   (F)   To enhance the economy of the village by promoting the
reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs and by avoiding the
“canceling out” effect of conflicting adjacent signs.



   (G)   To enable fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-2004; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.161  SCOPE.



   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, the use of all
signs and portions of signs erected, altered with respect to height and area
of sign face, added to, or relocated in the village shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter. Any existing sign not in conformity
with the regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-2004; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.162  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed to be an
expression of the maximum allowable number and size of signs which cause the
least potential conflict with surrounding uses and which promote an improved
physical appearance and aesthetics within the village.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this
subchapter upon the control of signs are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by the provisions of any other
law, ordinance, statute, resolution, rule or regulation of any governmental
body, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards shall govern.



   (C)   When a sign type is not specifically listed in the sections
devoted to permitted signs, it shall be assumed that such signs are hereby
expressly prohibited.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.163  RULES.



   (A)   The language set forth in this subchapter shall be interpreted
as set forth in this section.



   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural the singular.



   (C)   The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary.



   (D)   The word MAY is permissive.



   (E)   All measured distances or standards shall be to the nearest
integer; if a fraction is one-half or less, the integer next below shall be
taken.



   (F)   Height of signs shall be measured to the highest point
thereon, from the crown of the street directly opposite the sign, or from the
average normal grade level directly below the sign, whichever is higher.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.164  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL MARKETING SIGN.  A sign placed upon private
property advertising a commercial or industrial property is for sale of lease.



   CORNER LOT.  A lot with property lines of two streets bisecting on an
angle.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A temporary sign announcing a proposed project,
contractor, engineer, and/or architect.



   DIRECTIONAL INSET.  An inset sign located within off-premise sign that
acts as a directional sign plaza.



   FACADE.  The face or wall of a building as it is presented to view;
the apparent width and/or height of a building as viewed from streets,
driveways, and parking lots. Minor changes in wall elevations do not
constitute the creation of additional facades.



   GROUND OR MONUMENT SIGN.  A permanent sign which is supported by
uprights or braces securely anchored in the ground, with no more than 18
inches of clear space between the bottom of the face of the sign and the
grade beneath the sign face.



   INFLATABLE SIGN.  An object or device that can be filled with air or
gas constructed so as to resemble a figure or object when inflated and
generally used for advertising purposes.



   MOBILE OR ARROW BOARD SIGN. A sign 32 square feet or less not designed
to be permanently attached to a building or anchored to the ground; a sign
designed to be moved from place to place.



   OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a commercial use,
business, commodity, service, or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon
the premises where the sign is located.



   PERMANENT SIGN.  Any sign which is not a temporary sign.



   POLE SIGN.  Any sign having a supporting structure with a size less
than 25% of the total width of the sign with more than 18 inches of clear
space between the bottom of the face of the sign and the grade beneath the
sign face.



   PORTABLE COMMERCIAL SIGN. A temporary portable commercial sign no
larger than nine  square feet in size and no higher than four feet off the
ground, advertising a specific event, product or service. Such sign must be
self standing, can not obstruct pedestrian traffic as determined by Village
Code of Ordinances and/or other state or federal laws such as the American
Disabilities Act.



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN.  A permanent ground sign placed at the
major entrances to and identifying a residential development or residential
planned unit development.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A sign placed upon a property advertising that
particular property for sale or lease.



   RESIDENTIAL MARKETING SIGN. A sign placed on private property
advertising a residential development.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  A commercial development in excess of ten acres of
land improved with a structure of at least 50,000 square feet containing five
or more distinct and separate retail businesses.



   SHOPPING PLAZA.  A commercial development in excess of one acre of
land, improved with a structure containing three or more distinct and
separate retail businesses, also sharing common parking areas and access
drives.



   SIGN. Any structure, vehicle, device, or any part thereof, which shall
be used to identify, advertise or attract attention to any object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group, commodity,
profession, enterprise, industry or business and which shall display or
include any letter, word, model, number, banner, flag, pennant, insignia,
device or representation used as announcement, direction or advertisement,
and which is intended to be seen by persons in the public right-of-way.



   SIGN AREA.  The total area of the sign to include the message surface,
insignias, logos, sign face, structural supports, borders, and design/
architectural features. In the event that individual letters or insignia are
mounted directly to a wall or the sign area is of an irregular design, the
sign area will be determined by utilizing the area of the smallest triangle,
rectangle, or circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign.



   SIGN FACE.  The surface of a sign or sign board upon, against or
through which a message or copy is displayed.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  A sign which, based on its manner of construction or
assembly, is only intended to be displayed a limited length of time and/or
any other sign, banner, or other advertising device or display constructed of
cloth, canvas, cardboard, wallboard, or other light temporary materials, with
or without a structural frame.



   WALL SIGN.  A sign attached directly to a building wall which does not
extend more than 12 inches therefrom, nor extend above the eaves line of a
gable, hip or gambrel roof, nor extend above the facade of a flat roof, nor
above the deck line of a mansard roof.



   WINDOW SIGN.  A temporary or permanent wall sign which is visible to
persons in the public right-of-way and which is placed within or on the
outside of a window or on the inside of a glass window, or on the inside of a
building and within one foot of a window.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.165  LIMIT ON NUMBER OF SIGNS.



   The number of signs which may be maintained on any premises is governed
by the zoning district in which the property is located. A double faced sign
shall count as a single sign.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.166  LIMIT ON SIGN AREA.



   The total area of a sign which may be maintained on any premises is
governed by the zoning district in which the property is located. A double
faced sign shall count as a single sign.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.167  PERMITS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS.




   (A)   No permanent sign shall hereafter be erected, altered or moved
until the person proposing to erect, alter or move such sign shall have
obtained a permit from the Building Department. Such permit shall be issued
only when the sign complies with all of the applicable provisions of this
subchapter. The fee for granting such a permit shall be $.50 per square foot
of sign or a minimum of $50 (to include both sides of double faced signs),
and such other fees for an electrical sign as are provided by ordinance.





   (B)   Any person desiring such a permit shall file application upon
a form which shall contain the following information:





      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;





      (2)   A plot plan drawn to scale showing the location of the
building, structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected,
and showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and
thoroughfares;





      (3)   A plan drawn to scale showing the design of the sign,
materials used, method of construction, and means of attachment to the
building or ground;





      (4)   The name of the person, firm, corporation or association
erecting, altering or moving the sign;





      (5)   Written consent of the owner of the land on which the
sign is to be erected, altered or relocated;




      (6)   Any other information as the Building Department shall
require in order to show full compliance with this subchapter and all
applicable ordinances of the village.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.168  PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (A)   No temporary sign shall be placed or erected until a permit
has been issued by the Building Department. A temporary sign permit shall
entitle the holder thereof to display such a sign for the time period
specified within that zoning district as further stated therein.



   (B)   An application for a permit for a temporary sign shall be made
on a form provided by the village and be accompanied by written consent of
the property owner. Permits for temporary signs must be kept on the premises
where signs are displayed.



   (C)   Duration of temporary signs:



      (1)   Residential marketing signs, on- and off-site: 12
months, renewable on a six-month basis thereafter.



      (2)   Commercial or industrial marketing real estate signs: 12
months, renewable on a six- month basis thereafter.



      (3)   Temporary commercial or mobile signs: advertising a
special sale or event, not to exceed 30 days and not more than four times per
calendar year with at least 30 days in between such advertising periods.  No
more than two temporary signs shall be allowed per multi-tenant building.



   (D)   Every applicant for a temporary sign shall pay a fee of $50
per sign (to include both sides of double faced signs). No fee shall be
charged for temporary sign permits for not-for-profit activities or
organizations.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1526,
passed 3-3-08; Am. Ord. 1559, passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10) 
Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.169  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are prohibited:



   (A)   Signs that contain statements, words, or pictures of an
obscene, indecent, or immoral character, such as will offend public morals or
decency.



   (B)   Signs that contain or are an imitation of an official traffic
sign or signal or contain the words "stop", "go slowly", "caution", "danger",
"warning", or similar words.



   (C)   Signs that are of a size, location, movement, content,
coloring, or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed
as a traffic-control device or which hide from view any traffic or street
sign or signal.



   (D)   Signs that advertise an activity, business, or product or
service that are not or are no longer located on the property or premises
upon which the sign is located.



   (E)   Moving, rotating or animated signs, except traditional barber
poles, not exceeding two feet in height and projecting not more than 12
inches from the building, utilized only to identify a hair cutting
establishment. In authorizing the latter exemption, the corporate authorities
find it in the public interest to retain this historic symbol of American
commerce.



   (F)   Searchlights other than for grand openings.



   (G)   Windows painted or posted in excess of 50% of the viewing area.



   (H)   Signs not listed in §§ 156.174 through 156.178 shall be
deemed to be prohibited, even though such signs are not specifically listed
in § 156.169.



   (I)   Signs in public rights-of-way which are not public signs,
except for banners on light poles as approved by the Village Board.



   (J)   Streamers, posters, ribbons, light strings except residential
holiday lighting, light bulbs, light bands, spinners, attention-getting
devices that move, blinking, electronic or flashing signs except time,
temperature, date and informational signs with a time delay of not less than
three seconds between copy, signs which exhibit changing natural or
artificial light or color effects, festoon lighting, and neon signs.



   (K)   Signs attached to trees, fences, public utility poles,
standpipes, gutter drains or fire escapes, other than warning signs issued by
government officials or public utilities.



   (L)   Signs that emit an odor, sound or visible matter.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.170  PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON CORNER LOTS.



   No sign having a height of more than 30 inches above  the  crown 
of  adjacent  streets  shall  be constructed or placed within the part of
the yard or open area of a corner lot which is included within a triangular
area of 25 feet from the point of intersection of the two street right-of-way
lines forming such corner lot.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord.1618, passed 5-3-10)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.171  PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON LOTS.



   With the exception of wall-mounted signs not projecting more than 12
inches from wall, no sign shall be placed closer than five feet from any lot
line.  Temporary mobile signs shall be located not less than one foot from
the property line and shall not obstruct the view of traffic.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord.1618, passed 5-3-10)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.172  ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS.



   The illumination of signs shall be diffused or indirect and shall be
arranged so no direct rays shall reflect into a public way or any lot on the
perimeter of the premises on which the signs are located. Exposed light
bulbs, flashing, blinking and similar illumination are not permitted.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord.1618, passed 5-3-10)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.173  SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework,
supports, background, anchors and wiring systems shall be constructed and
maintained in compliance with the building, electrical and fire protection
codes of the village.



   (B)   All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept in a good state
of repair.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord.1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.174  SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS.



   Unless otherwise stated, signs listed in this section are permitted in
all zoning districts and shall not require a sign permit nor be counted when
calculating the number of signs or square footage on a premises. However,
such signs shall conform to all other general regulations in this subchapter,
for example, height, area, setback, clearance and the like.



   (A)   Name and address plates which give only the name and address
of the resident of the building and which are not more than one square foot
in sign area.



   (B)   Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of
erection of buildings, no larger than five square feet.



   (C)   No trespassing signs or other such signs regulating the use of
a property, not more than two square feet in sign area in residential
districts and six square feet in all commercial and industrial districts.



   (D)   Real estate signs, not exceeding six square feet per side in
all districts. Such real estate signs shall be removed within 15 days after
the premises so advertised has been sold or leased.



   (E)   Up to six temporary real estate marketing signs no larger than
six square feet in area shall be allowed to call attention and give
directions to a residential subdivision. Such signs shall be considered
temporary, must be located entirely on private property and can be up no
longer than 48 hours over a 72-hour period.



   (F)   Signs regulating on-premises traffic and parking, and signs
denoting building facilities such as lavatories and public telephone areas,
when less than six square feet in area and bearing no commercial advertising.



   (G)   Signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction
of such a body, and bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs,
railroad crossing signs, safety signs, and signs identifying public schools
and playgrounds.



   (H)   The flag, pennant or insignia of any government, or of any
religious, charitable or fraternal organization.



   (I)   One logo flag of a company shall be allowed provided it is
flown with and is not larger than the American flag.



   (J)   Garage sale signs, not exceeding six square feet in area, may
be placed at the curb in residential areas for not to exceed a total of six
days.



   (K)   Signs no larger than 32 square feet in area advertising the
sale of edible farm products on the premises or advertising auctions. Such
signs may remain for 30 days, must be located entirely on privately-owned
property, and must be removed upon close of the event.



   (L)   Signs announcing a candidate seeking political office or
social issue. Such signs must adhere to the following:



      (1)   Signs cannot exceed six  square feet in area in all
residential zoning districts and 32 square feet in area in all other zoning
districts.



      (2)   Must be installed, anchored and maintained sufficiently
so as not to become deteriorated, blighted, unsafe, or capable of being blown
or washed off the property.



      (3)   Located entirely within private property not closer than
three feet from an adjacent property or public right-of-way.



   (M)   Window signs of paper or similar material shall be allowed in
commercial districts, provided that such signs are to be used to notify the
public of special sales or current prices, and further provided that such
signs do not take up more than 50% of the total window area.



   (N)   Off-premise signs shall be permitted only under the following
conditions:



      (1)   Off-premise signs shall be constructed, managed, and
maintained by the village as a directional sign plaza.



      (2)   Off-premise signs and the directional insets will be
constructed in a uniform manner designated by the village.  All lettering
(size, font, color, etc.), colors, and sizes shall be assigned by the
village; however, the village will try to accommodate an applicant's request
to the aesthetics of the sign if possible.



      (3)   The location of off-premise signs shall be designated
and approved by the Village Board with a recommendation provided by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. An applicant may make a formal request in
writing to the village for an off-premise sign; however, the location of an
off-premise sign must meet the following criteria before approval can be
granted:



         (a)   The directional inset must be for commercial,
industrial, recreational, or institutional use. If the directional inset is
for a specific use within a building, it must be for a single tenant building
only. Multi-tenant buildings may use the name of the retail center on the
directional inset.



         (b)   Three  or more possible locations that meet the
criteria herein must be able to benefit from the proposed off-premise sign.



         (c)   No off-premise sign can be located within 1,000
feet of another on the same street frontage.



         (d)   The use being proposed for an off-premise sign
and/or directional inset must not be clearly visible from an arterial or
major collector road when within 3,000 feet of its proposed directional inset
location.



      (4)   If the commercial use, business, commodity, service, or
activity is suspended, inactive or closed for one month or more at any given
time, the village holds the right to remove the directional inset.



      (5)   The fee for granting a directional inset permit shall be
a minimum of $25.



   (O)   Portable commercial sign. Such signs must be located entirely
on private property, and must be taken indoors upon close of business each
business day and may not interfere with pedestrian traffic in reference to
the American Disabilities Act. Such signs shall be no larger than nine square
feet in size and no higher than four feet off the ground.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord.1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.175  SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   All signs are prohibited in residential and agricultural
districts except as set forth in this section.



   (B)   All signs enumerated in § 156.174.



   (C)   Name and address plates for buildings containing more than two
dwelling units, provided that such signs shall not be more than three square
feet in area.



   (D)   Identification ground signs for nonresidential uses, such as
churches, cemeteries, golf courses, private nonprofit recreational areas,
provided that such signs are limited to one sign per building entrance, and
provided that each such sign be limited to 32 square feet of area, and six
feet in height.



   (E)   Two permanent residential development ground signs shall be
allowed at each entrance to a residential development and containing no
commercial advertising, constructed entirely upon privately owned property,
constructed of material which is the same or of a more permanent nature than
the material used in the buildings and as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Village Board.



   (F)   One temporary real estate marketing sign shall be allowed at
the major entrance to a residential subdivision, not to exceed 64 square feet
in area and ten feet in height, containing the name of the development and
the names of builders or units therein. Such signs shall be considered
temporary and must obtain a temporary sign permit as outlined in §
156.168.  Such signs shall be removed when 90% of the residential building
permits are issued for an entire development.



   (G)   Two temporary real estate marketing signs shall be allowed on
undeveloped and vacant land to call attention and/or give directions to
either an on-site or off-site residential development. Each sign shall be
located entirely on private property, shall not exceed 32 square feet in area
and shall not have a total height of more than ten feet. Such signs shall be
considered temporary and must obtain a temporary sign permit as outlined in
§ 156.168.  Such signs shall be removed when 90% of the building permits
have been issued for the entire development.



   (H)   One temporary residential real estate sign shall be allowed on
developed lots within a residential development for the purpose of
advertising the lot for sale or lease. Each sign shall be located entirely on
private property, shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall not have
a total height of more than eight feet. Such signs are temporary and must
obtain a temporary sign permit as outlined in § 156.168.



   (I)   One temporary real estate marketing sign shall be allowed for
conforming model homes utilized to sell homes within that subdivision. Each
sign shall be located entirely on private property, shall not exceed 16
square feet in area and shall not have a total height of more than eight
feet. Such signs are temporary and must obtain a temporary sign permit as
outlined in § 156.168.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.176  SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.




   (A)   All signs are prohibited in the commercial districts except as
set forth in this section.





   (B)   All signs permitted in the residential districts. (See §§
156.174 and 156.175.)





   (C)   Ground or pole signs as follows:





      (1)   Single or combined use building and lot.  One per
street frontage, not to exceed 64 square feet of sign face and 96 square feet
in total sign area  and ten feet in height for a ground sign or 32 square
feet in total sign face and ten feet in height for a pole sign.




      (2)   Shopping plaza.  One per street frontage, not to exceed
120 square feet of sign copy or face and 180 square feet in total sign area 
and ten feet in height for a ground sign or 32 square feet in total sign area
and ten feet in height for a pole sign.



      (3)   Shopping center or single or combined use building and
lot over five acres.  One per street frontage, not to exceed 150 square feet
of sign face and 250 square feet in total sign area and 15 feet in height for
a ground mounted sign, or 64 square feet of total sign face and area, or 15
feet in height for a pole sign, provided that advertising displayed thereon
shall be limited to businesses or services found within the shopping center.



      (4)   No more than one gasoline price sign per street frontage
not to exceed ten square feet of sign face if attached to poles or 20 square
feet in sign area if attached to a ground sign. The sign will not be included
in the computation of the total signage requirement for the business.




      (5)   On-premise directional and instructional signs. Those
signs, which provide instruction or direction, and are located entirely on
the property to which they pertain, and do not advertise a business. This
includes, but is not limited to, such signs as those which identify a
business location, restrooms, telephone, parking areas, entrances, exits,
etc. Such signs may not exceed eight square feet in gross area per sign. Such
signs must be identified on site plans for new developments or approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission for existing businesses.





   (D)   Wall signs as follows:





      (1)   Single use building and lot.  Two signs per facade, but
not to exceed a total of four such signs.





      (2)   Combined use building and lot.  Three signs per facade,
but not to exceed a total of six such signs.





      (3)   Shopping plaza.  One sign per individual business or
other enterprise; two signs per corner unit, one on each facade.





      (4)   Shopping center.  Same as shopping plaza.





      (5)   The above signs are limited to an area equal to 10% of
the facade of the building containing the business or other enterprise of the
facade upon which the sign is to be mounted.




      (6)   When a premise, building or business has a front and
rear public entrance, a rear sign may be erected. The rear sign shall not
exceed one-quarter square foot in size of the front sign area. Rear public
entrance signs shall not be counted in calculating the total number of signs
or sign area allowed for the premises.



   (E)   Temporary signs as follows:



      (1)   A permit must be obtained in accordance with § 156.168.



      (2)   Each permit for a temporary sign is valid for a maximum
of 30 days.



      (3)   One temporary sign permit shall be allowed per business
establishment at any given time for a maximum of four permits per calendar
year with a minimum of 30 days between permit expiration to permit
application.



      (4)   Two temporary sign permits shall be allowed at any given
time on or at a multi-tenant (strip mall) building.  There shall be no
maximum number of temporary sign permits a multi-tenant building may be
issued per year.



      (5)   All temporary signs must be removed within 24 hours of
the permit expiration.



      (6)   All temporary banner signs (without a ridged
self-contained frame) must adhere to the following:



         (a)   Securely affixed to the wall of the associated
building or by means of temporary stakes or poles specifically for the
purpose of securing the temporary sign.



         (b)   Cannot be affected or attached to a tree, utility
pole, other sign pole or other stationary object.



         (c)   The maximum height shall be four feet and not to
exceed 32 square feet in total area.



      (7)   All temporary signs with a ridged self- contained frame
(i.e. arrow board sign) cannot exceed a maximum height of ten feet and cannot
exceed 32 square feet in total area.



      (8)   All temporary signs must be located entirely on private
property.



      (9)   One temporary real estate marketing sign shall be
allowed at the major entrance to a commercial development that is still in
the development phase not to exceed 32 square feet of sign area for each one
acre of land area up to a maximum of 80 square feet of total sign area per
face, and not to exceed ten feet in height. Such signs shall only contain the
name of the development, name of the developer and/or describe the units
therein. Such signs shall be considered temporary, must obtain a temporary
sign permit as outlined in § 156.168 and be removed when 90% of the building
permits have been issued for the entire development.



      (10)   Two temporary real estate marketing signs shall be
allowed on undeveloped and vacant land to call attention and/or give
directions to an off-site residential development. Each sign shall be located
entirely on private property, shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and
shall not have a total height of more than ten feet. Such signs shall be
considered temporary, must obtain a temporary sign permit as outlined in §
156.168 and be removed when 90% of the residential building permits are
issued for the advertised development.



      (11)   One temporary commercial real estate sign shall be
allowed on developed lots within a commercial development for the purpose of
advertising the property for sale or lease. Each sign shall be located
entirely on private property, shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and
shall not have a total height of more than eight feet. Such signs are
temporary and must obtain a temporary sign permit as outlined in § 156.168.



      (12)   Three temporary construction sign shall be allowed at
the construction site during construction, alteration or repair of a
structure to denote the architect, builder and/or name of the structure and
its occupants-to-be. Such signs may be illuminated and shall be removed
immediately upon completion, alteration or repair of the project. Each sign
shall be located entirely on private property, shall not exceed 32 square
feet in area and shall not have a total height of more than ten feet. Such
signs are temporary and must obtain a temporary sign permit as outlined in §
156.168.



      (13)   One temporary sign permit shall be allowed per
establishment for an inflatable marketing sign or searchlight for grand
openings and special events for a 72-hour duration at any given time for a
maximum of four permits per calendar year with a minimum of 30 days between
permit expiration to permit application. No more than one permit shall be
issued per multi-tenant building at any given time.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.177  SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.




   (A)   All signs are prohibited in the industrial districts except as
set forth in this section.




   (B)   All signs enumerated in §§ 156.174 and 156.176.



   (C)   Wall signs: wall signs are limited to an area equal to 12% of
the facade upon which the sign is to be mounted.



   (D)   Ground signs and pole signs: one per street frontage, not to
exceed 120 square feet of sign or face and 180 square feet in total sign area
and 15 feet in height for a ground sign or 35 square feet in total sign face
and area and ten feet in height for a pole sign.



   (E)   Real estate marketing sign: one per street frontage, not to
exceed 32 square feet of sign area for each one acre of contiguous land area,
but not to exceed a maximum of 100 square feet of area per sign face and not
to exceed 15 feet in height. Such signs shall be considered temporary and
have a temporary sign permit as outlined in § 156.168.



   (F)   Permanent industrial development signs at entrances to
industrial parks shall not exceed 100 square feet of sign face and 150 of
total sign area not to exceed 15 feet in height. Such signs shall be
constructed entirely upon privately-owned property, constructed of material
which is the same or of a more permanent nature than the material used in the
buildings and as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village
Board.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.177.1  SIGNS IN PUBLIC RECREATION-1 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   All signs are prohibited in the PR-1 District except as set
forth in this section.



   (B)   All signs permitted in the residential districts.



   (C)   Ground signs are permitted one per entrance and one per 500
feet of street frontage not to exceed 120 square feet each and not to exceed
10 feet in height.



   (D)   Wall signs are limited to an area equal to 20% of the facade
upon which the sign is to be mounted.



   (E)   Temporary signs:  As stated in § 156.176.



(Ord. 855, passed 6-19-95; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.177.2  SIGNS IN THE TOWN CENTER ZONING DISTRICT.



   Signs within the Town Center zoning district must be in conformance
with the Channahon Town Center Design Guidelines as outlined on pages 53 and
54.  All signage proposals within the Town Center zoning district must be
submitted with building plans as part of the architectural review process.



(Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559, passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618,
passed 5-3-10)



§ 156.178  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.




   (A)   All permanent signs which are legally in existence at the time
of passage of this subchapter, but which do not conform to one or more
provisions of this subchapter, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming
use and may be continued only as provided in this subchapter.





   (B)   Any nonconforming sign rendered nonconforming by the
provisions of this subchapter may be continued in use, provided there is no
physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair, except as
otherwise permitted herein.





   (C)   Whenever a nonconforming sign has been discontinued for a
period of six consecutive months, or whenever there is evidently a clear
intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming sign, such sign
shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the
sign thereafter shall be brought into conformity with the regulations of this
subchapter.





   (D)   Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign is permitted,
including necessary nonstructural repairs or incidental alterations which do
not extend or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign.





   (E)   No structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be
made in a nonconforming sign, unless the alteration will result in
eliminating the nonconforming use.





   (F)   If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means
to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement value at that time, or 50% or
more of the physical structure, whichever is least, the sign can be rebuilt
or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. In the event the damage or destruction is less
than 50%, the sign may then be restored to its original condition, and the
use may be continued which existed at the time of such partial destruction
until the nonconforming sign is otherwise abated by the provisions of this
subchapter. In either event, restoration or repair must be started within a
period of 30 days from the date of damage or destruction and diligently
prosecuted to completion.




   (G)   Existing temporary signs shall be removed or permitted
hereunder no later than 30 days after the effective date of this subchapter.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.179  DUTIES.



   The Building Department shall examine all applications for permits for
erection of new signs to ensure conformity with the requirements of this
subchapter, record and file all applications for permits with any
accompanying plans and documents, make a periodic inspection of all signs in
the village, and submit reports as directed by the Village Board.



(Ord. 730, passed 9-21-92; Am. Ord. 1342, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 1559,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed 5-3-10)



FENCES



§ 156.180  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL RUN.  A completely enclosed fence for the exercising and/or
containment of an animal.



   FENCES.  A nonpermanent, nonliving structure which is not otherwise a
part of any building or structure and used to delineate a boundary or as a
means of confinement for the purposes of privacy.



   HEIGHT OF FENCE.  The height of a fence is a height as measured from
the existing grade level of the property on which the fence is installed to
the highest most point on the fence.



   OPEN FENCE.  A fence including gates, of which open spaces which
afford direct views through the fence comprise 50% of each one foot wide
segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence.



   PERIMETER FENCE.  A fence following the outward boundaries of the
property on which it is located.



   PERIMETER OF FENCE.  That outermost point as measured by a
perpendicular line drawn along the edge of a fence outward and perpendicular
to the ground.



   SOLID FENCE.  A fence including gates, which conceals some view of
adjoining property, streets or alleys and any and all activities conducted
behind it.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83)



§ 156.181  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair of cause to be hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered or repaired a fence as provided in this subchapter.  Any permit
shall expire six months from the date of issuance in the absence of an
extension from the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83)



§ 156.182  PROHIBITED FENCES.



   No dangerous or hazardous type fence, such as barbed wire, fences with
spikes, broken glass or other sharp points imbedded in them or any other type
fence that could result in injuries to persons climbing on or over such
fences shall be permitted to be erected or maintained within the village
except as provided for in § 156.185(B).  Also, no fences that are leaning
in such a manner that an angle of 15 degrees or more is produced when
measured from the vertical shall be permitted to be maintained within the
village.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1861, passed 6-20-16)



§ 156.183  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.




   (A)   No person shall erect a fence in the village without first
having received a fence permit from the Building Inspector.





   (B)   Applications for a fence permit shall be submitted from the
Building Inspector on preprinted forms.  An applications for a fence permit
shall be accompanied by:





      (1)   A sketch of the proposed fence indicating the design of
the fence, the material to be used, the dimensions of the proposed fence, and




      (2)   A plat of survey of the lot on which the proposed fence
is to be located showing the location of the proposed fence.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83)



§ 156.184  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   Any and every fence to be erected in the village following the
effective  date of  this subchapter  shall be designed and constructed to
resist and withstand a wind pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square
feet of the gross proposed area of the fence less any openings from any angle
of approach.  All fence posts used in the construction of a fence must be
buried in the ground to a depth of at least one-third of the total length of
the fence post.  All fence parts, anchors and shavings of wood or other
organic materials shall be treated with a chemical treatment to protect them
from deteriorating when they are placed in or upon the ground.  Alterations
to the existing grade level preceding the use of a fence for the purpose of
altering the height of the fence shall not be permitted.  All fences shall
be maintained in good and sound condition and shall create a harborage for
rodents.  If a fence is to be painted, it should be painted with a nonlead
base paint.  No fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to impede or
alter the natural surface water drainage of the property upon which the fence
is constructed or any adjoining property.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83)



§ 156.185  DESIGN, LOCATION, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Agriculture and Residential Districts.



      (1)   R-1 and R-3 Zoning Districts. Perimeter fences shall
only be erected in the side and rear yard in back of the front building line.
Fences may be either open or solid and not exceed a height of six feet.
Perimeter fences shall be erected entirely on the property in which the fence
is to be located. Only open fences not exceeding a height of four feet may be
constructed beyond the side yard building line of those properties on corner
lots.



      (2)   A-1 and A-2 Agriculture and Rural Residential Zoning
Districts.  Same as R-1 and R-3 with the following exceptions: Wood-type
open rail fences or peeled split log open rail fences may be erected anywhere
on the property including the front yard and side yards past the building
line not to exceed a height of five feet. Wire fences designed to contain
farm animals may be erected entirely on the property in which the fence is to
be located including the front yard and side yard past the building line.




      (3)   R-2 Single Family Residential District. Same as R-1 and
R-3 with the following exception:  Open perimeter fences shall be erected
entirely on the property in which the fence is to be located including the
front yard and side yards past the building line. Fences erected past the
front and side building lines on corner lots may not exceed a height of four
feet.





   (B)   Business or Industrial Districts.





      (1)   All fences constructed in either business or industrial
districts shall be open or solid fences.  In business districts, such open
or solid fences shall not exceed six feet in height.  In industrial
districts, such open or solid fences shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
In either business or industrial districts a fence may not contain more than
three strands of barbed wire at the top of the fence and any barbed wire
shall extend inward toward the enclosed property.





      (2)   Where property in either business or industrial
districts adjoins or fronts on any property situated in a residential
district, a solid fence shall be erected on these sides adjoining or fronting
on the property situated in a residential district.  Such a fence shall be
located within six inches of the property line that abuts the residential
property.  Such solid fence shall be not less than five feet in height nor
more than six feet in height in business districts.  Such a fence shall be
not less than five feet in height nor more than eight feet in height in
industrial districts.  Natural screening such as a densely planted compact
hedge may be used in lieu of a solid fence.  The height of such natural
screening shall be in accord with those requirements set forth above in this
section.





      (3)   In business and industrial districts, fences shall be
required to screen storage areas.  If the storage area is within 150 feet of
the nearest point of any residential district, then all storage shall be in
completely enclosed buildings or structures.  Storage areas located
elsewhere in a business or industrial district may be open to the sky but
shall be enclosed by a solid fence or wall including solid doors or gates
thereto.  In business districts, such storage yard fences shall be a solid
fence six feet in height.  In industrial districts,  such  storage  yard
fences shall be  a  solid fence six feet in height.  In industrial
districts, such storage yard fences shall be a solid fence eight feet in
height.  All such fences shall be allowed only in real and side yards.




      (4)   All exterior area of food service establishments wherein
garbage and refuse are stored shall be enclosed by a solid fence or walls,
including solid doors or gates thereto.  Such fence or walls shall be not
less than five feet nor more than six feet in height.  All food service
establishments licensed by the village or the Will County Health Department
prior to the effective date hereof shall comply with the requirements of this
subchapter within six months from the effective date hereof.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 991, passed 6-15-98; Am. Ord. 1687,
passed 4-16-12)



§ 156.186  FENCES USED FOR SPECIFIC PURPOSES.



   (A)   Screening for Parking Lots.  All open automobile parking
areas containing more than four parking spaces shall be effectively screened
on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residential
district or any institutional premises by a wall, solid fence or natural
screening such as a densely planted compact hedge not less than five feet in
height nor more than six feet in height, around the perimeter of the property
within six inches of the property line except for that part of the property
abutting a public way.  For that part of the parking lot property abutting a
public way, a wall, a solid fence or other natural screening shall have a
minimum height of three feet and a maximum height of three and one-half,
except that where in the interest of safety, so that the line of sight will
not be obstructed, the minimum height shall be lowered at street
intersections and driveways to not less than 18 inches.  The line of sight
shall be determined by the Building Inspector.  Except as noted above, such
screening as required above shall not be located within the front and side
yard setback requirements of the district in which the parking is located. 
If the zoning regulations permit parking in a side yard, then the parking lot
must be screened in accordance with those provisions set forth above.  Also,
in the case of property in an industrial district, which abuts a railroad
right of way, parking is permitted up to right of way, then screening shall
be provided in accordance with those requirements set forth above.



   (B)   Swimming Pool Fences.  See Ordinance Numbers 226 and 244 for
provisions regulating the construction and equipping of fences for swimming
pools.



   (C)   Animal Runs.  Animal runs shall be located completely to the
rear of the principal structure and the perimeter of the fences shall be no
closer than five feet from the property line of the adjoining properties. 
The animal runs shall have an area of not more than 100 square feet and shall
not be more than six feet in height.



   (D)   Electrical Fences. The construction and use of electric fences
within the village are permitted subject to strict adherence to the foll0wing
standards and requirements:



      (1)   IEC Standard 60335-2-76 or successor: Unless otherwise
specified herein, electric fences shall be constructed or installed in
conformance with the specifications set forth in the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Standard 60335-2-76.



      (2)   Electrification:



         (a)   The energizer for electric fences must be driven
by a commercial storage battery not to exceed 12 volts DC. The storage
battery is charged primarily by a solar panel, however, the solar panel may
be augmented by a commercial trickle charger.



         (b)   The electric charge produced by the fence upon
contact shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph
22.108 and depicted in Figure 102 of IEC Standard No. 60335-2-76.



      (3)   Perimeter fence:



         (a)   No electric fence shall be installed or used
unless it is completely surrounded by a non-electrical fence that is not less
than six feet in height. Electric fences shall be located no closer than one
foot from a non-electric perimeter fence. Electric fences shall have a
maximum height of ten feet.



         (b)   Location: electric fences shall be only be allowed
on a non-residential outdoor storage area located in an I-1 Limited
Manufacturing Zoning District or 1-2 Intensive Industrial Zoning District.



         (c)   Warning signs: electric fences shall be clearly
identified with warning signs that read: “Warning-Electric Fence” at
intervals of not less than 30 feet.



         (d)   The property owner and/or fence owner where fence
is located shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement
whereby the owner agrees to release, defend, indemnify and hold the Village
of Channahon harmless from any and all claims of personal injury or property
damage arising from or related to the fence.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain
or operate an electric fence in violation of this section.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 741, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 1861,
passed 6-20-16)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.187  MAINTENANCE.



   Fences must be maintained in good condition as determined by the
Building Inspector.  Any owner failing to repair or replace a fence
determined to be in disrepair shall remove such fence at his expense within
ten days of receipt of notice from the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83)



§ 156.188  NONCONFORMING FENCES.



   Any fences which existed lawfully at the adoption of this subchapter
and which remain nonconforming may be continued provided no structural
alterations, additions or enlargements are made to the fence.



(Ord. 335, passed 12-5-83)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 156.190  ORGANIZATION.



   The administration of this chapter is vested in four offices or
agencies of the village government as follows:



   Office of the Building Commissioner



   Planning and Zoning Commission



   Village Board of Trustees



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.191  ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The position of Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby created
in which is vested the power and duty to administer and enforce all the
provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance and such related
regulations as are so assigned by the Corporate Authorities.



   (B)   The President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees shall appoint the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  The Corporate
Authorities may also provide for the appointment of such deputies as are
needed and qualified to carry out efficiently the duties and powers of the
position.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall hold said position
concurrently with the term of the Village President or until his successor is
duly appointed and qualified.




   (C)   The powers and duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer are as
follows:





      (1)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and land to
determine compliance with this Ordinance and notify in writing the person
responsible for any violation found, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it.





      (2)   Order the discontinuance of illegal use of land,
building or structures or any illegal work being done; removal of illegal
buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural
changes; and any other action authorized by statute or by this Ordinance to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.





      (3)   Prepare and cause to be published, on or before March 31
of each year, a map showing the existing zoning uses, divisions,
restrictions, regulations and classifications in effect on the preceding
December 31.





      (4)   Maintain permanent and current records of this section,
including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special use permits,
planned unit developments, variations, appeals and applications therefore.





      (5)   Initiate, direct and review from time to time a study of
the provisions of this Ordinance and make recommendations to the Planning and
Zoning Commission as such study requires.





      (6)   Keep the Board of Trustees advised of zoning activities.





      (7)   Enforce all provisions of this Ordinance.





      (8)   Make a written report to the President and Board of
Trustees once each month, or oftener if requested, including statements of
permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated.





      (9)   Be an exofficio nonvoting member of the Planning and
Zoning Commission.





      (10)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed from
time to time by the Corporate Authorities.





   (D)   Before entering upon the duties of Zoning Enforcement Officer,
the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall take and subscribed to the following
oath:





I,                 , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the
State of Illinois and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of Zoning
Enforcement Officer of the Village of Channahon according to the best of my
ability.





   Subscribed and Sworn to before me this       day of          
      , A.D., 19  .





                     





Notary Public





The oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.





   (E)   Before entering upon the duties of Zoning Enforcement Officer,
he shall execute a bonds with security to be approved by the Corporate
Authorities payable to the Village of Channahon in the amount of $3,000.00
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of Zoning Enforcement
Officer and the payment of all money received by him.  The premium for said
bond shall be paid by the Village of Channahon and the bond filed with the
Village Clerk.





   (F)   Compensation of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and payment of
any expenses shall be as provided for from time to time by the Corporate
Authorities in a separate ordinance.





   (G)   If the Corporate Authorities determine that the Zoning
Enforcement Officer was acting in good faith and without malice as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his official duties, any
suit instituted against the Zoning Enforcement Officer or deputy shall be
defended by the Village Attorney or the attorney for any insurance company
representing the Village, as the case may be, until the final termination of
the proceedings including any appeals.  The Village shall also pay for all
court costs of the proceeding.





   (H)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall carry proper credentials
for the performance of his duties under this ordinance.  In the discharge of
his duties, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, his authorized representative or
any other qualified Village Inspector or deputy shall have the authority to
enter at any reasonable hour any building, structure or premises in the
Village of Channahon to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.  The
assistance and cooperation of police, fire and health departments and all
other officials shall be available to him as required in the performance of
his duties.





   (I)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have power as may be
necessary in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare to
adopt and promulgate written rules and regulations to interpret and implement
the provisions of this ordinance to secure the intent thereof and to
designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other
conditions.  Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving working
stresses or fire resistive requirements specifically provided in this
ordinance or violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety.




   (J)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall deliver and return all
books, records, papers and other matters relative to his position to the
Village Clerk upon termination with the Village of his position as Zoning
Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 294, passed 11-1-82)



§ 156.192  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   For provisions concerning the Planning and Zoning Commission, see §§
32.70 through 32.79.



§ 156.193  [RESERVED].



§ 156.194  VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.




   (A)   The Village Board of Trustees shall establish the standards,
procedures, and content of this chapter and shall reserve certain matters of
final decision to itself and delegate certain other matters to other
individuals or agencies. Decisions of the Village Board shall be subject to
judicial review as the law may provide.





   (B)   Jurisdiction of the Board of Trustees shall be as follows:





      (1)   To decide amendments to this chapter after public
hearing and report by the Planning and Zoning Commission.





      (2)   To decide on special use permits after public hearing
and report by the Planning and Zoning Commission.





      (3)   To decide on Planned Unit Developments after public
hearing and report by the Planning and Zoning Commission.





      (4)   To make appointments to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.




      (5)   To decide all other matters required by this chapter.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.195  ZONING CERTIFICATES.




   (A)   Certificate required.  No building or structure shall be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered,
nor shall any excavation or grading for any building or structure be done,
without a building permit. No building permit and no other permit pertaining
to the use of land, buildings, or structures shall be issued by any employee
of the village unless the proposed building or structure and the proposed use
thereof comply with all the provisions of this chapter, nor shall any such
permit be issued unless the application for such permit has affixed to it or
stamped thereon a certificate of the Building Commissioner certifying such
compliance. Any permit or zoning certificate issued in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter shall be void.





   (B)   Application.  Every application for a building permit shall
also be deemed an application for a zoning certificate, shall be made in
duplicate in such form as the Building Commissioner may, from time to time,
provide and shall include:





      (1)   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the sizes and locations on
the lot of buildings and structures already existing, if any; the location
and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration; the location and
dimensions of all proposed off-street parking and loading spaces and
accessways thereto; and such other matters as the Building Commissioner may
deem necessary to determine conformance with this chapter.





      (2)   Information describing the existing and proposed use of
each building and land area on the lot; the number of families or dwelling
units proposed to be accommodated; and other such matters as the Building
Commissioner may deem necessary to determine conformance with this chapter.





      (3)   A certificate of a registered architect or a registered
structural engineer licensed by the state, or, if no architect or engineer
was employed,  affidavits of the owner and builder, that the proposed
construction and the proposed use thereof comply with all the provisions of 
this chapter, or stating the extent of noncompliance. Where the use requires
compliance with manufacturing performance standards herein set forth, the
certification of a professional engineer, licensed in the state and having an
expertise in such standards, shall be required.





   (C)   Action by Building Commissioner.  Within 15 days after the
receipt of an application for a zoning certificate, the Building Commissioner
shall issue the certificate, provided all applicable provisions of this
chapter are complied with, or the Building Commissioner shall refuse to issue
a zoning certificate and shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons
for the refusal. If the Building Commissioner fails to act within 15 days,
the applicant may then file with the Building Commissioner a written demand
that action be taken immediately. If the Building Commissioner fails to act
within three days after receipt of the written demand, the applicant may
treat the application as denied and may appeal from such denial to the
Planning and Zoning Commission in the manner and subject to the standards of
§ 156.198.




   (D)   Period of validity.  No building permit shall be valid for a
period longer than 180 days from the date of its issuance unless the work
authorized by it is substantially under way by the end of the period.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.196  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.




   (A)   Certificate required.  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy
or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued therefor by the Building Commissioner. No such
certificate shall be issued unless the proposed use or occupancy complies
with all the provisions of this chapter.  Any certificate of occupancy
issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be void.





   (B)   Application.  Every application for a building permit shall
also be deemed an application for a certificate of occupancy. Where no
building permit is required, an application for a certificate of occupancy
shall be made to the Building Commissioner in such form as he may from time
to time provide.





   (C)   Issuance.  No certificate of occupancy for a building,
structure or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date of this
chapter, shall be issued until construction has been completed and the
premises inspected and certified to be in conformity with the plans and
specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based. Pending issuance
of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued, to be valid
for a period not to exceed six months from its date, during the completion of
any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises.  A certificate of
occupancy shall be issued, or written notice shall be given to the applicant,
stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later than 15
days after the Building Commissioner is notified in writing that the building
or premises are ready for occupancy.




   (D)   Period of validity.  No certificate of occupancy shall be
valid for a period longer than 90 days from the date of its issuance unless
the use or occupancy authorized by it shall have been established within such
period.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)  Penalty, see § 156.999



§ 156.197  VARIATIONS.




   (A)   Authority.  In specific cases in which there are practical
difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the regulations of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have the power and duty to determine and vary the applicants of such
regulations, in harmony with their general purpose and intent, but only in
accordance with the requirements hereinafter set forth.





   (B)   Application and notice of hearing.  An application for a
variation shall be filed in duplicate with the Village Clerk, who shall
forward a copy of the application to the Board without delay. The application
shall be in such form, contain such information, and be accompanied by such
plans, as the Board may by rule require. The Board shall hold a public
hearing on such application not more than 60 days after its filing. Notice of
the time and place of such public hearing shall be published at least once,
not more than 30 days or less than 15 days before the hearing, in a newspaper
of general circulation in the village. The published notice may be
supplemented by such additional form of notice as the Board may provide by
rule.





   (C)   Standards.





      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not vary the
provisions of this chapter as authorized in this section, unless it shall
have made findings based upon the evidence presented to it in the following
cases:





         (a)   That the property in question cannot yield a
reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed
by the regulations governing the district in which it is located;





         (b)   That the plight of the owner is due to unique
circumstances; or





         (c)   That the variation, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality.





      (2)   A variation shall be permitted only if the evidence, in
the judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission, sustains each of the
three conditions enumerated above.





      (3)   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards,
the Planning and Zoning Commission, in making this determination whenever
there are practical difficulties or particular hardship,





shall also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts,
favorable to the applicant, have been established by the evidence:





         (a)   That the particular physical surroundings, shape
or topographical conditions of the specific property involved will bring a
particular hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;





         (b)   That the conditions upon which the petition for
variation is based would not be applicable generally to other property within
the same zone's classification;





         (c)   That the purpose of the variation is not based
exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property;





         (d)   That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not
been created by any person presently having an interest in the property;





         (e)   That the granting of the variation will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or unduly injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located, or





         (f)   That the proposed variation will not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially
increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public safety, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.





      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may require each
condition and restriction upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may
be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this section to reduce
or minimize the effect of such variation upon other property in the
neighborhood, and to implement the general purpose and intent of this chapter.





   (D)   Authorized variations.  Variations from the regulations of
this chapter shall be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission only in
accordance with the standards set out in this section and may be granted only
in the following instances, and in no others:





      (1)   To permit any yard or setback less than a yard or a
setback required by the applicable regulations.





      (2)   To permit the use of a lot or lots of record on the
effective date of this chapter for a use otherwise prohibited solely because
of insufficient area of width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the
respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than 90% of the required
area and width.





      (3)   To permit the same off-street parking facility to
qualify as required facilities for two or more uses, provided that
substantial use of such facility by each user does not take place at
approximately the same hours of the same days of the week.





      (4)   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading
facilities required by 20% of the applicable regulations.





      (5)   To increase by not more than 25% the maximum distance
that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served.





      (6)   To increase by not more than 20% the gross area of a
sign.




      (7)   To modify any requirement of § 156.023, Accessory
Buildings.



   (E)   Effective period.  No order of the Board granting a variation
shall be valid for a period longer than 180 days from the date of such order
unless a building permit is obtained within such period and the erection or
alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within such
period. The Board may grant one extension of this period, valid for no more
than 180 additional days, upon written application, and good cause shown,
without notice or hearing. If any of the benefits conferred by any variation,
whether heretofore or hereafter granted, are abandoned, or are not utilized
for any continuous period of one year, the variation shall, to the extent of
such abandonment or nonutilization, become void.



   (F)   Decisions.  Not more than 60 days after the close of the
public hearing, the Board shall make its findings of fact and its
determination, in writing, and shall forthwith transmit a copy thereof to the
applicant. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to grant a variation.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 1809, passed 6-1-15)



§ 156.198  APPEALS.




   (A)   Authority.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and
decide appeals from an administrative order, requirement, or determination
under this chapter.





   (B)   Scope of appeals.  An appeal, in which it is alleged that
there is error in any decision made by the Building Commissioner under this
chapter, may be taken to the Board by any person or governmental agency
aggrieved by such decision or by any department, officer, board or bureau of
the village. Such an appeal shall be taken, within such time as shall be
prescribed by the Board by rule, by filing with the Village Clerk a notice of
appeal in such form as the Board may provide by rule.  The Building
Commissioner shall, without delay, forward to the Board a copy of the notice
of appeal together with all of the papers constituting the record upon which
the decision appealed from was made.





   (C)   Stay of proceedings.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision appealed unless the Building Commissioner
certifies to the Board, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with
him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
proceedings shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the  Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to
the Building Commissioner and on due cause shown.





   (D)   Hearing.  The Board shall select a reasonable time and place
for the hearing of the appeal and give notice thereof to the parties,
including the appellant, the Building Commissioner, and any other affected
party who has requested in writing that he be so notified.




   (E)   Decisions.  The Board shall render a written decision on the
appeal within a reasonable time, but in no event more than 60 days after the
filing of the notice of appeal, and shall promptly forward a copy of the
decision to the parties. The Board may affirm or may, upon the concurring
vote of four members, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify, the decision of
the Building Commissioner, as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that
end shall have all the powers of the Building Commissioner. All decisions,
after hearing, of the Planning and Zoning Commission on appeals from an
administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building
Commissioner shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations
and shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable
state statutes.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.199  SPECIAL USE PERMITS.




   (A)   Purpose.  This chapter is based upon the division of the
village into districts, within which the uses of land, and the uses and bulk
of buildings and structures, are substantially uniform. It is recognized,
however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique
characteristics, can only be properly classified in any particular district
or districts upon consideration in each case of the impact of those uses upon
neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the
particular location. Such special uses fall into two categories:





      (1)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a
public interest; and





      (2)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an
unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with
respect to their impact upon neighboring property, public facilities or the
village as a whole.





   (B)   Authority.  Special uses permits may be granted by the
Village Board, but only in accordance with the requirements hereinafter set
forth.





   (C)   Application and notice of hearing.  An application for a
special use permit shall be filed in duplicate with the Village Clerk, who
shall forward a copy of the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission
without delay. The application shall be in such form, contain such
information, and be accompanied by such plans, as the Planning and Zoning
Commission may by rule require.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
hold a public hearing on such application not more than 60 days after its
filing.  Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at
least once, not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before the hearing,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The published notice
may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the Planning and
Zoning Commission may provide by rule.





   (D)   Report.  Within 60 days after the close of the hearing,
unless the applicant shall have consented to a longer period, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the Village Board shall a written
report giving its findings and recommendations for action to be taken by the
Village Board on the application. The report shall include any recommended
conditions or restrictions to be imposed upon the premises benefitted by the
special use permit.





   (E)   Standards.





      (1)   No special use permit may be granted unless:





         (a)   The proposed use is designated by this chapter as
a special use in the district in which the use is to be located.





         (b)   The proposed use will comply with all applicable
regulations in the district in which the use is to be located.





         (c)   The location and size of the proposed use, the
nature and intensity of the operation involved in or conducted in connection
with it, the size of the site in relation to it, and the location of the site
with respect to streets giving access to it are such that it will be in
harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which
it is located.





         (d)   The location, nature and height of buildings,
walls and fences, and the nature and extent of the landscaping on the site
are such  that the use will not unreasonably hinder or discourage the
appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings.





         (e)   Parking areas will be of adequate size for the
particular use, properly located and suitably screened from adjoining uses,
and the entrance and exit drives will be laid out so as to prevent traffic
hazards and nuisances.





         (f)   The proposed use will not cause substantial injury
to the value of other property in the neighborhood.





         (g)   Conditions in the area have substantially changed,
and at least one year has elapsed since any denial by the Village Board of
any prior application for a special use permit that would have authorized
substantially the same use of all or part of the site.





      (2)   The Village Board shall impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a special use permit as may be
necessary to assure compliance with the above standards, to reduce or
minimize the effect of such permit upon other properties in the neighborhood,
and to better carry out the general intent of this chapter. Failure to comply
with such conditions or restrictions shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.





   (F)   Effective period.  No special use permit shall be valid for a
period longer than 180 days from the date it is granted unless a building
permit or certificate of occupancy is obtained within such period and the
erection or alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced
within such period. The Council may grant one extension of this period, valid
for no more than 180 additional days, upon written application and good cause
shown, without notice or hearing. If any special use is abandoned, or is
discontinued for a continuous period of one year, the special use permit for
such use shall become void, and such use shall not thereafter be
reestablished unless a new special use permit is obtained.





   (G)   Decision.  The Village Board, upon report of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any
proposed special use in accordance with applicable state statutes, or may
refer it back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration.




   (H)   Planned unit development.  A planned unit development shall
be granted a special use.  The standards, requirements, and procedures
granted shall be in accord with §§ 156.135 through 156.141.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.200  AMENDMENTS.




   (A)   Authority.  The regulations and districts established by this
chapter may be amended from time to time, by the Village Board through the
enactment of an amending ordinance. No such amendment shall be made without a
public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission and after a report
of findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Village Board by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.





   (B)   Initiation.





      (1)   Amendments may be proposed by the Board of Trustees,
Planning and Zoning Commission, and by any other person, firm or corporation
having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an
option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest which is
specifically enforceable on the land which is described in the application
for an amendment.





      (2)   No application for amendment to this chapter  shall be
made which proposes reclassification of any of the same property for the same
zoning district that has been the subject of a public hearing held by the
Planning and Zoning Commission within the 12 months preceding the date of
filing.





   (C)   Processing.  The process for obtaining an amendment shall be
as follows:





      (1)   An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
Village Clerk, and thereafter entered into the records of the first meeting
thereafter of the Village Board.





      (2)   A copy of such application shall thereafter be forwarded
by the Village Clerk to the Planning and Zoning Commission with a request to
hold a public hearing and submit to the Village Board a report of its
findings and recommendations.





      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public
hearing within 60 days after receiving the application from the Village
Board.  Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at
least once, not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before the hearing,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the village.





      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within 60 days
after the hearing, transmit a written report giving its findings and
recommendations to the Village Board.





   (D)   Decisions.





      (1)   The Village Board, upon report of the Planning and
Zoning Commission without further public hearing, may grant or deny any
proposed amendment in accordance with applicable state statutes or may refer
it back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration.





      (2)   If no action is taken by the Village Board within six
months after the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
application shall be deemed to have been denied and shall not thereafter be
granted.





      (3)   In case a written protest against any proposed amendment
signed and acknowledged by owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be
altered, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining, or by
owners 20% of the frontage directly opposite  the  frontage  to be altered
is  filed  with  the Village Clerk, the amendment cannot be passed except
on the favorable vote of two-thirds of all members of the Village Board.





   (E)   Notice required prior to the amendment of any zoning district
or the issuance of any special use permit.





      (1)   The petitioner for an amendment to the zoning map or for
the issuance of a special use permit shall post notice of the public hearing
on the property for which the amendment or special use is sought.  The
petitioner and/or his assigned agent is required to erect at least one sign
for every 500 linear feet of street frontage with a minimum of one sign on
each street abutting the property.  The signs required herein shall be
provided by the village and must be posted not more than 30 nor less than 15
days prior to the public hearing.  The petitioner shall provide a sworn
certificate to the Planning and Zoning Commission that the signs required
herein were posted upon the subject property in accordance with this chapter.





      (2)   The petitioner shall also give written notice of the
proposed amendment or special use permit to the owner of record, as shown on
the record of the local real estate tax collector, of all lots lying within
250 feet, exclusive of public right-of-ways, of the property line for which
the amendment or special use is sought.  The written notice shall be
delivered personally or may be sent by certified or registered mail, properly
addressed, with sufficient postage or affixed thereon, with return receipt
requested.  The petitioner shall file with the Village Clerk a sworn
affidavit with copies of the notice showing the names and addresses of the
persons to whom the written notice was sent.  The affidavit shall create a
presumption of the giving of the notices, any notice returned “unclaimed”
shall be considered effective.  The notice required herein shall be mailed
not more than 30 nor less than 15 days prior to the public hearing and shall
minimally recite the amendment or special use sought; the location of the
property involved; the common address, if any; the name of the petitioner;
and the date and time for the public hearing.




      (3)   The failure to provide written notice or post signs as
required herein shall be grounds for denial or deferral of the petition;
however, the notice and signage are not jurisdictional.  Amendments or
special  uses duly approved by the appropriate village authority shall not
be set aside because of a failure to give written notice or post the signs as
required herein.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 602, passed 7-26-90)



§ 156.201  TEMPORARY PERMITS.




   (A)   Authority.  The Building Commissioner is authorized by this
chapter to issue a temporary permit for uses specifically authorized in
particular zoning districts as temporary permit uses.





   (B)   Application.  An application for a temporary permit shall be
made to the Building Commissioner in writing on a form provided by the
village. The Building Commissioner shall issue a permit only after he is
satisfied that the use allowed by the temporary permit will not adversely
affect the public health, safety or general welfare of the village and/or
immediate neighborhood.





   (C)   Hearing.  The Building Commissioner may, if he so desires,
hold a public hearing on the request for a temporary permit, or may contact
the property owners affected by the proposed use regarding their opinion of
the use.





   (D)   Conditions.  The Building Commissioner may require that
certain conditions relating to the public health, safety or general welfare
be complied with before the issuance of a temporary permit.




   (E)   Decisions.  The Building Commissioner shall render a written
decision on the application for a temporary permit within a reasonable time
and promptly forward a copy of the decision to the petitioner. Appeals from
the decision of the Building Commissioner can be made to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.202  FEES.



   (A)   The Village Board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges
and expenses required for building permits, zoning certificates, certificates
of occupancy, variations, special use permits, temporary use permits,
amendments, planned unit development approvals and other matters pertaining
to this chapter.



   (B)   Until all such required fees have been paid, no application
for any of the above shall be deemed to have been filed and no action shall
be taken on such application.



   (C)   All fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk, and none shall in
any event be refunded.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71)



§ 156.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter, for which another penalty is not specifically
provided, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500
for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist after
notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, or land, and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found
guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.



   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 95, passed 4-5-71; Am. Ord. 1559, passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 1618, passed
5-3-10)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 157:  SOIL EROSION REGULATIONS



Section



   157.01   Purpose



   157.02   Definitions



   157.03   General principles



   157.04   Site development permit



   157.05   Design and operation standards and requirements



   157.06   Enforcement



   157.07   Violations prohibited



 



   157.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Flood hazard prevention, see Ch. 153



   Stormwater detention, see §§ 51.60 - 51.67



§ 157.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property,
prevent damage to the environment, and promote the public welfare by guiding,
regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of
any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or
otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the village. 
It is the intention of this chapter that the delivery of sediment from sites
affected by land disturbing activities be limited, as closely as practicable,
to that which would have occurred if the land had been left in its natural
undisturbed state.



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)



§ 157.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter certain terms used herein are defined
as set forth below:



   BUILDING PERMIT.  A permit issued by the village for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.



   CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION.  Formally attesting that the specific
inspections and tests where required have been performed, and that such tests
comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.



   CLEARING.  Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.



   CUBIC YARDS.  The amount of material in excavation or fill measured by
the method of “average end areas.”



   EXCAVATION.  Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel,
rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.



   EXISTING GRADE.  The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to excavation or filling.



   FILL.  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported
or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.



   FINAL GRADE.  The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface
after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development
plan.



   GRADING.  Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall
include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.



   NATURAL DRAINAGE.  Channels formed in the existing surface topography
of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.



   PARCEL.  All contiguous land in one ownership.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.



   PERMITTING AUTHORITY.  The Director of Development of the village.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the
State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United
States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent,
servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.



   REMOVAL.  Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete
extraction, or killing by spraying.



   SITE.  A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof,
where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



   SITE DEVELOPMENT.  Altering terrain or vegetation for non-agricultural
purposes.



   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  A permit issued by the village for the
construction or alteration of ground improvements, altering terrain or
vegetation for non-agricultural purposes for the control of erosion, runoff
and grading.



   STREAM.  Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural
or man-made drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in
or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or
intermittently.  For purposes of this chapter, a stream does not include
very small head water swales or ditches which generally would not be mapped
on U.S.G.S. 7.5 minute quadrangle maps.



   STRIPPING.  Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover
including tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of top soil.



   VACANT.  Land on which there are no structures or only structures
which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Channahon, Will County, Illinois.



   WETLANDS.  Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, and which are subject to regulations
of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)



§ 157.03  GENERAL PRINCIPLES.



   It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion and
sedimentation caused by development activities, including clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating, and filling of land, in the village.  Measures taken
to control soil erosion and offsite sediment runoff should be adequate to
assure that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event of
ten-year frequency or less.  The following principles shall apply to all
development activities within the village and to the preparation of the
submissions required under § 157.04:



      (1)   Development should be related to the topography and
soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion.  Areas of
steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided
wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as
possible.



      (2)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected
wherever possible.  Areas within 25 feet of natural watercourses, lakes,
ponds, and wetlands should be left undisturbed wherever possible.  Temporary
crossing of watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate
stabilization measures.



      (3)   Special precautions should be taken to prevent damages
resulting from any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any
stream, lake, pond, or wetland.  Preventative measures should reflect the
sensitivity of these areas to erosion and sedimentation.



      (4)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed
for the shortest practical time during development.



      (5)   Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions,
and any other appropriate sediment or runoff control measures should be
installed prior to site clearing and grading and maintained to remove
sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing development.



      (6)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control
measures should be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic
and other events likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the
risks, costs, and benefits involved.



      (7)   In the design of erosion control facilities and
practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should
be considered.



      (8)   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes
to other land uses should be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover
prior to development.



      (9)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed
and functional as soon as practical during development.



      (10)   Provision should be made to accommodate the increased
run-off caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.  Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients
and the resultant velocities and rates of discharge will not create
additional erosion onsite or downstream.



      (11)   All waste generated as a result of site development
activity should be properly disposed of and should be prevented from being
carried off the site by either wind or water.



      (12)   All construction sites should provide measures to
prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)



§ 157.04  SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit necessity.  Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, no person shall commence or perform any clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating, or filling of land which meets the following
provisions without having first obtained a site development permit from the
permitting authority of the village:



      (1)   Any land disturbing activity, such as clearing, grading,
stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination thereof, that will affect an
area in excess of 5,000 square feet.



      (2)   Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in
excess of 500 square feet if the activity is within 25 feet of a lake, pond,
stream, or wetland.



      (3)   Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof that will
exceed 100 cubic yards.



   (B)   Exceptions.  A permit shall not be required for any of the
following provided that the person responsible for any such development shall
implement necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures to satisfy the
principles set forth in § 157.03:



      (1)   Excavation below final grade for the basement and
footings of a single family residence and appurtenant structures on a site in
excess of two acres for which a building permit has been issued by the
village.



      (2)   Agricultural use of land, including the implementation
of conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the
Will-South Cook Soil and Water Conservation District or the Grundy County
Soil and Water Conservation District, and including the construction of
agricultural structures.



      (3)   Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic
system to serve an existing dwelling or structure.



   (C)   Application.  Application for a site development permit shall
be made by the owner of the property or authorized agent to the permitting
authority on a form furnished for that purpose.  Each application shall bear
the names and addresses of the owners or developers of the site and of any
consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the
applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a
filling fee of $150.  Each application shall include certification that any
land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth
shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit.



   (D)   Submissions.  Each application for a site development permit
shall be accompanied by the following information:



      (1)   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy
location in the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and
including the boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing
zoning, and a legend and scale.



      (2)   A development plan of the site showing:



         (a)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land
within approximately 100 feet of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two
foot contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage
pattern of the area.



         (b)   The location of existing buildings, structures,
utilities, streams, lakes, flood plains, wetlands and depressions, drainage
facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas, and other significant natural or
man made features on the site and adjacent land within 100 feet of the
boundary.



         (c)   A general description of the predominant soil
types on the site their location, and their limitations for the proposed use.



         (d)   Proposed use of the site, including present
development and planned utilization; areas of clearing, stripping, grading,
excavation, and filling; finished grades, and street profiles; provisions for
storm drainage, including storm sewers, swales, detention basins and any
other measures to control the rate of runoff; a drainage area map,
indications of flow directions, and computations; kinds and locations of
utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or
seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed.



      (3)   An erosion and sediment control plan showing all
measures necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all
phases of construction and permanently after completion of development of the
site, including:



         (a)   Location and description, including standard
details, of all sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment
basins and traps, including outlet details.



         (b)   Location and description of all soil stabilization
and erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of
sod, method of seed bed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of
lime and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both
temporary and permanent vegetative control measures, and types of
non-vegetative stabilization measures.



         (c)   Location and description of all runoff control
measures, including diversions, waterways, and outlets.



         (d)   Location and description of methods to prevent
tracking of sediment offsite, including construction entrance details, as
appropriate.



         (e)   Description of dust and traffic control measures.



         (f)   Locations of stockpiles and description of
stabilization methods.



         (g)   Description of off-site fill or borrow volumes,
locations, and methods of stabilization.



         (h)   Provisions for maintenance of control measures,
including type and frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the
cost of maintenance.



         (i)   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of
the persons or entities which will have legal responsibility for maintenance
of erosion control structures and measures during development and after
development is completed.



      (4)   The proposed phasing of development of the site,
including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final
grading and landscaping. 



         (a)   Phasing should identify the expected date on which
clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and
the sequence of installation of temporary sediment control measures
(including perimeter controls) clearing, grading, installation of temporary
soil stabilization measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets
and parking areas, final grading and the establishment of permanent
vegetative cover, and the removal of temporary measures.  It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to notify the permitting authority of any
significant changes which occur in the site development schedule after the
initial erosion and sediment control plan has been approved.



         (b)   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and the standards  and requirements
contained in “Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control” (the Yellow Book) published by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and the “Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control” (the Green Book) prepared by the
Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering
Committee and adopted by the Will-South Cook Soil and Water Conservation
District, which standards and requirements are hereby incorporated into this
chapter by reference.



         (c)   The permitting authority may waive specific
requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information
submitted is sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives
and principles of this chapter.



   (E)   Bonds.  The applicant is required to file with the village a
faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other
performance/improvement security satisfactory to the village attorney in an
amount deemed sufficient by the permitting authority to cover all costs of
improvement, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and landscaping, and
soil erosion and sediment control measures for such period as specified by
the village in the site development permit, and engineering and inspection
cost to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the
site.



   (F)   Review and approval.  Each application for a site development
permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:



      (1)   The permitting authority will review each application
for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.  The permitting authority may also refer any
application to any other local government or public agency within whose
jurisdiction the site is located for review and comment.  Within 30 days
after receiving a completed application, the permitting authority shall in
writing:



         (a)   Approve the permit application if it is found to
be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and issue the permit.



         (b)   Approve the permit application subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions.



         (c)   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application or
submission.



      (2)   No site development permit shall be issued for an
intended development site unless:



         (a)   The site development plan, including but not
limited to subdivisions and planned unit development, has been approved by
the village where applicable.



         (b)   All relevant federal and state permits, such as 
for flood plains and wetlands, have been received for the portion of the site
subject to soil disturbance.



      (3)   Failure of the permitting authority to act on an
original or revised application within 30 days of receipt shall authorize the
applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time
is extended by agreement between the permitting authority and the
applicant.  Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development
activities may be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions
established by the permitting authority.



   (G)   Expiration of permit.  Every site development permit shall
expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not
been commenced within 180 days, or is not completed by a date which shall be
specified in the permit; except that the permitting authority may, if the
permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have
prevented work being commenced or completed within the specified time limits,
grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before
the expiration date of the permit.  The permitting authority may require
modification of the erosion control plan to prevent any increase in erosion
or offsite sediment runoff resulting from any extension.



   (H)   Appeals.  The applicant, or any person or agency which
received notice of the filing of the application, may appeal the decision of
the permitting authority as provided in § 157.04(F), to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.  Upon receipt of an appeal, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving 15 days
notice thereof. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall render a decision
within 30 days after the hearing.  Factors to be considered on review shall
include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed development
activities on the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands, any
comprehensive watershed management plans, or the use of any retention
facilities; possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both
natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting
of drainageways; nature and type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the
proposed development activities may create earth movement and produce slopes
that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the
natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation.



   (I)   Retention of plans.  Plans, specifications, and reports for
all site developments shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by
the permitting authority.



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)



§ 157.05  DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General.  All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and
filling which is subject to the permit requirements of this chapter shall be
subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this
section.



   (B)   Liability.  The permittee shall not be relieved of
responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law,
and the village or its officers or agents will not be made liable for such
damage, by (1) the issuance of a permit under this chapter, (2) compliance
with the provisions of that permit or with conditions attached to it by the
permitting authority, (3) failure of village officials to observe or
recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, (4) failure of village officials
to recommend denial of or to deny a permit, or (5) exemptions from the permit
requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Site design requirements.



      (1)   On-site sediment control measures, as specified by the
following criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating
clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site.



         (a)   For disturbed areas draining less than one acre,
filter barriers (including filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control
measures) shall be constructed to control all offsite runoff as specified in
referenced hand books.  Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of 25
feet, may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is
expected.



         (b)   For disturbed areas draining more than one but
less than five acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be
constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area.



         (c)   For disturbed areas draining more than five acres,
a sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the
downslope point of the disturbed area.



         (d)   Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall be
in accordance with the Yellow and Green Book.



         (e)   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the
estimated sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the
construction period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of
sediment generated in one year.  For construction periods exceeding one
year, the one year sediment load and a sediment removal schedule may be
substituted.



      (2)   Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches,
swales, and diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be
designed and constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the
10-year frequency storm without erosion.  All constructed or modified
channels shall be stabilized within 48 hours, consistent with the following
standards:



         (a)   For grades up to 4%, seeding in combination with
mulch, erosion blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. 
Sod or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.



         (b)   For grades of 4% to 8%, sod or an equivalent
control measure shall be applied in the channel.



         (c)   For grades greater than 8%, rock, riprap, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied, or the grade shall be
effectively reduced using drop structures.



      (3)   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or
permanent measures within seven calendar days following the end of active
disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:



         (a)   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization
measures shall include seeding, mulching, sodding, and non-vegetative
measures.



         (b)   Areas having grades greater than 12% shall be
stabilized with sod, mat or blanket in combination with seeding, or
equivalent.



      (4)   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be
avoided, where possible.  If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the
following requirements shall be met:



         (a)   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the
stream channel to the maximum extent practicable.  Where construction
crossings are necessary, temporary crossings shall be constructed of
non-erosive material, such as riprap or gravel.



         (b)   The time and area of disturbance of stream
channels shall be kept to a minimum.  The stream channel, including bed and
banks, shall be restabilized within 48 hours after channel disturbance is
completed, interrupted, or stopped.



         (c)   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new
channel shall be constructed in the dry and shall be fully stabilized before
flow is diverted.



      (5)   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by
sediment traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and
specifications.



      (6)   Soil storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards
of material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less
than 25 feet to a roadway or drainage channel.  Filter barriers, including
straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be installed immediately on
the downslope side of the piles.



      (7)   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations
shall be protected from erosion.  All pumped discharges shall be routed
through appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent.



      (8)   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance
roads, access drives, and parking areas of sufficient length and width to
prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.  Any
sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or
street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported
to a controlled sediment disposal area.



      (9)   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control
practices must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective
performance of their intended function.



      (10)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures
shall be disposed of within 30 days after final site stabilization is
achieved with permanent soil stabilization measures.  Trapped sediment and
other disturbed soils resulting from the disposal of temporary measures
should be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.



   (D)   Handbooks adopted by reference.  The standards and
specifications contained in “Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control” (the Yellow Book) and the “Illinois Procedures
and  Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control” (the
Green Book) cited in § 157.04, are hereby incorporated into this section and
made a part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and
methods of operation under site development and erosion and sedimentation
control plans approved under § 157.04.  In the event of conflict between
provisions of such manuals and of this chapter, the chapter shall govern.



   (E)   Maintenance of control measures.  All soil erosion and
sediment control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter
shall be maintained periodically by the applicant or subsequent land owner
during the period of land disturbance and development of the site in a
satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance.



   (F)   Inspection.



      (1)   The permitting authority shall make periodic inspections
and shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the site
development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved.



      (2)   If stripping, clearing, grading or landscaping are to be
done in phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request
inspection at the completion of each work stage in each phase or area.  If
an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five
working days after notice is received by the village from the permittee, the
permittee may continue work at his own risk, without presuming acceptance by
the village. Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given in
writing.



   (G)   Special precautions.



      (1)   If at any stage of the grading of any development site
the permitting authority determines by inspection that the nature of the site
is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to
imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage
structure, the permitting authority may require, as a condition of allowing
the work to be done, that reasonable special precautions be considered
advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril.  "Special precautions" may
include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope,
construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction,
or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and
recommendations of a registered soils engineer or engineering geologist may
be made requirements for further work.



      (2)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because
the grading on any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and
the permittee required to install temporary structures or take such other
measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public
safety.  On large developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the
permitting authority may specify the time of starting grading and time of
completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages
so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the
advent of seasonal rains.



   (H)   Amendment of plans.  Major amendments of the site development
or erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the
permitting authority and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in
the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature
may be authorized by the permitting authority.



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)



§ 157.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Exceptions.



      (1)   The permitting authority upon advice of the village
engineer may, in accordance with the following procedures, authorize
exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this
chapter.



      (2)   Application for any exception shall be made by a
verified petition of the applicant for a site development permit, stating
fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon by the
applicant.  Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit
application.  In order for the petition to be granted, it shall be necessary
that the permitting authority find all of the following facts with respect to
the land referred to in the petition:



         (a)   That the land is of such shape or size or is
affected by such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations
of record, that it is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply
with all of the requirements of this chapter.



         (b)   That the exception is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant.



         (c)   That the granting of the exception will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the
vicinity of the subject property.



   (B)   Stop work order; revocation of permit.  In the event any
person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates
the terms of the permit, or carries on site development in such a manner as
to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood of the development site or so as to
be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood, the permitting authority may suspend or
revoke the site development permit.



      (1)   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work
order issued by the permitting authority and delivered to the permittee or
his agent or the person performing the work.  The stop work order shall be
effective immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall
state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      (2)   Any person affected by a decision of the permitting
authority shall have the right to appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20
days after the day the decision, notice or order was served.



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)



§ 157.07  VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any terms of this chapter. 



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued,
or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. 



   (B)   Upon conviction of any such violation, such person,
partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
for each offense. 



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section,
any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to restore the site to the
condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the
expense of such restoration.



(Ord. 868, passed 11-20-95)



CHAPTER 158:  LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE



Section




General Provisions




   158.01   Definitions




Village Tree Board




   158.20   Creation and establishment



   158.21   Term of office



   158.22   Compensation



   158.23   Duties and responsibilities



   158.24   Operation




Standards




   158.35   Applicability



   158.36   Landscape design criteria



   158.37   Tree preservation



   158.38   Public tree care



   158.39   Maintenance standards



   158.40   Tree removal and topping



   158.41   Pruning, corner clearance



   158.42   Private property tree removal



   158.43   Removal of stumps



   158.44   Corporate authority interference



 



   158.99   Penalty



   Appendix A: Overstory trees



   Appendix B: Understory trees



   Appendix C: Street trees



   Appendix D: Evergreen trees



   Appendix E: Preservation trees



   Appendix F: Stormwater detention/retention trees



   Appendix G: Unacceptable trees



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 158.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BERM.  An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).  A design or practice employed with
the primary objective to minimize adverse water quality impacts, preserve
beneficial features on-site, avoid downstream erosion and habitat loss,
maintain natural base flows and groundwater recharge, prevent increases to
downstream flooding, provide multiple uses of drainage and storm water
drainage facilities, and/or provide for the economical, safe, and
aesthetically pleasing drainage system for development.



   BUFFER.  A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such
as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and
screen incompatible land uses from each other.



   CALIPER.  A circumferential measurement of a tree's truck recorded six
inches above the grade for those trees having a caliper of four inches or
less, and 12 inches above grade for those trees with a caliper of above four
inches.



   DECIDUOUS.  A plant with foliage that is shed annually.



   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT.  A lot abutting two  parallel streets, or two
streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.



   DRIP LINE. A circle area that could be drawn on the soil around a tree
directly under the tips of the outermost branches.



   EVERGREEN.  A plant with foliage that persists and remains green
year-round.



   LANDSCAPED AREA.  An area which consists of living landscape material.



   LIVING LANDSCAPE. Low growing woody or herbaceous ground cover, turf,
shrubs, and trees.



   NATURALIZED LANDSCAPE. Ecologically sensitive landscaping that uses
regionally native plant species to create, improve or restore specialized and
self-sustaining plant communities (prairie, woodland, etc.).



   OVERSTORY TREE.  A self-supporting woody plant having at least one
well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and spread
of at least 30 feet, and having a trunk that may at maturity, be kept clear
of leaves and branches at least eight feet above grade.



   PARKWAY. That portion of village owned property between the curb line,
shoulder line, traveled portion of the roadway or alley and the private
property line.



   SCREEN.  An area of planting which provides an effective visual
barrier.



   STREET TREES. Any tree or part of a tree, existing or new planting,
including the canopy and root system that lies on or has grown onto or over
public property, or in public right- of-way owned by the village.



   TRANSITION YARD.  That portion of yard that separates two incompatible
uses.



   TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.



   UNDERSTORY TREE. A self supporting woody plant having at least one
well-defined stem or trunk or normally attaining a mature height and spread
of less than 30 feet with branching less than eight feet above grade.



   VEHICULAR USE AREAS. All areas subject to vehicular traffic including,
but not limited to, access ways, driveways, loading areas, service areas, and
parking stalls for all types of vehicles. This definition shall not apply to
covered parking structures or underground parking lots.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



VILLAGE TREE BOARD



§ 158.20  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created and established a Village Tree Board
(hereinafter referred to as Board) for the village, which will consist of
five members, citizens and residents of this village, who will be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Village Board; members once appointed
may be removed in like manner.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



§ 158.21  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the five persons to be appointed shall be three years,
except that the initial term of two of the members appointed to the first
Board shall be for only one year, and the initial term of two members of the
first Board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur
during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term. All members shall serve until their successors
are duly appointed and qualified.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



§ 158.22  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



§ 158.23  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study,
investigate, counsel, develop (and/or update), and administer a written plan
for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of street trees. Such a plan will be presented annually to the
Village Planning and Zoning Commission and, upon their acceptance and
approval, shall constitute the official Village Tree Plan.



   (B)   The Board, when requested by the Village Board or Planning and
Zoning Commission, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and
recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its
work.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



§ 158.24  OPERATION.



   The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



STANDARDS



§ 158.35  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Administration.



      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
development herein after the effective date of this chapter and any
development which has not received final plat approval, and explicitly does
not apply to any existing single family detached housing.



      (2)   For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or
use which is in existence on the effective date of this chapter which is
subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or
other cause, and is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired at a cost that
exceeds 50% of the value of the building or use, landscaping shall be
provided as required by this chapter for equivalent new use or construction.



      (3)   All requirements in this chapter are minimum
requirements. Provision of landscaping in excess of these requirements is
encouraged and may be required when necessary to achieve the purpose of these
regulations.



      (4)    The requirements of this chapter shall take precedence
over any other ordinance, resolution, and orders or parts thereof, with
conflicting requirements.



   (B)   Areas of responsibility.



      (1)   Landscape plan requirements.



         (a)   Landscape plans.  Landscape plans shall be
required as part of all development scenarios, and shall be submitted and
approved by the same procedure set forth in the Village Code for residential,
commercial, institutional, industrial development, and planned unit
development site plans.



            1.   Single- family detached residential
developments of seven or more units; any single-family detached residential
development with less units or individually separated lots are not required
to submit landscape plans, but the developer or housing contractor must still
comply with all regulations as describe herein.



            2.   Single- family and multi-family attached
residential developments.



            3.    Commercial,  industrial,  institutional 
or public purpose development.



            4.   Any modification of existing structures,
(excluding single-family detached structures) that either increases the
footprint by 25%, or where the cost of improvements exceeds the value of the
existing structure by 50%. Existing value shall be determined by the value of
the building or stated in most recent tax bill as provided by the owner. The
owner shall provide the estimated costs of improvements.



         (b)   The landscape plan shall show exact locations and
quantities of landscape features. Each proposed plant shall be identified as
to botanical and common name, size and installed condition (balled and
burlapped, container, etc).



         (c)   At the preliminary plat stage (or P.U.D.
preliminary plat), a preliminary landscape plan, indicating general locations
and approximate quantities of landscape features shall be prepared. A list of
typical plants proposed shall be provided, including common and botanical
names, installed condition, and approximate sizes.



         (d)   All landscape plans shall include the following:



            1.   North point and scale.



            2.    Topographic information and proposed grades.



            3.   Proposed structures and pavement.



            4.   Existing utilities, above and or below ground.



            5.   Location, type, size, quantity and planting
condition (balled and burlapped, bare root, etc.) of all proposed landscape
materials.



            6.   Common and botanical scientific names of all
proposed plant material.



            7.   Location, size and common/botanical names of
existing vegetation that is to remain.



            8.    Identification of vegetation proposed to be
removed.



            9.   Symbols representing proposed plant material
shall be drawn to scale showing two-thirds of full mature size and labeled as
to quantity and type.



            10.   Location of underground irrigation system,
if any.



            11.   Location of drain tiles, downspouts and sump
pump discharge.



            12.   Planting schedule.



            13.   Stormwater retention/ detention pond
improvement plan(s).



            14.   Indication of all underground improvements
to include water, sewer, storm sewer, and any other such utility to ensure no
conflicts exist.



            15.   Berm cross sections including height, width,
plantings, seedings. (if applicable).



         (e)   Revising approved landscape plans.



            1.   Once a landscape plan has been approved and a
building permit issued, the village staff may authorize minor revisions to
the approved landscape plan including the substitution of equivalent
plantings and ground covers where such revisions do not diminish the benefits
of the approved landscape plan.



            2.   A revision shall be considered minor where
there is no significant reduction in the quality or quantity of plant
material, no significant change in size or location of plant material, and
new plants are of the same general category (overstory, ornamental,
evergreen, etc.) and have the same general design characteristics (mature
size, spread, density) as the materials being replaced.



      (2)   Existing public properties lacking appropriate street
tree plantings shall receive new infill planting on an ongoing basis. All
removed public trees shall be replaced with one or more new trees selected
from the approved street tree species.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



§ 158.36  LANDSCAPE DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Planting units: Planting units shall be calculated as follows:



 

One overstory tree

(2.5 " caliper)
 

10 plant units



One understory or ornamental tree

(2.5" caliper)
 

5 plant units



One evergreen tree

(10 ‘ or greater in vertical height)
 

8 plant units



One evergreen tree

(6' - 9' in vertical height)
 

5 plant units



One large shrub

(36" in height)
 

2 plant units



One small shrub

(24" in height)
 

1 plant unit



Perennials and ground cover

(per 100 sq. ft. of area)
 

1/2 plant unit




 



   (B)   Single-family detached residential:



      (1)   Parkway plantings will be required in accordance with
division (E) below.



      (2)   Certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all
landscape requirements have been met as described herein.



      (3)   All yards (front and side) of any single- family
residential must be complete with sod, and any rear yard must be seeded or
sodded.



      (4)   Double frontage lots: Landscaping shall be provided on
each double frontage lot along the frontage from which the lot does not have
access to the public right-of-way. The landscaping shall be located parallel
to the lot line and shall extend along the entire frontage. If a fence is
located along the frontage, the required landscaping shall be provided on the
side of the fence facing the public right-of-way. The landscaping shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements provided in § 158.36(B)(3) and
(4), depending on the classification of the adjacent right-of-way.



      (5)   Yard adjacent to a major collector right-of-way: A
minimum of a ten-foot wide landscape area shall be provided in any yard
adjacent to a major collector road and shall consist of a minimum of 40 plant
units per 80 linear feet of frontage. Twenty-five percent of the unit count
must be evergreen.







 



      (6)   Yard adjacent to an arterial right-of-way: A minimum of
a 20-foot wide landscape area shall be provided in any yard adjacent to an
arterial road and shall consist of a minimum of 65plant units per 80 linear
feet of frontage. Twenty-five percent of the unit count must be evergreen.
Berming and mounding height of two feet shall be incorporated into the
landscape plan.







 



      (7)   The requirements stated in divisions (B)(5) and (6)
above may be reduced or replaced if a buffer landscape area of 25 feet or
more and berm are installed between the collector or arterial road and the
adjacent yards. The berm must be at least six feet in height at a maximum of
3:1 slope and the buffer landscape area shall have a minimum of 40 plant
units per 100 linear feet of frontage. Creative landscaping techniques such
as undulating berms and staggering plantings should be implemented.



   (C)   Attached single-family housing/ multi- family housing:



      (1)   Parkway plantings will be required in accordance with
division (E) below.



      (2)   Certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all
landscape requirements have been met as described herein.



      (3)   All front and side yards shall be sodded and landscaped
with trees and shrubs. A minimum ratio of ten plant units shall be provided
for each 1,500 square feet of yard area. At least 75% of the plant material
must include overstory trees by unit count.



         b.   The foundation landscaping shall be located in a
planting bed a minimum of ten feet in width adjacent to the building.



         c.   The required foundation landscaping area shall
remain open and free of all paving except where sidewalks and driveways lead
directly into the building. In no case shall the foundation landscaping area
be reduced to extend across less than 50% of the building face due to said
sidewalks and driveways.



         d.   Foundation landscaping shall consist of a minimum
ratio of 30 plant units for every 1,000 square foot area of planting bed
which is within ten feet of the foundation. Flowers, ornamental grasses, and
groundcover may also be used.



         e.   The required foundation landscaping may be
relocated elsewhere on site provided in an alternate manner, such as through
the use of above ground planting containers or boxes per staff approval.



   (D)   Non-residential development:



      (1)   Parkway plantings will be required in accordance with
division (E) below.



      (2) Certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all
landscape requirements have been met as described herein.



      (3)   The landscape front yard shall be a minimum of 30% of
the total depth of the front yard setback and shall be reserved for
landscape/ greenspace use only, and the measurement of area shall not include
bike paths or sidewalks. The landscape front yard shall have a minimum of 80
plant units. If the development exceeds 600 feet of street frontage, 20 plant
units shall be planted per 100 feet. Plantings may be clustered in areas to
avoid a utilitarian look. (Parkway tree plantings not inclusive on plant unit
counts.)



      (4)   The landscaped side and rear yards shall have a minimum
ten-foot landscaped area within the setback, with a minimum 40 plant units.
If the development exceeds 600 feet of street frontage, ten plant units shall
be planted per 100 feet. These plantings may be clustered in areas to avoid a
utilitarian look. (Parkway tree plantings not inclusive on plant unit counts.)



      (5)   Foundation plantings shall be required along each wall
of the principal structure.



      (6)   All ground-based/monument signs shall have flower beds
with small shrubs. Monument signs shall be located with its surrounding
landscaping on the landscape plan.



      (7)   Transition yards:



         (a)   The required landscaping in transitional yards
shall be comprised of a combination of overstory trees, evergreen trees,
ornamental trees and large shrubs. If shrubs are used, they shall be
installed at a minimum height of four feet. Additional small shrubs may be
used, but shall not count toward meeting the landscape requirements.



         (b)   A minimum of a 25-foot wide landscaped screen
consisting of a minimum of 125 plant units per 100 linear feet of frontage
measured along the length of a common boundary between two units. Forty
percent of the plant material (by unit count) must be evergreen. The
landscape plan shall include a landscape berm, of no less than three feet in
height to be located in a landscape easement. Exceptions will be considered
if the berm is determined to conflict with the natural or proposed drainage
ways.



         (c)   At the direction of village staff the required
number of plant units may be reduced in the following percentages:



            1.   Up to a 75% reduction in plant material (by
unit count) for a solid fence structure with a minimum height of six feet,
constructed of a solid masonry or brick material, a combination of wood with
masonry structural supports, or materials as approved by village staff.



            2.   Up to a 50% reduction in plant material for
an earthen berm, a minimum of six feet high, with a maximum slope of 3:1.



         (d)   If existing woodlands are located within the
transitional yard, preservation of those woodlands may substitute for part or
all of the required landscaping. If existing woodlands are located in only
part of the transitional yard, the required number of plant units may be
proportionately reduced. If existing woodlands substitute for any portion of
the required landscaping, a six -foot high sight-proof, wood board fence
shall be provided along the edge of the preserved woodlands area. Any
reductions or substitutions will be approved at the discretion of the village
staff and all reductions or substitutions shall be indicated on the approved
landscape plan.



         (e)   The area of the transitional yard not planted with
trees, shrubs, or existing woodlands shall be planted with sod, live
groundcover, flowers, ornamental grasses or some combination thereof.



         (f)   When vehicle uses are in the area of the
transitional yard, a minimum 15 feet wide landscape strip shall be provided
along the length of the vehicle use area. The landscaping within this area
shall consist of one or more of the following options:



            1.   A minimum of 100 plant units per 1000 square
feet of area between the vehicle use area and the residential property.



            2.   An undulating berm or earth mounding that is
at least two and one-half feet high than the finished elevation of the
parking lot (at the nearest point) and 80 plant units per 1,000 square feet
of area between the vehicle use area and the residential property.



            3.   A minimum three-foot grade drop from the
property line to the vehicle use area, and 70 plant units per 1,000 square
feet of area between the vehicle use area and the public right-of-way.



            4.   A minimum 25-foot wide strip of existing
woodlands.



         (g)   Loading docks, service yards, and exterior work
areas. Service yards, loading docks and exterior work areas shall be screened
from view from public rights-of-way. The screening shall consist of either of
the following:



            1.   Sight-proof board fence constructed of
masonry material, cedar, or preservative treated lumber of a minimum six feet
in height.



            2.   All planting requirements shall be in
accordance with § 96.36(D).



         (h)   Open storage yards. In accordance with § 156.185,
if any storage area is within 150 feet of the nearest point of any
residential district, then all storage shall be in completely enclosed
buildings or structures. All open storage yards shall be screened on all
sides by solid walls or fences (including solid doors or gates thereto) in
accordance with § 156.185, then landscaping shall be provided at a minimum
ratio of 50 plant units for each 100 linear feet of the fence or wall visible
from the public right-of-way. The landscaping shall be in addition to the
fence or wall. The installed height of the landscaping shall be equal to or
greater than one-half the height of the fence or wall.



         (i)   Drive-through lanes adjacent to other vehicular
uses. Drive-through lanes shall be separated from adjacent driveways, parking
lot aisles and other vehicular uses areas by a curbed planting bed along the
entire length of the lane. The planting bed shall be a minimum of five feet
wide (excluding the curb) and shall contain a minimum of 100 plant units per
100 linear feet.



         (j)   Recycling and refuse receptacle areas.  Refuse
and recycling receptacles and removal areas shall be screened from view on
all sides. The screening shall consist of a sight-proof wall constructed of
the same material as the principal structure, and shall be a minimum six feet
in height. The side that includes access into the facility shall include a
sight-proof gate, and be oriented to minimally visible from adjacent
properties. Landscape material should be provided adjacent to this area.



   (E)   Parkway planting and interior parking lot criteria:



      (1)   Interior parking lot.



         (a)   Parking lots with more than 20 cars shall include
landscape islands planted with overstory trees at a ratio of one landscape
island for every 20 parking spaces or fraction thereof. They shall be evenly
dispersed throughout the parking area.



         (b)   Curbed planting islands shall be placed at the
ends of each row of parking. These islands shall be a minimum of nine feet
wide and shall extend the length of the parking stalls. . They shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, or groundcover. The planting beds
shall meet the following requirements:



            1.   The minimum area of a planting bed for each
tree shall be 180 square feet with a minimum dimension of nine feet in any
direction. These planting beds shall be curbed with a barrier curb. Planting
beds may be combined to create larger planting islands within the parking lot.



            2.   Planting beds shall not be used for snow
storage. Rather, separate snow storage areas shall be designated on the
landscape plan.



            3.   Small shrubs, flowers and groundcovers other
than turf grass may be planted in the tree planting beds, in addition to the
required overstory trees or necessary lighting.



            4.   Plant materials other than groundcover shall
be set back a minimum of three feet from the curb to avoid damage from
overhanging car bumpers and doors.



            5.   Plant materials other than overstory trees
shall be limited to a mature height of no more than two feet within ten feet
of any curb at a driveway intersection.



      (2)   Parkway plantings standards.  Parkways should be
planted according to the following standards for all development of property,
including any modifications of existing structures which increases the
footprint of the existing structure by 25% or in those cases where the cost
of improvements exceeds the value of the existing structure by 50%. Existing
values shall be determined by the value of the building as stated on the most
recent tax bill as provided by the owner. The owner shall also provide
estimated costs of improvements.



         (a)   Street trees shall be planted along all public or
privately dedicated streets within a development.



            1   Residential developments. One street tree
shall be planted every 40 linear feet with one tree per lot and two per
corner lot.



            2.   Non-residential developments.  One street
tree shall be planted every 40 linear feet with one tree per lot and two per
corner lot.



         (b)   Selection of tree species for street tree planting
shall be made from the approved street tree plant list available from the
village (see Exhibit C to this chapter). This list shall be updated by the
village as needed to ensure quality, disease resistance and hardiness.



         (c)   No street tree shall be planted closer than 30
feet from the right-of-way line at an intersection or closer than eight feet
from any drive or alley way.



         (d)   The parkways shall be planted with grass or low
ground cover, except where covered by pavement, trees, or shrubs, or up to
two  feet of paving which is allowed along the curb.



         (e)    The use of stone, rock, or gravel is prohibited
on public parkways.



         (f)   Plantings under utility wires are discouraged. If
overhead utilities exist, plant selection shall be made from the approved
understory plant list (see Exhibit B to this chapter) and the selection of
planting site and species shall be determined by village staff.



         (g)   Parkways less than four feet in width do not
require tree plantings.



         (h)   No overstory tree shall be planted closer than 15
feet from any lamppost to allow for proper lighting.



         (i)   No tree shall be planted within ten  feet of any
fire hydrant or stop sign.



         (j)   No street trees or shrubs shall be planted at an
intersection corner within a triangle having two 50-foot sides as measured
perpendicular to the curb line.



   (F)   Detention/retention areas:



      (1)   A stormwater detention/retention pond landscape plan
must be submitted to the village for all stormwater retention/detention
facilities. The plan must include all the information in accordance with §
158.35(B)(1)(d) and the following:



         (a)   Plant material suitable for periods of inundation.



         (b)   Proposed grades.



         (c)   Identification of all seed mixes.



         (d)   Perimeter landscaping providing a minimum of 20
plant units for every 100 linear feet of the facility perimeter, as measured
at high water level.



   (G)   Planting specifications:



      (1)   The following are required minimum sizes for plant
material. Larger sizes may be required, upon recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission and approval of the Village Board, to ensure tree
survival or provide a desired landscape effect. All plant material shall
comply with the provisions set forth by the most recent edition of the
American Standard for Nursery Stock, as sponsored and approved by the
American Association of Nurserymen and the American National Standards
Institute, Inc. (ANSI).



         (a)   Overstory trees: Two and one-half inch caliper and
six feet clear of branches;



         (b)   Understory trees: Two-inch caliper;



         (c)   Evergreen trees: Six feet height; and



         (d)   Large shrubs: 36 inches height and five-gallon
containers or equivalent balled and burlapped.



         (e)   Small shrubs: 18 - 24 inches height and
five-gallon containers or equivalent balled and burlapped.



      (2)   Tree size caliper shall be measured six inches above the
ground, up to and including, four-inch caliper size, and 12 inches above the
ground for larger sizes.



      (3)   All trees and shrubs shall be mulched with a minimum of
four-inch depth shredded bark, wood chips or other all organic mulch. All
flower and groundcover beds shall be mulched with a minimum of two-inch depth
shredded bark or other all organic mulch.



      (4)   The use of stone, rock, or gravel as a ground cover is
discouraged unless used as a decorative accent or as part of an appropriate
landscape concept.



      (5)   Planting pits shall be one and one-half times as deep
and three times as wide as the root ball. Native soil should be used for
backfill whenever possible.



      (6)   Local ecotypes should be preserved. Therefore, all
native seed and plant stock should be obtained from sources within a
150-miles radius of the village. Vendors from beyond that radius may supply
the native seed and/or plants, but they must demonstrate the materials come
from local genetic stock.



      (7)   Any planting of noxious weeds or other plants is
strictly prohibited, as seen in Exhibit G of this chapter.



      (8)   Trees and shrubs should be spaced so that they are
separated by a minimum of one-half of their total mature canopy spread.



      (9)   All plant materials must be in conformance with best
management practices (BMPs).



      (10)   The distance trees may be planted from curbs,
curblines, and sidewalks may be closer than the following:



         (a)   Understory and overstory trees at four feet.



         (b)   Evergreens at one-half of the mature spread.



      (11)   Plant material use in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter shall be selected to provide:



         (a)   Climate hardiness of plant material.



         (b)   High disease resistance and stress tolerance.



         (c)   Adaptability of proposed plant material to the
particular microclimate, (sun, shade, dry or wet soils, etc.)



         (d)   Inclusion of native plant material where
appropriate.



         (e)   Select plants for drought intolerance.



         (f)   Overall year round ornamental effect.



         (g)   Conformance with Best Management Practices.



   (H)   Installation of public trees should be done by balled and
burlapped or tree spade method. Bare root plantings and containers are not
permitted without written permission of the Public Works Department.



   (I)   In order to prevent uniform disease susceptibility and
eventual uniform age, no single species shall make up more than 15% of the
total village tree population. The following are minimum requirements for
tree species variation on a given plan.



 


Table I



Number of Trees on Plan
 
Maximum Percentage of Any One Species on Plan



10 - 19

 

50




20 - 39

 

33




40 - 59

 

25




60 or more

 

15




 



   (J)   Permitted and unacceptable trees:



      (1)   The exhibits immediately following this chapter shall
constitute as the tree species list for the village. No species other than
those included in this list may be planted without written permission of the
Public Works Department who may consult with the Tree Board.



      (2)   All plants shall meet county, state and federal law with
respect to freedom from disease and insect infestation. All plants must be
alive and healthy, free from dead limbs, damaged tissue or any form of
mutilation. Additional trees may be deemed acceptable at the discretion of
the Public Works Department who shall consult with the Tree Board.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14) Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.37  TREE PRESERVATION.



   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish
regulations limiting the removal and ensuring the replacement of trees from
public and private property within the village and, in doing so, safeguard
the ecological and aesthetic environment of the community. These regulations
are further intended to discourage the unnecessary clearing and disturbance
of land so as to preserve, insofar as practical, the existing natural
vegetation with plant material indigenous to the region, and preserve
landscape buffers to minimize the impact of adjoining conflicting land uses,
enhance and protect the integrity of roadway corridors, and reduce the
surface heat and negative visual impact of vehicular use areas.



   (B)   Scope. Tree preservation requirements shall apply to all
developments as outlined in § 158.35(B). The requirements under this chapter
do not apply to any existing single-family residence or development that has
final plat approval.



   (C)   Tree survey.



      (1)   For the properties with existing vegetation in areas
proposed for development, a tree survey shall be submitted prior to issuance
of any final plat or final site plan approval indicating deciduous plant
material that is greater than 20 feet  in height, or five inches in diameter
measured six inches above the ground (hereafter referred to as "surveyed
deciduous trees") or evergreen trees measuring five feet or more in vertical
height (hereafter referred to as "surveyed evergreen trees").



      (2)   The tree survey shall indicate the location, size, and
species (both scientific, and common) of all surveyed deciduous and evergreen
trees measuring 20 feet in height or having a caliper of five inches measured
six inches above the ground, or all evergreen trees measuring five feet or
more in vertical height.



      (3)   The tree survey must be completed by a certified
arborist or landscape architect, and shown as such on the submitted tree
survey.



   (D)   Removal and replacement criteria.



      (1)   No existing surveyed deciduous or evergreen tree which
has been identified on the Tree Preservation List (Exhibit E to this chapter)
shall be removed without approval of village staff.



      (2)   Existing trees removed (with village approval) shall be
replaced according to the following schedule:



         (a)   Deciduous trees.



            1.   In the event a deciduous tree designated for
preservation is destroyed or removed, such trees shall be replaced with new
trees for every one inch in caliper of removed tree. (Example: A ten-inch
caliper Sycamore is designated for preservation and destroyed. Four deciduous
trees from the village recommended tree list shall be provided at two and
one-half inch caliper.)



            2.   In the event of a fraction of an inch, if the
fraction is less than one-half inch it may be disregarded. If the fraction is
one-half inch or greater, it shall be counted as one inch.



         (b)   Evergreen trees.  In the event an evergreen tree
designated for preservation is destroyed or removed, such tree shall be
replaced with new trees at a rate of one vertical foot for each one vertical
foot of removed tree.



      (3)   Trees normally required by this chapter may not be
counted towards the required caliper inches to mitigate preservation trees.



      (4)   Village staff shall approve the type of replacement tree
to be planted as selected from the approved Overstory Tree List (Exhibit A to
this chapter). The following minimum sizes are required for replacement trees:



         (a)   Deciduous trees.  All replacement trees for
deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of two an one half inches in
diameter, as measured at diameter breast height (DBH) above the ground. Any
combination of tree sizes equaling two and one half inches in diameter or
larger, may be used tree replacement; i.e., one 24-inch  tree equals two
six- inch and four three-inch tree replacements or eight three-inch
replacements.



         (b)   Evergreen trees.  All replacement trees for
evergreen trees shall be a minimum height of six vertical feet in height or
greater may be used as tree replacements.



      (5)   Village staff may vary the number of replacement trees
required depending on the desirability of the existing trees.



      (6)   For those areas of significant vegetation (50% or
greater contiguous lot coverage by existing vegetation and/or identified by
the village staff), lots shall be reviewed on an individual basis. Emphasis
will be placed on maintaining contiguous plantings, and keeping disruption
confined to the perimeter as much as possible.



      (7)   All required replacement trees shall be planted on the
site from which the trees were removed. Relief from any portion or the entire
on-site tree replacement requirement may be granted by the Code Official.
Relief shall be based upon practical physical difficulties and/or undue
hardships related to conditions of the site.



         (a)   Where specific unique site conditions render
complete replacement impractical, cash-in-lieu of replacement trees may be
accepted by the village. The contribution in lieu of planting replacement
trees shall be $100 for each caliper inch of deciduous tree or $50 for each
vertical foot of evergreen tree and shall be paid to the village prior to the
issuance of any building permits.



      (8)   Removal of any ash trees may require special
requirements due to the Emerald Ash Borer. Before any ash trees are moved out
of the area, the person or persons removing the tree must contact the village.



   (E)   Preservation techniques.



      (1)   Prior to the development of any project, temporary
barriers shall be installed to protect and preserve the existing vegetation.



         (a)   Wooden lath snow fencing, brightly colored plastic
construction fencing, chain link fencing, or an alternative barrier, shall be
installed at the periphery of the drip line of the tree or beyond to prevent
storage of materials or vehicles. Said fence or barrier shall be a minimum of
48 inches in height securely anchored to fence posts a minimum distance of
five feet on center.



      (2)   Where a change of grade is planned, the trees to be
preserved shall be protected by a wall so as to preserve the existing grade
for the roots.



      (3)   Where a change of grade is planned, the topsoil shall be
preserved for new landscaping to be installed, unless imported topsoil is
used which meets planting specifications as outlined in § 158.36(G).



      (4)   All grading and construction equipment shall be
forbidden from encroaching upon the drip line of any tree.



      (5)   Crushed limestone or any other material which may be
detrimental to tree shall not be dumped within the drip line of any tree(s)
nor shall be located at any higher location where drainage toward the tree(s)
could adversely affect the health of said tree(s).



      (6)   No materials or vehicles shall be stored, driven, or
parked within the drip line of any trees.



      (7)   In the event that an underground utility line is to be
located within five feet of the trunk of a tree designated for preservation,
said utility line shall be augured to prevent damage to the trees root system.



      (8)   All trees to be preserved which have been subjected to
the construction activity within the drip line should be reviewed by a
qualified arborist and appropriate actions performed per the recommendation
of the arborist. None of the trees shall be topped, headed-back, skinned
(removal of interior branches), or climbed with spikes. All dead wood shall
be removed to reduce hazard.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



§ 158.38  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the sight lines of all streets,
alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to
insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds.



   (B)   The Village Tree Board, with approval from the Public Works
Department, may remove or order to be removed any tree or part thereof that
is in an unsafe condition or that by reason of its nature is injurious to
sewers, electric lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements,
or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest (see §§
96.43 and 96.44).



   (C)   The management of street trees is the responsibility of the
Public Works Department. State routes and arterial roads shall receive the
highest priority for tree planting.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



§ 158.39  MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   All deciduous trees on public properties shall be pruned on a
rotational basis of not more than ten years. This involves pruning each
village-owned deciduous tree at least once in this time period.



   (B)   Public trees shall be managed in such a manner as to promote
their general health by providing the necessary arboricultural practices,
which may include insect and disease control, fertilization, irrigation,
staking, guying, wrapping, cabling, bracing or pruning.



   (C)   Trees shall be maintained in such a manner as not to endanger,
interfere or otherwise conflict with requirements of public safety.



   (D)   Any public tree, because of habit of growth, age, condition or
disease, becomes a hazard to public safety or obstructs a clear view of
streets, signs, signals or intersection, thus creating a hazard, shall be
maintained to correct the problem. Hanging limb and branch growth shall be
maintained 14 feet above streets and eight feet above sidewalks.



   (E)   Any tree, because of an epidemic disease or insect
infestation, thus posing a threat to other trees or plants in the community,
shall be treated so as to control the spread of the problem organism.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.40  TREE REMOVAL AND TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or
village department to remove or top any street tree or other tree on public
property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the
Public Works Department.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.41  PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.



   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not severely
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection, so that there shall be a clear space free of overhanging limbs
of 14 feet above street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. The
owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or
decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The
village shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property
when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a
street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
sign or sight triangle at intersections. Tree limbs, which grow near high
voltage electrical conductors, shall be maintained clear of such conductors
by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable franchise
agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the utility
company and Village Public Works Department prior to any trimming by the
utility company.



(Ord.1780, passed 5-5-14)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.42  PRIVATE PROPERTY TREE REMOVAL.



   The village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the village, when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease that
constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the village. The Village
Tree Board or Public Works Department will notify in writing the owners of
such trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense within a
maximum of 30 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of
failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the village shall have the
authority to remove such trees at the expense of the village with the cutting
and removal charges and expenses charged to and paid by the owner.



   (A)   Charges for tree removal shall be a lien upon the real
property. Whenever a bill for tree removal remains unpaid, the Village Clerk,
or the person performing the service by authority of the village, shall file
with the County Recorder of Deeds within 60 days after the expense is
incurred a notice of lien in the name of the village or in the name of the
person performing the service. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting forth the legal description of the real property and a
common address sufficient for identification thereof; the amount of the cost
and expense incurred or payable for the removal of the trees; and the date or
dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village. The failure of
the Village Clerk to mail the lien notice or record the notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien, as provided for in the following
section. Expenses shall include but not be limited to the expenses of the
cutting and removal, service and filing expenses and reasonable attorney's
fees.



   (B)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid tree removal charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the charges and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in
the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by a bill in
equity in the name of the village within two years of the date of the cutting
and removal of the trees. The Village Attorney shall hereby be authorized and
directed, following approval of the corporate authorities, to institute such
proceedings in the name of the village against any owner for which a bill for
tree removal has remained unpaid for a period of 60 days after the expense
has been incurred in any court having jurisdiction over such matters. The
owner shall also be required to pay any and all costs and expenses of the
village for the foreclosure of the lien including, but not limited to,
reasonable attorney's fees. In addition to foreclosure of the lien, the
village may institute any necessary proceedings in any court of law to
recover from the owner the costs and expenses of the village in cutting and
removing the trees, including but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees.



   (C)   Upon payment of all of the expenses of the village, the lien
shall be released by the village in the same manner as the filing of the lien.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.43  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   All stumps of street trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not be projected above the surface
of the ground.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.44  CORPORATE AUTHORITY INTERFERENCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Public Works Department, or any of its agents, while engaging in and
about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of
any street trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $200 for each
separate offense, each day during which any violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be a separate offense. If, as the result of the provisions
of this chapter, the injury, mutilation or death of a tree, shrub or other
plant located in the village-owned property is caused, the cost of repair or
replacement of such tree, shrub or other plant shall be born by the party in
violation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in
accordance with the latest revision of Valuation of Landscape Trees, Shrubs
and Other Plants, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture.



(Ord. 1780, passed 5-5-14)



APPENDIX A: OVERSTORY TREES



 

   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR OVERSTORY TREES*

   *  Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to
current biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



BOTANICAL NAME

 

COMMON NAME





Acer platanoides
 
Emerald Queen Maple


Acer rubrum
 
Red Maple


Acer saccharum
 
Sugar Maple


Acer x freemanii
 
Autumn Blaze, Marmo


Celtis Occidentalis
 
Hackberry


Corylus colurna
 
Turkish Filbert


Fagus sylvatica
 
European Beech


Ginkgo biloba
 
Maidenhair Tree (male only)


Gleditsia trianchanthos inermis var.
 
Thornless Honeylocust


Gymnocladus dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Lirodendron tulipifera
 
Tulip Tree


Nyssa sylvatica
 
Black Tupelo/Black Gum


Platanus acerifolia
 
London Plane


Platanus occidentalis
 
Sycamore


Pyrus calleryana
 
Ornamental Pear


Quercus acutissma
 
Sawtooth Oak


Quercus alba
 
White Oak


Quercus bicolor
 
Swamp White Oak


Quercus coccinea
 
Scarlet Oak


Quercus imbricaria
 
Shingle Oak


Quercus macrocarpa
 
Bur Oak


Quercus muehlenbergii
 
Chinquapin Oak


Quercus robur
 
English Oak


Quercus rubra
 
Red Oak


Quercus shumardii
 
Shumard Oak


Sassafras albidum
 
Sassafras


Sophora japonica
 
Japanese Pagpdatree


Taxodium distichum
 
Bald Cypress


Tilia Americana
 
American Linden


Tilia cordata
 
Littleleaf Linden


Tilia euchlora
 
Redmond Linden


Tilia platphyllos
 
Bigleaf Linden


Tilia tomentosa
 
Silver Linden


Ulmus
 
Elm




 



APPENDIX B: UNDERSTORY TREES



 

   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR UNDERSTORY TREES*

   *  Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to
current biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



BIOLOGICAL NAME

 

COMMON NAME





Acer ginnala
 
Amur Maple


Acer palmatum
 
Bloodgood Japanese Maple


Alnus glutinosa
 
Common Alder


Amalanchier canadensis
 
Shadowberry Serviceberry (tree form)


Amalanchier grandiflora
 
Apple Serviceberry


Amalanchier laevis
 
Allegheny Serviceberry


Betula nigra
 
River Birch


Betula platyphyllis japonicum
 
Whitespire Birch


Carpinus betulus
 
European Hornbeam


Carpinus Carolina
 
American Hornbeam


Cercidiphyllum japonicum
 
Katsuratree


Corylus colurna
 
Hazelnut


Crataegus crus-galli inermis
 
Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn


Crataegus phaenopyrum
 
Washington Hawthorn


Crataegus virdis
 
Winter King Hawthorn


Magnolia stellata
 
Star Magnolia


Malus `prairiefire'
 
Prairiefire Crab


Malus 'red jewel'
 
Red Jewel Crab


Ostrya virginiana
 
Ironwood/American Hornbeam


Syringa japonica
 
Japanese Tree Lilac




 



APPENDIX C: STREET TREES



 

   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR STREET TREES*

   *  Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to
current biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



BIOLOGICAL  NAME

 

COMMON NAME





Acer x freemanii
 
Autumn Blaze, Marmo


Acer platanoides
 
Emerald Queen Maple


Acer rubrum
 
Red Maple


Aesculus glabra
 
Buckeye


Celtis occidentalis
 
Hackberry


Ginko Biloba
 
Maidenhair Tree (male only)


Gleditsia trianchanthos inermis var.
 
Thornless Honeylocust


Gymnocladus dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Liquidambar styraciflua
 
Sweetgum


Liriodendron tulipfera
 
Tulip Tree


Nyssa sylvatica
 
Black Gum


Phellodendron
 
Cork Tree


Plantanus x acerifolia
 
London Planetree


Quercus Alba
 
White Oak


Quercus bicolor
 
Swamp White Oak


Quercus imbrcaria
 
Shingle Oak


Quercus rubra
 
Red or English Oak


Tilia Americana
 
American Linden


Tilia cordata var.
 
Littleleaf Linden


Tilia euchlora
 
Redmond Linden


Tilia tomentosa
 
Sterling Silver Linden


Ulmus var.
 
Elm (newer hybrids)


Zelkova serrata
 
Japanese Zelkova




 



APPENDIX D:  EVERGREEN TREES



 

   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR EVERGREEN TREES*

   *  Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to
current biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



BOTANICAL  NAME

 

COMMON NAME





Juniperus Virginiana
 
Eastern Red Cedar


Picea Abies
 
Norway Spruce


Picea Glauca
 
White Spruce


Picea Glauca var. Densata
 
Black Hills Spruce


Picea Omorika
 
Serbian Spruce


Picea Pungens
 
Colorado Blue Spruce


Pinus Flexilus
 
Limber Pine


Pinus Ponderosa
 
Ponderosa Pine


Pinus Strobus
 
Eastern White Pine


Pinus Sylvestris
 
Scotch Pine


Pseudtotsuga Meniesii
 
Douglas Fir


Taxodium Distichum
 
Bald Cypress


Tsuga Canadensis
 
Canadian Hemlock




 



APPENDIX E:  PRESERVATION TREES



 

   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR PRESERVATION TREES*

   *  Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to
current biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



BOTANICAL  NAME

 

COMMON NAME





Aesculus species
 
Buckeye/Horse Chestnut


Acer rubrum
 
Red Maple


Acer saccharum
 
Sugar Maple


Carpinus caroliniana
 
Blue Beech


Carya var.
 
Hickory


Celtis Occidentalis
 
Hackberry


Gymnocladus dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Juglansnigra
 
Walnut


Ostrya Virginiana
 
Ironwood


Platanus occidentalis
 
Sycamore


Quercus (all except (palustris))
 
Oaks (all except Pin Oak)


Taxodium Distchum
 
Bald Cyprus


Talia Americana
 
American Linden




 



APPENDIX F:  STORMWATER DETENTION/RETENTION TREES



 

   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR DETENTION TREES*

   *  Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to
current biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



BOTANICAL  NAME

 

COMMON NAME





Acer rubrum
 
Red Maple


Acer saccharum
 
Sugar Maple


Alnus glutinosa
 
European Alder


Albus rugosa
 
Speckled Alder (native)


Betala nigra
 
River Beech


Carpinius caroliniana
 
Blue Beech


Carya ovata
 
Shagbark Hickory


Crataegus crus-galli inermis
 
Thornless Hawthorne


Gymnocladus Dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Jaglans nigra
 
Black Walnut


Platanus occidentalis
 
Sycamore


Quecus bicolor
 
Swamp White Oak


Quecus rubra
 
Red Oak


Taxodium disfichurn
 
Bald Cyprus




 



APPENDIX G:  UNACCEPTABLE TREES



 

   RECOMMENDED UNACCEPTABLE TREES*

   *  Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to
current biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



BOTANICAL  NAME

 

COMMON NAME





Acer negundo
 
Boxelder


Acer platanoides
 
Norway Maple


Acer saccharinum
 
Silver Maple


Ailanthus altissima
 
Tree of Heaven


Albizza sp.
 
Mimosa


Betula papyrifera
 
White Birch


Elaegnus angustifiolia
 
Russian Olive


Fraxinus Var.
 
Ash


Juglans sp.
 
Juniper


Malus sp.
 
Common apple


Morus sp.
 
Mulberry


Pinus nigra
 
Austrian Pine


Populus spp.
 
Poplars, Cottonwoods, Aspen


Prunus spp.
 
Blackthorn


Rhamnus frangula
 
Alder Buckthorn


Salix spp.
 
Willows


Ulmus
 
Elms (other than new hybrids)




 



CHAPTER 159:  SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS



Section



Telecommunications Facilities, Towers, and Antennas



   159.01   Definitions



   159.02   Intent



   159.03   Applicability



   159.04   Exemptions and nonconforming uses, maintenance, and
temporary antennas during emergencies



   159.05   General requirements



   159.06   Application and standards of approval



   159.07   Removal of abandoned PWF and towers, and bond



   159.08   Time for determination/denial



   159.09   Environmental effects



Wind Energy Systems



   159.15   Definitions



   159.16   Intent



   159.17   Site requirements



   159.18   Review and approval



   159.19   Removal of abandoned structures



TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TOWERS, AND ANTENNAS



§ 159.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT.  To cease operation for a period of 60 or more
consecutive days; or to reduce the effective radiated power of an antenna by
75% for 60 or more consecutive days; or to relocate an antenna at a point
less than 80% of the height of an antenna support structure; or to reduce the
number of transmissions from an antenna by 75% for 60 or more consecutive
days.



   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE.  Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, flag poles, fight poles, similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.



   APPLICANT. Any provider or any person, partnership, or company who
files an application for any permit necessary to install, maintain, or remove
a personal wireless service facility within the village.



   CO-LOCATION.  The use of a personal wireless service facility or cell
site by more than one personal wireless service provider.



   EIA.  The Electronics Industry Association.



   MODIFICATION.  The significant changing of any portion of personal
wireless service facility from its description in a previously approved
permit. Examples include, but are not limited to, changes in design or height
or placement of antenna on an antenna support structure.



   MOUNT. The structure or surface upon which personal wireless service
facilities are mounted. There are types of mounts:



      (1)   Building mounted.  A personal wireless service facility
mount fixed to the roof or side of a building.



      (2)   Ground mounted.  A personal wireless service facility
mount fixed to the ground, such as a tower.



      (3)   Structure mounted.  A personal wireless service
facility fixed to a structure other than a building, such as light standards,
utility poles, and bridges.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY (PWF).  Facilities for the provision of
personal wireless services.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES.  Commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless services all as contemplated by
the United States Code and the FCC.



   PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND PWF.  Any tower or PWF for which a building
permit or special use permit has been properly issued or is considered
legally nonconforming prior to the effective date of this chapter, including
permitted towers or PWF that have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and not expired.



   PWF HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the base of the PWF
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure. Measurement
of tower height shall include PWF, base pad, and other appurtenances and
shall be measured from the finished grade of the parcel. If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and
lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.



   PWF SITE OR SITE.  A tract or parcel of land that contains personal
wireless facilities including any support structure, accessory buildings, and
parking, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to
telecommunications services.



   PWF SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or
other structure which supports PWF.



   SECURITY BARRIER.  A wall, fence, or berm that has the purpose of
sealing a personal wireless service facility from an unauthorized entry or
trespass.



   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more PWF, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers.



   TOWER HEIGHT.  When referring to a tower or other structure, the
distance measure from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point
on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.



   UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICES.  The offering of telecommunications
services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual
licenses, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-have satellite
services as defined by the United States Code.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



§ 159.02  INTENT.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of towers and personal wireless facility.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



§ 159.03  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   New towers and PWF.  All new towers or PWF within the village
will be subject to these regulations, except as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Pre-existing towers or PWF. Pre-existing towers and
pre-existing PWF shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
chapter, other than those which specifically apply to pre-existing towers or
antennas.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



§ 159.04  EXEMPTIONS AND NONCONFORMING USES, MAINTENANCE, AND TEMPORARY
ANTENNAS DURING EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   Exemptions. The following are considered exempt and are not
governed by this chapter.



      (1)   Routine maintenance or repair of a tower, or personal
wireless service facility and related equipment, (excluding structural work
or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, towers, or buildings)
provided that compliance with the standards of this chapter are maintained;



      (2)   Subject to compliance with all other applicable
standards of this chapter, a building permit application need not be filed
for emergency repair or maintenance of a personal wireless service facility
or tower until 30 days after the completion of such emergency activity;



      (3)   A temporary personal wireless facility shall be
permitted for a maximum of 30 days or during an emergency declared by the
village, state or federal government.



   (B)   Nonconforming uses.



      (1)   No expansion of nonconforming use. Notwithstanding
anything in this chapter to the contrary, towers that are constructed, and
PWF that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a non-conforming use or
structure.



      (2)   Pre-existing towers, and personal wireless facilities. 
Pre-existing towers and PWF shall be allowed to continue their usage as they
presently exist. Construction or work other than routine maintenance on a
pre-existing tower, or personal wireless facility shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
personal wireless facilities. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the
contrary, bona fide nonconforming towers or PWF that are damaged or destroyed
may be rebuilt without having to first obtain a special use permit and
without having to meet the separation requirements specified herein. The
type, height, and located of the tower and PWF thereon shall be of the same
type and characteristics as the original facilities. Building permits to
rebuild shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be
obtained within 180 days from the date the facilities are damaged or
destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or
personal wireless facilities shall be deemed abandoned.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



§ 159.05  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Location.



      (1)   Towers and PWF are not permitted in A-2, TC and all
residential zoning districts.



      (2)   Towers and PWF are permitted in all other zoning
districts by special use authorization and are subject to the terms and
conditions of this chapter.



      (3)   Towers and PWF located on publicly- owned land not being
used for residential purposes are permitted in any zoning district by special
use authorization.



   (B)   Co-location.



      (1)   Each applicant for PWF and/or tower shall provide to the
Director of Community Development or his or her designee an inventory of the
applicant's existing towers, PWF, or sites approved for towers or PWF, that
are either within the jurisdiction of the village or within one and one-half
miles of the boundary thereof, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each facility. The Director of Community
Development or his or her designee may share such information with other
applicants applying for special use permits under this chapter or other
organizations seeking to locate towers, or personal wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the village, provided; however, that the Director
of Community Development or his or her designee is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.



   (C)   Principal or accessory use.  PWF and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of PWF or tower
on such lot.



   (D)   Lot size.  For the purposes of determining whether the
installation of a tower or PWF complies with the zoning district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot
shall control, even though the PWF or towers may be located on leased parcels
within such lot unless there are unusual geographic or public health, safety,
and welfare or other public policy considerations. A plat of survey must
accompany any village application.



   (E)   Height limitations.



      (1)   Towers in all zoning districts, except for industrial
districts, shall be restricted to 80 feet in height.



      (2)   Towers in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts shall be
restricted to 100 feet in height.



      (3)   PWF located in an alternative tower structure or on an
existing approved tower or structure may exceed the height restrictions by
special use authorization.



   (F)   Setbacks.



      (1)   PWF or towers in industrial zoning districts must
satisfy the setback requirements of that district for principal buildings
except that a tower shall not be placed closer than 100% of its height from
any residential zoned lot or residential land use building setback line.



      (2)   PWF or towers in any other zoning district shall satisfy
the setback requirements of that district for principal buildings except that
no PWF or tower shall be placed closer than 150% of its height from any
residential zoned lot or residential land use building set back line.



   (G)   Lighting.  PWF or towers shall not be artificially lighted,
unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable
authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design
chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.



   (H)   Aesthetics and screening.



      (1)   PWF or towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel
finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), be painted a neutral color or such shades as are
appropriate and compatible with the surrounding environment, so as to reduce
visual obtrusiveness.



      (2)   At a site, the design of the buildings and related
structures ancillary to the tower and/or PWF shall, to the extent possible,
be screened with live plantings and include evergreen vegetation with a
minimum height of six feet, at the time of planting, placed densely as to
form a screen sufficient enough to reduce the visual obtrusiveness of said
structures. Landscaping shall meet all requirements and specifications of
Chapter 158 of this code.



      (3)   When a PWF support structure exists, the PWF and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color
that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the PWF and related equipment as visually unobtrusive
as possible.



      (4)   Fencing for equipment enclosures must be of residential
quality such as wood privacy fencing or if chain-link is used, must be
screened with evergreen vegetation. Landscaping shall meet all requirements
and specifications of Chapter 158 of this code.



   (I)   Signs.  No signs shall be allowed on a PWF, tower, PWF
support structure or equipment enclosures other than identification signs not
exceeding one square feet in area.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09; Am. Ord. 1658, passed 8-15-11)



§ 159.06  APPLICATION AND STANDARDS OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   Application requirements. The following shall apply for all
required submittals and applications:



      (1)   Towers, PWF and PWF support structures.



         (a)   A scaled site plan.



         (b)   Legal description and survey of the parent tract
and leased parcel or subdivision plat.



         (c)   All setbacks required by this chapter must be
depicted on the survey and site plan.



         (d)   A landscape plan in accordance with the Chapter
158 of this code.



         (e)   Fence detail with color, heights, type of material.



         (f)   A description of compliance with this chapter and
all applicable federal, state, or local laws.



         (g)   A notarized statement by the applicant as to
whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional
antennas for future users.



         (h)   A statement that the proposed facility meets all
FAA, FCC and other applicable standards and regulations.



   (B)   Special use permit base standards in addition to all other
requirements.  In the case where a special use permit is required the
facility must meet all of the following requirements.



      (1)   The use will not materially endanger the public health
or safety if location where proposed and developed according to the plan
submitted.



      (2)   The use meets all required conditions and specifications.



      (3)   The petitioner has satisfied the co-location
requirements listed herein.



      (4)   The use will not substantially injure the value of
adjoining or abutting property unless the use is a public necessity.



      (5)   The use meets all FAA and FCC standards and other
applicable federal, state, or other standards.



      (6)   The location and character of the use, if developed
according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the
area in which It is to be located and will be in conformity with the general
plan of development for the area.



      (7)   The separation distance from other towers or PWF's shall
not be less than 1,500 feet. If less, the applicant must provide evidence
that the existing tower cannot accommodate the new request.



      (8)   Applicants are required to demonstrate by providing
proof of certified mailings or other reasonable means:



         (a)   That they contacted the owners of reasonably
suitable structures which are ten feet less than the design height of the
tower within a one-quarter mile radius of the site proposed and which from a
location standpoint could provide part of a network for transmission of
signals;



         (b)   Have asked for permission to install the antenna
on those structures; and



         (c)   Were denied for reasons other than economic
feasibility.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



§ 159.07  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED PWF AND TOWERS, AND BOND.



   (A)   Removal of abandoned PWF and towers. Any PWF or tower that is
abandoned as defined herein shall be removed within 180 days of receipt of
notice from the village notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to
remove an abandoned PWF or tower within said 180 days shall be grounds for
the village to cause removal of the tower or PWF at the owner's expense. If
there are two or more uses of a single tower, then this provision shall not
become effective until all users cease using the tower.



   (B)   The owner of any approved PWF or tower shall post a bond or
other surety payable to the village, equivalent to the cost of demolition or
removal of the approved facility in the event said owner is unable or
unwilling to remove an abandoned PWF or tower in conformance with the
provisions hereof. The village will have the right, at intervals no more
often than every three years, to require that the bond amount be increased to
reflect changes in the Chicago Metropolitan Area Consumer Price Index (all
consumers) during the prior three year period.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



§ 159.08  TIME FOR DETERMINATION/DENIAL.



   (A)   The village shall deny or approve a request for a tower or PWF
within 45 days of the filing of a complete application. If a special use
permit is required that time shall be extended to 90 days.



   (B)   Any denial of a request for a tower or PWF shall be in writing
and contain a written record of the reason(s) for such denial.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



§ 159.09  ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS.



   The environmental effects of radio frequency emissions shall not be a
basis for denial of a request to place, construct or modify a PWF if such
facilities complies with applicable regulations concerning such emissions.



(Ord. 1593, passed 9-21-09)



WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS



§ 159.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS (AWES). A wind energy conversion system
designed as a secondary use to existing buildings or facilities, wherein the
power generated is used primarily for on-site consumption. The system
consists of a wind turbine and associated controls and may include a tower.



   HUB HEIGHT. The distance measured from ground level to the center of
the turbine hub.



   SHADOW FLICKER. The moving shadows or shaded areas which are cast by
rotating turbine blades.



   TOWER HEIGHT. The distance measured from ground level to the top of the
tower, plus the length of one blade.



   WES FARM. Two or more of WES's and substations in the same location or
vicinity interconnected with a power collection system and communications
network to generate power primarily for off-site consumption.



   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (WES). A wind energy conversion system consisting of
a wind turbine, a tower, blades, generators and associated control or
conversion electronics and distribution system which will be used primarily
to produce energy for off-site consumption.



   WIND TURBINE. A device which converts the kinetic energy of the wind
into a useable form of electrical energy.



(Ord. 1607, passed 1-4-10)



§ 159.16  INTENT.



   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to establish a process,
regulations and standards for the construction and operation of accessory
wind energy systems (AWES) used primarily for on-site power consumption and
WES Farms used primarily for off-site consumption.



(Ord. 1607, passed 1-4-10)



§ 159.17  SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A    Location.



      (1)   Subject to the requirements in this subchapter, AWES
shall be considered a permitted use in all zoning districts, except for the
Town Center District.



      (2)   Multiple AWES (more than one) are not permitted on any
single lot within any zoning district within the village.



      (3)   WES Farms are permitted in the I-2 Intensive Industrial
District subject to the requirements of this subchapter and prohibited in all
other zoning districts.



      (4)   AWES may only be erected when there is a primary
structure already on the lot or property and must be located in the rear yard.



      (5)   No part of the AWES or WES shall be located within or
over any utility, water, sewer, or other type of easement.



      (6)   No part of the AWES or WES shall be located within any
required setbacks.



   (B)   Tower height.



      (1)   In the A-1, A-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, C-6, C-7, I-1,
PR, R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning districts AWES shall not extend more than 1.25
times in height above the primary structure as measured from the ground.



      (2)   In the I-2 zoning district AWES shall not extend more
than two times in height above the primary structure as measured from the
ground.



      (3)   The maximum allowable tower height for WES shall be no
more than 350 feet.



   (C)   Setbacks. All WES setbacks, as required herein, shall be
measured from the nearest property or right-of-way line to a line extended
from the leading edge of the wind system to the ground.



      (1)   Any AWES shall be setback from the property or
right-of-way line a distance of 1.1 times the tower height.



      (2)   Any WES shall be setback from the property or
right-of-way line a distance of 1.1 times the tower height.



      (3)   Any WES shall be setback a distance of 1,000 feet from
all platted subdivisions.



      (4)   Any WES shall be setback a distance equal to 1.1 times
the tower height from other WES on the same property.



   (D)   Decibel level.



      (1)   The decibel level for any AWES shall not exceed 30
decibels at the property line.



      (2)    The decibel level for any WES Farm shall not exceed 60
decibels at the property line.



   (E)   Rooftop AWES.



      (1)   AWES may be installed on top of a primary structure on
any lot in any zoning districts where permitted subject to the regulations
required herein.



      (2)   A maximum of one rooftop AWES may be installed on any
single family residence.



      (3)   A maximum of one rooftop AWES may be installed on any
multi-family unit, excluding apartment or condominium buildings.



      (4)   A maximum of two rooftop AWES may be installed on any
apartment or condominium building.



      (5)   Rooftop AWES may be installed on any commercial or
industrial building in accordance with the size of the building to be
installed upon:



         (a)   20,000 square feet or under = Maximum of one
rooftop AWES.



         (b)   20,000 - 100,000 square feet = One additional
rooftop AWES per additional 10,000 square feet. (EXAMPLE : 24,000 square foot
building = one maximum rooftop AWES, 32,000 square foot building = two
maximum rooftop AWES, 100,000 square foot building = 9 maximum rooftop AWES.)



         (c)   100,000 square feet or more = A maximum of ten
AWES.



   (F)   Force wind standards.  The WES must be engineered to
withstand wind forces of up to 100 miles per hour.



   (G)   Signage.



      (1)   WES may not contain any commercial markings, messages,
or banners on the turbine or tower or any miscellaneous structure accompany
the AWES.



      (2)   One sign, no less than four square feet and no greater
than six square feet in area, shall be posted at the base of the tower of any
AWES or WES. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a warning of
high voltage, and the phone number of the property owner/operator to call in
case of emergency.



   (H)   Tower access.  The WES should not be accessible for climbing.
This can be accomplished by not providing rungs for the first 12 feet,
covering the climbing apparatus, enclosing the base of the structure with a
six-foot fence, or by any other approved preventative measures.



   (I)   Color.  The WES shall be of a neutral color such as white or
light grey, and the surface shall be non-reflective.



   (J)   Lighting. No lights shall be installed on the WES, unless
required to meet FAA, state, and/or federal regulations.



   (K)   Soil studies.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance for a building permit for any WES
the applicant shall provide proof that the site's soil conditions meet the
minimum standards as specified by the AWES manufacturer; provided that site
soil analysis is not necessary or required for residential scale turbines



      (2)    For WES designed to generate greater than 20kW, a
structural engineer's seal will be required as well as a full soil analysis
of the site.



   (L)   Proof of insurance.    Liability insurance for the AWES
shall be provided prior to the release of the building permit.



(Ord. 1607, passed 1-4-10)



§ 159.18  REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   The owner or owners of the AWES or WES and/or tract of land must submit
to village staff a plan for the use of an AWES or WES for the purpose of and
meeting the requirements set forth in this subchapter. Said plan may be
accompanied by evidence concerning the compatibility of the project and its
effects on surrounding property and other physical conditions. The plan and
supporting evidence shall include each of the following:



   (A)   A site plan submittal showing the following information:



      (1)   Existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of two-foot
intervals.



      (2)   Location, setbacks, exterior dimensions and square
footage of all structures and of those on adjacent properties.



      (3)   Location and dimensions of all access points adjacent to
site.



      (4)   Location and size of existing waterways, sanitary
sewers, storm sewer systems, and water distribution systems.



      (5)   Location of any overhead power or other utility lines.



      (6)   Approval letters from all utility companies.



      (7)   Certified letters notifying adjacent property owners
within 250 feet of subject property of AWES or WES application.



      (8)   Areas subject to flooding.



      (9)   Engineering plans of the proposed AWES or WES and
foundation.



      (10)   Manufacturer's engineering specifications of the WES
including the foundation.



      (11)   Detailed drawing of electrical components as supplied
by the manufacturer and installation details which conform to the National
Electrical Code.



      (12)   Any and all other pertinent information regarding the
installation and construction of the WES.



   (B)   Review and approval.  The AWES and WES site plan is subject
to the site plan review and approval process outlined in Chapter 154:
Subdivision and Development Regulations.



(Ord. 1607, passed 1-4-10)



§ 159.19  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED STRUCTURES.



   The owner of an AWES(s) or WES and associated facilities which have
been inoperable for 180 days will be notified by the Village of Channahon
that the owner has 180 days from the notice date to restore the AWES(s) or
WES to operating condition or remove the AWES(s) or WES. Removal of the wind
system shall consist of: the turbines, any above ground improvements,
fencing, all foundations, pads, underground electrical wires, or any other
components associated with the wind systems operations, all of which shall be
to a depth of ten feet. Failure to restore operating condition or remove the
AWES(s) or WES will be in violation of the zoning ordinance and will result
in the removal of the AWES(s) or WES at the owner's expense and the costs of
removal assessed against the property.



(Ord. 1607, passed 1-4-10)

CHAPTER 160:  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   160.01   Purpose and scope
   160.02   Definitions
   160.03   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   160.04   Dispute resolution
   160.05   Indemnification
   160.06   Insurance
Bookmark§ 160.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the act.
   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
(Ord. 1938, passed 7-16-18; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 5-6-19)
Bookmark§ 160.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   ANTENNA. An apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radiofrequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to FCC authorization, for the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information services. The antenna does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile station or device.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. A person or entity that submits a siting application and the agents, employees and contractors of such person or entity.
   APPLICATION. A written submission to the village requesting authorization for the deployment of a personal wireless facility at a specified location.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. Means:
      (1)   Mounting or installing an antenna facility on a pre-existing structure; and/or
      (2)   Modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D. 1 .a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or
      (2)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A facility that: (1) is mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height including its antennas; or (2) is mounted on structures no more than 10% taller than other adjacent structures; or (3) does not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10%, whichever is greater. Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume. All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 1938, passed 7-16-18; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 5-6-19)
Bookmark§ 160.03  REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in division (C)(9) regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district; or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the village to collocate a small wireless facility. While a pre-application discussion with the Village Administrator is not required, it is suggested to help streamline the application process. All requests for a pre-application discussion will be accommodated in a timely fashion.
An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village Administrator, together with the village's small cell facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application process. The village shall process applications as follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 60 days after the submission of a completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 45 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 60th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (c)   1.   An application to collocate: (i) a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole; or (ii) a facility other than a small wireless facility using an existing structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the pennit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   1.   An application to deploy a facility other than a small wireless facility using a new structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 150 days after the submission of a completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 135 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 150th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (e)   1.   The village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
            2.   If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
            3.   The village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the village denies an application.
            4.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the village's review period.
            5.   The applicant must notify the village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.
            6.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
         (f)   Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement, provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of application. Within ten days after receiving an application, the village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to provide notification to the applicant within ten days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the village. Processing deadlines reset to day one upon the applicant submitting the additional information requested by the village.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the village; or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications.
         (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits.
         (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
         (b)   If the act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable village code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the village by personal delivery at the village's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter and Chapter 54 "Construction of Facilities in Public Rights-of-Way" and the Channahon Code of Ordinances including but not limited to: (i) appearance standards (§ 54.15(H)); (ii) removal, relocation or modification of facilities (§ 54.18); (iii) general construction standards (§ 54.13); and (iv) cleanup and restoration (§ 54.19). The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
         (a)   The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
         (b)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment.
         (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
         (d)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
         (e)   The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous division (c). Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   (a)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
         (b)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         (c)   For purposes of this division (c), the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      (6)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a village ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      (7)   Alternate placements.
         (a)   Except as provided in this collocate requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
         (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this division.
      (8)   Height limitations.
         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
            1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
            2.   45 feet above ground level.
      (9)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in § 156.197 of Channahon's Code of Ordinances.
      (10)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
      (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $500 for an application to collocate up to five small wireless facilities on existing utility poles or wireless support structures, and $100 for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than five small wireless facilities on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of  state law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with (B)(1)(d) of this section; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      (3)   1.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of § 16-108.5(i) of the Public Utilities Act.
         2.   For the purposes of this section, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: (a) to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service; or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-existing agreements.
      (1)   Existing agreements between the village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the village on the effective date of the act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the act by notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this division.
   (G)   Annual recurring rate.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals:
         (a)   $270 per year; or
         (b)   The actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the village utility pole.
      (2)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $270 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment.
      (1)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
      (2)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(Ord. 1938, passed 7-16-18; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 5-6-19)
Bookmark§ 160.04  DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Will County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 1938, passed 7-16-18; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 5-6-19)
Bookmark§ 160.05  INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 1938, passed 7-16-18; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 5-6-19)
Bookmark§ 160.06  INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
      (2)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(Ord. 1938, passed 7-16-18; Am. Ord. 1975, passed 5-6-19)

CHAPTER 161: DONATION/COLLECTION BOXES
Section
General Provisions
   161.01   Purpose
   161.02   Conflicting provisions
   161.03   Violation
   161.04   Responsibility
   161.05   Definitions
DCB Permit Requirement and Process
   161.20   Permit required for DCBs
   161.21   Application requirements
   161.22   DCB permit expiration and renewal
   161.23   Requirements for the approval and renewal of a DCB permit
   161.24   Time limit for final decision
   161.25   Appeal and petition processes
Standards and Requirements
   161.30   Location
   161.31   Physical attributes
   161.32   Maintenance
   161.33   Liability
Code Enforcement
   161.40   Compliance process
Noticing Procedure for Removal
   161.50   Notice required for removal
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Bookmark§ 161.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public by providing minimum blight-related performance standards for the operation of donation/collection boxes (DCBs). This includes establishing criteria to ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate
outside of the DCBs, the DCBs remain free of blight, DCBs are maintained in sanitary conditions, and residents and/or users are fully informed of those who operate the DCBs so that they can be contacted if there are any blight-related questions or concerns.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.02  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   Where a conflict exists between the regulations or requirements in this chapter and applicable regulations or requirements contained in other chapters of the Village of Channahon Code of Ordinances, the applicable regulations or requirements of this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.03  VIOLATION.
   Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be prima facie evidence of an existing violation, a continuing blight and a declared public nuisance and shall be abated by the Building Official in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person in violation will be subject to administrative penalties, citations, civil action and/or other legal remedies.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.04  RESPONSIBILITY.
   The parcel owner and the DCB operator ("operator") have joint and several liability for blight-related conditions and/or compliance with this chapter, including fees, administrative citations, civil actions, and/or legal remedies relating to a DCB. The parcel owner remains liable for any violation of duties imposed by this chapter even if the parcel owner has, by agreement, imposed on the operator the duty of complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.05  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY ACTIVITY. An activity that is incidental to, and customarily associated with, a specified principal activity.
   AGENT. A person who is authorized by the parcel owner to act on their behalf in filling out all required forms of the parcel pursuant to this chapter. A person who is given general authorization to act on the behalf of a parcel owner for various activities and transactions in regards to a property may be considered an agent.
   BLIGHT or NUISANCE. A DCB that is dilapidated, physically deteriorating, unsafe, unsanitary, marked with graffiti or generally unkempt as to constitute a threat or nuisance to the public.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Chief Building Official and his or her successor in title and his or her designees.
   DCB OPERATOR or OPERATOR. A person or entity who utilizes or maintains a DCB to solicit donations/collections of salvageable personal property.
   DCB PERMIT. The village’s annually renewable permit required to place, operate, maintain, or allow a DCB within the village limits.
   DONATED/COLLECTED MATERIAL. Salvageable personal property, such as clothing, shoes, books and household items that are collected for periodic transport off-site for processing or redistribution or both.
   DONATION/COLLECTION BOXES or DCBS. Staffed or unstaffed drop-off boxes, containers, receptacles, or similar facility that accepts textiles, shoes, books and/or other salvageable personal property items to be used by the operator for distribution, resale, or recycling, but shall not include furniture or other items too large to be contained within the DCB. This term does not include any collection bin that is owned by the property owner and is used in connection with, or is an accessory to, the principal business of that property.
   PARCEL OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of real property on which a DCB is or is proposed to be placed.
   PRINCIPAL ACTIVITY. An activity that fulfills a primary function of an establishment, institution, household, or other entity.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A main building that is occupied by a principal activity.
   UNPERMITTED DCB. A DCB established either without a DCB permit or with a DCB permit that was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or incomplete information supplied, or in violation of any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Channahon, Will County, Illinois.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
DCB PERMIT REQUIREMENT AND PROCESS
Bookmark§ 161.20  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DCBS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to place, operate, maintain or allow a DCB on any real property unless the parcel owner/agent and/or operator first obtain a DCB permit from the village. A separate DCB permit is required for each DCB.
   (B)   The DCB permit applicant shall be the DCB operator and the permit may not be transferred, conveyed or otherwise assigned to another person or entity.
   (C)   Decisions regarding DCB permit applications shall be made by the Building Official and the Building Official shall be considered the investigating official acting for the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.21  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The DCB permit application shall be made on a form provided by the village. All applications shall be valid for one calendar year, filed with the Administration Department and shall include:
   (A)   A signed agreement as provided by the village stating that the operator will abide by all the processes and requirements described in this chapter and an expedited code enforcement process;
   (B)   A non-refundable application fee in the amount of $100;
   (C)   A signed authorization from the parcel owner/agent to allow placement of the DCB on a form provided by the village;
   (D)   A signed acknowledgement of responsibility from the parcel owner/agent and the operator for joint and several liability for violations of conditions or regulations, and/or blight relating to the DCB on a form provided by the village;
   (E)   Proof of general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000 covering the applicant's DCB and naming the Village of Channahon and the parcel owner as additional insureds;
   (F)   For nonprofit operators, evidence that the nonprofit has been registered as a non-profit organization with the State of Illinois;
   (G)   The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone number of the DCB operator and parcel owner, including 24-hour contact information;
   (H)   A vicinity map showing:
      (1)   The proposed location of the DCB; and
      (2)   The distance between the site and all existing DCBs within 1,000 feet of the proposed DCB location;
   (I)   Photographs of the location and adjacent properties;
   (J)   A site plan containing:
      (1)   Location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries;
      (2)   Location of all buildings;
      (3)   Proposed DCB location;
      (4)   Distance between the proposed DCB and parcel lines buildings; and
      (5)   Location and dimension of all existing and proposed driveways, garages, carports, parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, pavement and striping/marking;
   (K)   Elevations showing the appearance, materials, and dimensions of the DCB, including the information required in this chapter to be placed on the DCB and notice sign;
   (L)   A description and/or diagram of the proposed locking mechanism of the DCB; and
   (M)   A maintenance plan (including graffiti removal, pick-up schedule, and litter and trash removal on and around the DCB) that is sufficient to prevent/eliminate blight-related conditions.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.22  DCB PERMIT EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Unless renewed as described in division (B), below, each DCB permit shall expire and become null and void on December 31 of the year of issuance.
   (B)   A DCB operator may apply for a permit for the subsequent calendar year by submitting an application to the Administration Department by December 1 of the current year. The DCB permit renewal application shall be made on a form provided by the village. All applications shall be filed with the Administration Department and shall include:
      (1)   A signed agreement stating that the operator will abide by all the processes and requirements described in this chapter and an expedited code enforcement process;
      (2)   Photographs of the existing DCB;
      (3)   A non-refundable $100 application fee;
      (4)   A signed authorization from the parcel owner/agent to allow placement of the DCB;
      (5)   A signed acknowledgement of responsibility from the parcel owner/agent and the operator for joint and several liability for violations of conditions or regulations, and/or blight relating to the DCB;
      (6)   Proof of general liability insurance of at least $1,000,000 covering the applicant's DCB and naming the Village of Channahon and the parcel owner as additional insureds;
      (7)   For nonprofit operators, evidence that the nonprofit has been registered as a non-profit organization with the State of Illinois;
      (8)   Name and telephone number of any entity that may share or profit from items collected via the DCB;
      (9)   The name, address, email, website (if available) and telephone number of the DCB operator and parcel owner, including 24-hour contact information; and
      (10)   Any other reasonable information regarding time, place, and manner of DCB operation, placement, and/or maintenance that the Building Official requires to evaluate the proposal consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   The Building Official shall either approve or deny the renewal of a DCB permit within 30 calendar days of receipt of the complete renewal application and payment of the renewal fee.
   (D)   The Building Official shall approve the renewal of a DCB permit if he or she finds that no circumstances existed during the term of the DCB permit or existed at any time during the review of the application for renewal that are inconsistent with any criteria required for approval of a new DCB permit as specified in § 161.23 or that would justify the revocation of the DCB permit as specified in § 161.50.
   (E)   See § 161.25 for the appeal and petition processes for DCB permit decisions, including decisions regarding renewal.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.23  REQUIREMENTS FOR THE APPROVAL AND RENEWAL OF A DCB PERMIT.
   The Building Official shall not issue a DCB permit or renewal unless each of the following is true:
   (A)   The applicant has submitted a complete and accurate application accompanied by the applicable fee;
   (B)   There are no open citations, unpaid fines or unresolved violations or complaints related to any DCB managed by the proposed operator;
   (C)   Any verified blight on the subject property has been abated and any case of a complaint to the village regarding blighted conditions on the subject property has been closed; and
   (D)   The proposal is consistent with all the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   For renewals, the site does not have a history of being an attractive nuisance even if incidents of blight were abated. For the purpose of this section, "history of attractive nuisance" means the DCB received three administrative citations in the previous 12 months.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.24  TIME LIMIT FOR FINAL DECISION.
   The Building Official shall provide a written decision regarding the placement of a DCB within 30 calendar days of the submission of a complete application for a DCB permit.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.25  APPEAL AND PETITION PROCESSES.
   (A)   (1)   If an applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the Building Official, the applicant shall file a written request for appeal of the decision within ten calendar days after the date of a decision by the Building Official. The written request for appeal must be filed by the applicant or any other interested party and submitted to the Administration Department at Village Hall. In the event the last date of appeal falls on a weekend or holiday when village offices are closed, the next date such offices are open for business shall be the last date of appeal. Such appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the village and shall be filed with the Administration Department. The appeal application must be complete and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Building Official or wherein his or her decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. The appeal itself must raise each and every issue that is contested, along with all the arguments and evidence in the record, which supports the basis of the appeal.
      (2)   If a request for appeal is timely filed, the village must set a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of its receipt of the written request for appeal. If a hearing is held on the appeal, then during such hearing, the appellant will be limited to issues and/or evidence previously raised in the appeal itself. The appellant shall not be permitted to present any other issues and/or oral, written and/or documentary evidence during the appeal process.
      (3)   In considering the appeal, the Village Administrator shall determine whether the proposal conforms to the requirements of this chapter, and may grant or deny a permit or require such changes in the proposed use or impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary to ensure conformity to said criteria. The written decision of the Village Administrator shall be final and shall be made within 60 calendar days of the submission of the appeal.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant seeking placement of a DCB which would be affected by this chapter and who contends that the ordinance as applied to him or her would be unlawful under and/or conflict with federal, state, or local law or regulation, must submit a petition to the Village Administrator requesting relief from the ordinance. Petitions must be on the appeal form provided by the village and submitted to Village Hall. The petition shall identify the name and address of the applicant and property owner, the affected application number, and shall state specifically and completely how the ordinance as applied to him or her would be unlawful under and/or in conflict with federal, state, or local law or regulation. Failure to raise each and every issue that is contested in the petition and provide appropriate supporting evidence will be grounds to deny the petition.
      (2)   If a hearing is held on the petition, then during such hearing, the petitioner will be limited to issues and/or evidence previously raised in the petition itself. The petitioner shall not be permitted to present any other issues and/or oral, written and/or documentary evidence during the petition process.
      (3)   Within 60 calendar days of receipt of the completed petition, the Village Administrator, or designee, shall mail to the applicant a written determination accepting or rejecting the petition. The written decision of the Village Administrator is final. The Village Administrator will utilize reasonable time, place and manner criteria to determine if the petition should be granted or denied consistent with this chapter. If the petition is granted, the village may impose reasonable time, place and manner-related conditions on the DCB consistent with this chapter.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
Bookmark§ 161.30  LOCATION.
   (A)   No more than one DCB is permitted per parcel.
      (1)   DCB's placed on separate, adjacent parcels, must be placed at least 500 feet away from the nearest DCB.
   (B)   No DCBs are permitted in any R zoning districts.
   (C)   DCBs are only allowed to be located in A, C, I, or PR zoning district, which are designated in the zoning maps described in the Village of Channahon Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   A DCB is only permitted on a lot that also contains a principal building that contains at least one operating business.
   (E)   DCBs will be placed on the parcel in a location where normal deliveries are received.
   (F)   DCBs are prohibited within any of the following locations:
      (1)   The public right-of-way;
      (2)   Five feet from any property line; or
      (3)   Landscaping.
   (G)   DCBs cannot block or impede access to:
      (1)   Required parking or driveways;
      (2)   Pedestrian routes;
      (3)   Emergency vehicle routes;
      (4)   Building ingress and egress;
      (5)   Required handicapped accessibility routes;
      (6)   Required easements; or
      (7)   Trash enclosure areas or access to trash bins/trash enclosures; or
      (8)   Lot ingress and egress.
   (H)   DCBs cannot impede the functioning of exhaust, ventilation, or fire extinguishing systems.
   (I)   The donation/collection area must be visible from the principal building and be no more than ten feet from a continually operating light source.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.31  PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES.
   (A)   DCBs shall:
      (1)   Be fabricated of steel;
      (2)   Be placed on ground that is paved with cement or asphalt;
      (3)   Have a collection opening that has a tamper-resistant locking mechanism;
      (4)   Not be more than 84 inches high, 72 inches wide and 72 inches deep;
      (5)   Not be electrically or hydraulically powered or otherwise mechanized;
      (6)   Not be a fixture of the site or considered an improvement to real property; and
      (7)   Have the following information conspicuously displayed on at least two-inch type visible from the front on the DCB:
         (a)   The name, address, 24-hour telephone number, and, if available, the internet web address, and email address of the owner and operator of the DCB and the parcel owner/agent;
         (b)   Address and parcel number of the site;
         (c)   Instructions on the process to register a complaint regarding the DCB to the Village Code Enforcement Division, in substantially the following form:
         "To register a complaint regarding this UDBC, contact the Village of Channahon Administration Department at (815) 467-6644 or at www.channahon.org/about-channahon/contact-the-village/ with the permit number and location of the DCB detailing the complaint."
         (d)   The type of material that may be deposited;
         (e)   A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the DCB;
         (f)   The pickup schedule for the DCB;
         (g)   A village provided sticker that identifies the box as being properly permitted by the village;
         (h)   If the DCB is owned by a nonprofit organization:
            1.   A statement describing the charitable cause that will benefit from the donations;
            2.   The federal tax identification number of the nonprofit organization operating the DCB; and
            3.   The statement "This collection box is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization."
         (i)   If the DCB is owned by a for-profit entity:
            1.   "This donation is not tax deductible." And
            2.   "This collection box is owned and operated by a for-profit organization."
   (B)   The parcel containing the DCB shall display an additional standalone sign with text in at least two-inch typeface stating that no material shall be left outside the DCB. This sign shall be installed at a visually conspicuous location within a radius of 20 feet from the DCB.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.32  MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   No blight shall be within 20 feet of the DCB including, but not limited to donation/collection overflow, litter, debris, and dumped material.
   (B)   DCBs shall be maintained and in good working order. Items to be repaired, removed, and/or abated include, but are not limited to graffiti, removed or damaged signs and notifications, peeling paint, rust, and broken collection operating mechanisms.
   (C)   DCBs shall be serviced not less than weekly between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends. This servicing includes the removal of donated/collected material and abatement of the blight described in this section.
   (D)   The operator shall maintain an active email address and a 24-hour telephone service with recording capability for the public to register complaints.
   (E)   DCBs cannot be used for the collection of solid waste and/or any hazardous materials.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
Bookmark§ 161.33  LIABILITY.
   Applicants and/or owner(s) agent shall maintain a minimum general liability insurance of $1,000,000 for the duration of the operation of a DCB at each site, to cover any claims or losses due to the placement, operation, or maintenance of the DCB and naming the Village of Channahon as additional insured.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
CODE ENFORCEMENT
Bookmark§ 161.40  COMPLIANCE PROCESS.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Official determines that a DCB with a valid permit does not conform to any requirement in this chapter he/she shall promptly notify the parcel owner/agent and DCB operator through electronic mail or first class mail of the violation delivered to the addresses provided upon application. The violation must be abated and proof of such submitted to the village within three business days after receipt of such notification.
   (B)   If an unpermitted DCB is not within a permissible geographic area according to § 161.26, then both the DCB and any blight within 20 feet of the DCB shall be removed within 72 hours after the parcel owner/agent and DCB operator is notified of the violation.
   (C)   If an unpermitted DCB is within a permissible geographic area according to § 161.26 then any blight within 20 feet of the site shall be removed and the parcel owner/agent and/or operator shall either: (1) apply for all DCB permits required by this chapter; or (2) remove the DCB. This requirement shall be met within 72 hours after the parcel owner/agent and/or DCB operators are notified of the violation.
   (D)   Each day, after the three business day cure period, that a violation of a requirement of this chapter is not abated constitutes a new and separate offense.
   (E)   The operation or maintenance of an unpermitted DCB may be abated or summarily abated by the village in any manner by this code or otherwise by law for the abatement of public nuisances. All expenses incurred by the village in connection with any action to abate a public nuisance will be chargeable to the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the public nuisance and is an express condition of the permit.
   (F)   The village shall issue administration citations against a parcel owner and/or operator who fails to timely resolve a violation or verified compliance is not sent to the village showing the resolution of the violation relating to a DCB after notice. The village shall issue administrative citations as follows:
      (1)   Not more than $ 150 for the first citation after the 72-hour abatement period;
      (2)   Not more than $250 for the second citation after the 72-hour abatement period; and
      (3)   Not more than $500 for the third and each subsequent citation after the 72-hour abatement period.
   (G)   The daily administrative citations described in division (F) shall continue until either the violation is abated or the DCB is removed. Removal of the DCB shall be at the expense of the parcel owner and/or operator. Any DCBs removed shall also have any of its DCB permits revoked.
   (H)   The property owner and operator are jointly and severally liable and responsible for all fees, administrative citations, and compliance with the regulations.
   (I)   A party aggrieved by a final administrative decision of the village, after an appeal has been made pursuant to § 161.25, may seek judicial review of the administrative decision pursuant to the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure within the time frame pursuant to those code sections.
   (J)   All notices for unpermitted DCBs shall be in writing and personally delivered to the parcel owner/agent and DCB operator or by depositing such notice in the United States mail, postage paid, and addressed to the parcel owner/agent at the owner(s) last known address as it appears on the last Will County equalized assessments roll, as well as placed on the DCB itself. If the village cannot reasonably determine the name and/or address of the unpermitted DCB operators, placing the written notice on the DCB itself constitutes sufficient notice. All notices regarding permitted DCBs shall be through electronic mail.
   (K)   Administrative citations established in this chapter are in addition to any other administrative or legal remedy which may be pursued by the village to address violations identified in this chapter.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)
NOTICING PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL
Bookmark§ 161.50  NOTICE REQUIRED FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any DCB scheduled to be removed by either the village or the operator shall clearly display a notice on the DCB with at least four-inch type visible from the front on the DCB that states the following text in capital letters: "THIS BOX WILL BE REMOVED BY" followed by the date the DCB is scheduled for removal. The entity who is removing the DCB is responsible for placement of the notice on the DCB.
   (B)   For DCBs required to be removed by the Village of Channahon due to an abatement order, the notice shall be posted immediately after the village notifies the operator and/or parcel owner that the facility is required to be removed.
   (C)   Notice that a DCB will be removed by the owner or operator shall be posted at least 14 calendar days prior to the removal of the facility.
(Ord. 1962, passed 12-17-18)


TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



        Table



         I.   ANNEXATIONS



         II.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



         III.   DISCONNECTIONS



         IV.   EASEMENTS



         V.   FRANCHISES



         VI.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



         VII.   STREET NAME CHANGES



         VIII.   VACATIONS



         IX.   ZONING CHANGES



         X.   SPECIAL USE PERMITS



TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




20
 
1-28-63


21
 
4-22-63


32
 
6-11-64


34
 
11-17-64


64
 
2-10-69


65
 
2-10-69


66
 
2-10-69


68
 
5-12-69


69
 
6-2-69


81
 
11-2-70


83
 
2-8-71


84
 
2-8-71


85
 
2-8-71


86
 
2-8-71


87
 
2-16-71


88
 
2-16-71


89
 
2-16-71


90
 
2-16-71


91
 
2-16-71


92
 
2-16-71


93
 
2-16-71


96
 
4-26-71


103
 
5-1-72


107
 
6-5-72


108
 
6-5-72


113
 
2-5-73


118
 
6-7-73


119
 
6-7-73


120
 
6-7-73


121
 
6-7-73


122
 
6-7-73


123
 
6-7-73


128
 
10-1-73


130
 
7-2-73


132
 
12-26-73


147
 
5-5-75


153
 
3-1-76


155
 
6-7-76


156
 
6-7-76


167
 
10-3-77


171
 
1-24-78


177
 
4-3-78


178
 
4-3-78


181
 
5-15-78


182
 
5-15-78


184
 
5-15-78


187
 
6-30-78


192
 
8-7-78


193
 
8-7-78


199
 
12-4-78


200
 
12-4-78


202
 
12-4-78


210
 
2-5-79


258
 
6-1-81


264
 
10-5-81


265
 
10-5-81


270
 
12-21-81


275
 
2-1-82


288
 
9-13-82


305
 
1-3-83


316
 
7-11-83


323
 
8-1-83


342
 
4-2-84


356
 
6-11-84


361
 
9-10-84


362
 
9-10-84


363
 
9-10-84


364
 
9-10-84


365
 
9-10-84


366
 
9-10-84


367
 
9-10-84


368
 
9-10-84


371
 
11-5-84


372
 
11-5-84


373
 
11-5-84


380
 
3-4-85


382
 
3-4-85


388
 
6-3-85


393
 
7-22-85


394
 
7-22-85


405
 
3-3-86


407
 
4-7-86


415
 
8-4-86


417
 
9-8-86


447
 
5-2-88


459
 
6-20-88


463
 
7-11-88


464
 
7-11-88


474
 
8-22-88


475
 
8-22-88


476
 
8-22-88


477
 
8-22-88


490
 
11-7-88


491
 
11-7-88


511
 
3-6-89


513
 
4-3-89


524
 
7-17-89


525
 
7-17-89


531
 
8-7-89


532
 
8-7-89


533
 
8-7-89


538
 
8-15-89


539
 
8-15-89


543
 
9-20-89


544
 
9-20-89


545
 
9-20-89


548
 
10-2-89


573
 
3-19-90


588
 
5-21-90


589
 
5-21-90


591
 
6-4-90


592
 
6-4-90


606
 
8-20-90


622
 
11-19-90


630
 
1-7-91


631
 
1-7-91


644
 
4-1-91


646
 
4-29-91


647
 
5-3-91


663
 
7-15-91


673
 
9-9-91


677
 
11-20-91


678
 
12-2-91


691
 
3-2-92


692
 
3-2-92


709
 
4-6-92


735
 
11-16-92


736
 
11-16-92


742
 
12-7-92


743
 
12-7-92


776
 
11-15-93


777
 
11-15-93


799
 
5-2-94


800
 
5-2-94


808
 
7-18-94


815
 
8-29-94


816
 
8-29-94


821
 
10-17-94


822
 
10-17-94


845
 
4-17-95


846
 
4-17-95


881
 
1-15-96


882
 
1-15-96


884
 
1-15-96


885
 
1-15-96


888
 
2-5-96


889
 
2-5-96


899
 
4-15-96


908
 
6-17-96


911
 
7-1-96


912
 
7-15-96


918
 
11-4-96


933
 
1-20-97


936
 
1-29-97


938
 
3-3-97


944
 
6-16-97


953
 
10-6-97


954
 
10-6-97


981
 
6-15-98


986
 
6-15-98


990
 
6-15-98


995
 
7-6-98


1000
 
10-19-98


1001
 
10-19-98


1002
 
10-19-98


1003
 
10-19-98


1008
 
11-16-98


1019
 
12-21-98


1023
 
2-15-99


1024
 
2-15-99


1025
 
2-15-99


1026
 
2-15-99


1034
 
3-1-99


1040
 
5-17-99


1044
 
6-7-99


1047
 
6-7-99


1051
 
6-21-99


1083
 
2-7-00


1091
 
3-20-00


1106
 
5-15-00


1108
 
5-15-00


1109
 
5-15-00


1110
 
5-15-00


1111
 
5-15-00


1117
 
7-5-00


1119
 
7-5-00


1122
 
7-5-00


1125
 
7-5-00


1127
 
7-5-00


1129
 
7-5-00


1131
 
7-5-00


1134
 
7-5-00


1135
 
7-5-00


1137
 
7-5-00


1141
 
7-17-00


1169
 
4-2-01


1170
 
4-2-01


1182
 
7-16-01


1183
 
7-16-01


1184
 
7-16-01


1190
 
9-4-01


1194
 
11-5-01


1195
 
11-5-01


1201
 
11-19-01


1202
 
11-19-01


1216
 
3-18-02


1217
 
3-18-02


1228
 
5-20-02


1231
 
5-20-02


1234
 
6-3-02


1235
 
6-3-02


1239
 
6-17-02


1240
 
6-17-02


1242
 
6-17-02


1243
 
7-1-02


1250
 
8-19-02


1254
 
9-3-02


1255
 
9-3-02


1272
 
1-6-03


1276
 
3-3-03


1277
 
3-3-03


1280
 
3-17-03


1281
 
3-17-03


1284
 
4-7-03


1287
 
4-21-03


1293
 
4-21-03


1313
 
10-20-03


1318
 
11-17-03


1327
 
12-1-03


1332
 
2-16-04


1333
 
3-1-04


1334
 
3-1-04


1343
 
5-17-04


1344
 
5-17-04


1353
 
9-7-04


1354
 
9-7-04


1382
 
6-6-05


1394
 
8-1-05


1395
 
8-1-05


1428
 
5-15-06


1431
 
6-26-06


1433
 
8-7-06


1437
 
8-21-06


1446
 
12-4-06


1450
 
12-4-06


1498
 
8-20-07


1499
 
8-20-07


1524
 
2-4-08


1720
 
12-3-12


1724
 
1-7-13


1730
 
1-21-13


1731
 
1-21-13


1753
 
10-21-13


1754
 
10-21-13


1756
 
10-21-13


1757
 
10-21-13


1806
 
5-18-15


1815
 
11-2-15


1818
 
12-21-15


1832
 
2-15-16


1834
 
3-7-16


1858
 
6-20-16


1891
 
4-3-17


1895
 
6-19-17


1896
 
6-19-17


1917
 
12-18-17


1924
 
3-5-18


1927
 
4-2-18


 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




158
 
6-7-76


169
 
11-7-77


170
 
11-7-77 


195
 
10-16-78


196
 
10-16-78


213
 
4-2-79


221
 
7-2-79


224
 
8-22-79


231
 
11-5-79


290
 
9-13-82


299
 
12-6-82


301
 
12-6-82


308
 
1-3-83


309
 
1-17-83


352
 
5-30-84


354
 
6-11-84


374
 
12-3-84


375
 
12-3-84


379
 
1-14-85


386
 
5-6-85


398
 
9-9-85


408
 
5-5-86


421
 
1-5-87


422
 
2-2-87


443
 
2-22-88


444
 
3-7-88


445
 
3-21-88


446
 
3-7-88


499
 
2-6-89


501
 
2-6-89


502
 
2-6-89


527
 
7-17-89


529
 
7-31-89


530
 
7-31-89


542
 
9-20-89


534
 
8-7-89


547
 
10-2-89


555
 
10-23-89


556
 
10-23-89


581
 
5-7-90


582
 
5-7-90


583
 
5-7-90


605
 
8-20-90


609
 
10-10-90


617
 
11-15-90


627
 
11-26-90


628
 
1-7-91


629
 
1-7-91


637
 
3-4-91


638
 
3-4-91


655
 
6-17-91


670
 
8-5-91


683
 
12-11-91


688
 
2-3-92


697
 
3-2-92


699
 
3-2-92


706
 
4-6-92


714
 
6-1-92


720
 
4-6-92


724
 
8-3-92


759
 
5-10-93


766
 
7-19-93


809
 
7-18-94


812
 
7-18-94


838
 
2-6-94


848
 
5-1-95


852
 
6-19-95


887
 
1-15-96


904
 
6-3-96


910
 
7-1-96


920
 
11-18-96


947
 
7-7-97


948
 
7-21-97


982
 
6-15-98


983
 
6-15-98


984
 
6-15-98


985
 
6-15-98


994
 
7-6-98


1010
 
12-7-98


1021
 
2-1-99


1035
 
3-1-99


1036
 
4-4-99


1037
 
4-19-99


1042
 
6-7-99


1043
 
6-7-99


1046
 
6-7-99


1049
 
6-7-99


1050
 
6-21-99


1064-A
 
9-7-99


1071
 
11-29-99


1085
 
2-7-00


1090
 
3-20-00


1093
 
3-20-00


1094
 
4-3-00


1095
 
4-3-00


1099
 
4-3-00


1100
 
4-3-00


1116
 
7-5-00


1121
 
7-5-00


1124
 
7-5-00


1128
 
7-5-00


1130
 
7-5-00


1133
 
7-5-00


1140
 
7-17-00


1143
 
8-21-00


1157
 
11-20-00


1158
 
11-20-00


1163
 
2-5-01


1165
 
3-5-01


1166
 
3-5-01


1186
 
7-16-01


1191
 
9-17-01


1192
 
10-1-01


1217
 
3-18-02


1227
 
5-20-02


1237
 
6-17-02


1249
 
8-5-02


1261
 
12-2-02


1290
 
4-21-03


1301
 
5-30-03


1373
 
2-7-05


1397
 
8-15-05


1398
 
8-15-05


1468
 
2-19-07


1473
 
3-5-07


1486
 
4-16-07


1490
 
5-15-07


1491
 
6-18-07


1493
 
6-18-07


1494
 
7-2-07


1511
 
12-3-07


1523
 
2-4-08


1535
 
4-7-08


1546
 
8-18-08


1550
 
9-15-08


1571
 
1-19-09


1573
 
2-16-09


1575
 
3-2-09


1583
 
6-1-09


1584
 
6-1-09


1629
 
10-4-10


1652
 
6-20-11


1683
 
1-16-12


1685
 
1-16-12


1689
 
4-16-12


1695
 
5-7-12


1697
 
5-7-12


1707
 
9-4-12


1709
 
10-1-12


1710
 
10-1-12


1711
 
10-1-12


1723
 
1-7-13


1727
 
1-21-13


1728
 
1-21-13


1729
 
1-21-13


1800
 
3-16-15


1816
 
12-7-15


1817
 
12-7-15


1833
 
3-7-16


1842
 
4-18-16


1905
 
9-5-17


1922
 
2-19-18


 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  DISCONNECTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




25
 
10-7-63


26
 
10-7-63


230
 
10-8-63


561
 
11-20-89


844
 
4-3-95


945
 
6-16-97


1259
 
9-16-02


1260
 
9-16-02


1528
 
3-3-08


 




 



TABLE IV:  EASEMENTS



 


Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





603
 
8-6-90


604
 
8-6-90


685
 
1-6-92


1193
 
10-15-01


1246
 
8-5-02


1247
 
8-5-02


1317
 
11-17-03


1361
 
11-1-04


1380
 
4-18-05


1436
 
8-7-06


 




 



TABLE V: FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




127
 
9-17-73


223
 
8-22-79


251
 
8-6-81


376
 
1-7-85


734
 
10-19-92


872
 
12-4-95


 




 



TABLE VI:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




194
 
10-16-78


198
 
12-4-78


232
 
11-5-79


756
 
3-1-93


793
 
5-7-94


863
 
10-2-95


914
 
7-15-96


923
 
12-16-96


932
 
1-6-97


943
 
5-19-97


1176
 
6-4-01


1188
 
8-20-01


1381
 
5-16-05


1666
 
9-19-11


1921
 
1-15-18


 
 
 




 



TABLE VII:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




671
 
9-9-91


729
 
9-21-92


907
 
6-17-96


1224
 
4-15-02


1554
 
10-6-08


1646
 
4-18-11


 




 



TABLE VIII:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




22
 
5-6-63


31
 
6-11-64


35
 
11-17-64


38
 
1-6-65


82
 
12-7-70


102
 
9-20-71


144
 
9-9-74


190
 
7-10-78


412
 
7-7-86


480
 
9-12-88


791
 
3-7-94


792
 
3-7-94


865
 
11-6-95


1071
 
11-29-99


1193
 
10-15-01


1207
 
12-3-01


1208
 
12-3-01


1230
 
5-20-02


1309
 
7-21-03


1802
 
3-16-15


 




 



TABLE IX:  ZONING CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




36
 
1-6-65


44
 
8-2-65


57
 
12-4-67


61
 
5-6-68


70
 
6-2-69


131
 
7-2-73


160
 
9-13-76


172
 
1-24-78


179
 
4-3-78


183
 
5-15-78


185
 
5-15-78


201
 
12-4-78


204
 
12-4-78


228
 
8-22-79


233
 
12-3-79


248
 
12-1-80


266
 
10-5-81


269
 
12-7-81


271
 
12-21-81


276
 
2-1-82


289
 
9-13-82


306
 
1-3-83


326
 
9-12-83


327
 
9-12-83


334
 
12-5-83


413
 
7-7-86


432
 
7-6-87


436
 
8-3-87


437
 
8-31-87


441
 
12-7-87


448
 
5-2-88


460
 
6-20-88


461
 
6-20-88


465
 
7-11-88


478
 
9-12-88


488
 
11-7-88


489
 
11-7-88


492
 
11-7-88


495
 
12-5-88


503
 
2-6-89


510
 
3-6-89


512
 
4-3-89


526
 
7-17-89


546
 
9-20-89


579
 
4-16-90


585
 
5-7-90


590
 
5-21-90


607
 
8-20-90


623
 
11-19-90


624
 
11-19-90


635
 
3-4-91


648
 
4-29-91


649
 
4-29-91


651
 
5-20-91


664
 
7-15-91


676
 
11-4-91


693
 
3-2-92


701
 
3-2-92


712
 
5-4-92


737
 
11-16-92


744
 
12-7-92


763
 
7-6-93


778
 
11-15-93


801
 
5-2-94


818
 
9-19-94


823
 
10-17-94


824
 
10-17-94


826
 
11-21-94


847
 
4-17-95


870
 
11-20-95


871
 
11-20-95


883
 
1-15-96


886
 
1-15-96


909
 
6-17-96


913
 
7-15-96


955
 
10-6-97


957
 
10-10-97


971
 
3-2-98


974
 
3-16-98


977
 
4-6-98


980
 
5-4-98


987
 
6-15-98


1009
 
11-16-98


1027
 
2-15-99


1028
 
2-15-99


1041
 
5-17-99


1061-D
 
9-7-99


1063-D
 
9-7-99


1070
 
11-15-99


1084
 
2-7-00


1092
 
3-20-00


1107
 
5-15-00


1112
 
5-15-00


1118
 
7-5-00


1120
 
7-5-00


1123
 
7-5-00


1132
 
7-5-00


1138
 
7-5-00


1196
 
11-5-01


1203
 
11-19-01


1226
 
5-5-02


1229
 
5-20-02


1236
 
6-3-02


1241
 
6-17-02


1251
 
8-19-02


1278
 
3-3-03


1279
 
3-3-03


1282
 
3-17-03


1285
 
4-7-03


1288
 
4-21-03


1289
 
4-21-03


1308
 
7-21-03


1328
 
12-1-03


1335
 
3-1-04


1375
 
3-21-05


1393
 
8-1-05


1414
 
3-20-06


1462
 
2-19-07


1476
 
3-19-07


1485
 
4-16-07


1487
 
4-16-07


1500
 
8-20-07


1503
 
9-17-07


1506
 
11-19-07


1549
 
9-15-08


1551
 
9-15-08


1556
 
10-20-08


1581
 
6-1-09


1616
 
4-19-10


1627
 
9-20-10


1654
 
6-20-11


1662
 
9-6-11


1669
 
10-17-11


1671
 
11-21-11


1690
 
4-16-12


1725
 
1-7-13


1732
 
1-21-13


1755
 
10-21-13


1758
 
10-21-13


1775
 
4-7-14


1799
 
2-16-15


1804
 
4-20-15


1805
 
4-20-15


1807
 
5-18-15


1812
 
8-24-15


1819
 
12-21-15


1850
 
5-16-16


1859
 
6-20-16


1890
 
4-3-17


1897
 
6-19-17


1908
 
11-20-17


1926
 
3-19-18


1928
 
4-2-18


 
 
 




 



TABLE X:  SPECIAL USE PERMITS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




752
 
1-4-93


753
 
1-18-92


860
 
8-21-95


894
 
2-19-96


937
 
1-3-97


972
 
3-2-98


975
 
3-16-98


989
 
6-15-98


996
 
7-6-98


1045
 
6-7-99


1048
 
6-7-99


1052
 
6-21-99


1136
 
7-5-00


1173
 
5-7-01


1174
 
5-21-01


1181
 
7-2-01


1185
 
7-16-01


1232
 
5-20-02


1258
 
9-16-02


1303
 
5-19-03


1329
 
12-1-03


1345
 
5-17-04


1355
 
9-7-04


1356
 
9-7-04


1385
 
6-20-05


1386
 
6-20-05


1387
 
6-20-05


1388
 
6-20-05


1392
 
8-1-05


1424
 
5-1-06


1427
 
5-15-06


1434
 
8-7-06


1447
 
12-4-06


1488
 
5-7-07


1506
 
11-19-07


1507
 
11-19-07


1512
 
12-17-07


1513
 
12-17-07


1553
 
10-6-08


1580
 
4-20-09


1621
 
5-17-10


1639
 
12-20-10


1659
 
8-15-11


1660
 
8-15-11


1661
 
8-15-11


1663
 
9-6-11


1665
 
9-19-11


1700
 
7-16-12


1703
 
8-20-12


1704
 
8-20-12


1705
 
8-20-12


1706
 
8-20-12


1726
 
1-7-13


1747
 
7-15-13


1759
 
11-4-13


1836
 
3-7-16


1860
 
6-20-16


1863
 
7-5-16


1918
 
12-18-17


 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Illinois Compiled Statutes





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS
 
Code Section




Ch. 5, Act 315, § 3
 
38.70


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-1.4
 
38.70


Ch. 10, Act 5, § 9-3
 
38.70


Ch. 10, Act 5, §§ 10 et seq.
 
32.118


Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.
 
132.02


Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.
 
13.5/24-2


Ch. 35, Act 120, § 2-27
 
37.170


Ch. 35, Act 305, §§ 1 et seq.
 
37.78


Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.
 
37.173


Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
 
118.06, 118.07


Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005
 
13.5/24-2


Ch. 55, Act 5, § 1063
 
151.11


Ch. 65
 
154.30


Ch. 65, Act 5, §1-2-1
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-146
 
37.30


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-25
 
34.21


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-30
 
34.21


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-2-9.1 et seq.
 
34.20


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1
 
37.95


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5
 
37.95


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6
 
37.160


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-7
 
37.15


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8
 
37.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10.2-1-1 et seq.
 
32.124, 32.125


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-1
 
156.120


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8
 
153.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-74-2
 
37.41


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 4
 
54.05


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-221
 
37.170


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222
 
37.170


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1
 
37.170


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v)
 
54.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
 
118.02, 118.03


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
 
54.02, 118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)
 
118.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
118.01   


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d)
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501
 
118.15


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(r)(1)
 
118.99


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 70-501(s)
 
118.17


Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.
 
54.16


Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3
 
52.107


Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1-49
 
153.02


Ch. 225, Act 330, §§ 1-49
 
153.02


Ch. 225, Act 445, §§ 1 et seq.
 
13.5/24-2


Ch. 225, Act 445, § 28
 
13.5/24-2


Ch. 230, Act 15, § 5
 
119.08


Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.
 
132.02


Ch. 230, Act 40
 
120.01


Ch. 235
 
111.25, 111.50


Ch. 235 et seq.
 
34.08


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-2 et seq.
 
111.03


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-3.24
 
111.02


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-4
 
111.25


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-5
 
111.25


Ch. 410, Act 625, §§ 1 et seq.
 
121.01


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3
 
110.27


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360
 
13.5/105-3, 13.5/105-4


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 4(e)
 
52.108


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 1
 
13.5/105-1


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 2
 
13.5/105-2


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3
 
13.5/105-3


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 4
 
13.5/105-4


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 5
 
13.5/105-5


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 6
 
13.5/105-6


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 7
 
13.5/105-7


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8
 
13.5/105-8


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 9
 
13.5/105-9


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 10
 
13.5/105-10


Ch. 415, Act 105, § 11
 
13.5/105-11


Ch. 425, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.
 
13.5/35-2


Ch. 425, Act 35, § 1
 
13.5/35-1


Ch. 425, Act 35, § 2
 
13.5/35-2


Ch. 425, Act 35, § 2.1
 
13.5/35-2.1


Ch. 425, Act 35, § 2.2
 
13.5/35-2.2


Ch. 425, Act 35, § 2.3
 
13.5/35-2.3


Ch. 615, Act 5, § 5
 
153.02, 153.61


Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18g
 
153.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.
 
13.5/105-3


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146
 
13.5/105-3


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.8
 
96.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217
 
13.5/21-3


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 2-118.1
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101
 
97.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-204
 
10.98


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303
 
97.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-500 through 11-502
 
70.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501
 
97.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-1426.1
 
70.21


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102
 
96.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103
 
96.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107
 
96.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111
 
96.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 14-1 et seq.
 
13.5/26-4


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-1
 
13.5/21-1


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1
 
13.5/21-1


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-2(a)
 
13.5/21-2


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3
 
13.5/21-3


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
 
97.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)
 
13.5/24-1


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7)
 
13.5/24-2


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.5
 
97.01


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2
 
13.5/24-2


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3
 
97.01, 13.5/24-3


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1
 
13.5/24-3.1


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6
 
13.5/24-6


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1
 
13.5/26-1


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-2
 
13.5/26-2


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-3
 
13.5/26-3


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-4
 
13.5/26-4


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 26.5 et seq.
 
Ch. 13.5


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1
 
13.5/31-1


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-3
 
13.5/31-3


Ch. 720, Act 17, § 1
 
13.5/17-1


Ch. 720, Act 17, § 2
 
13.5/17-2


Ch. 720, Act 130
 
Ch. 13.5


Ch. 720, Act 135
 
Ch. 13.5


Ch. 720, Act 535
 
Ch. 13.5


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 1
 
131.550/1


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 2
 
131.550/2


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 3
 
131.550/3


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5
 
131.550/5


Ch. 720, Act 600, § 1
 
131.600-1


Ch. 720, Act 600, § 2
 
131.600-2


Ch. 720, Act 600, § 3
 
131.600-3


Ch. 720, Act 670, § 0.01
 
13.5/670-0.01


Ch. 720, Act 670, § 1
 
13.5/670-1


Ch. 720, Act 670, § 2
 
13.5/670-2


Ch. 720, Act 670, § 3
 
13.5/670-3


Ch. 720, Act 690, § 0.01
 
13.5/690-0.01


Ch. 720, Act 690, §1
 
13.5/690-1


Ch. 720, Act 690, § 2
 
13.5/690-2


Ch. 720, Act 690, § 3
 
13.5/690-3


Ch. 720, Act 690, § 4
 
13.5/690-4


Ch. 720, Act 690, §4.5
 
13.5/690-4.5


Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-3(7)
 
13.5/21-3


Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-14
 
13.5/21-3


Ch. 725, Act 210, §§ 1 et seq.
 
13.5/24-2


Ch. 730, Act 150
 
114.02


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 2-202
 
13.5/21-3


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 8-902
 
13.5/26-4


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1200.5
 
13.5/21-3


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1505.8(l)
 
13.5/21-3


Ch. 765
 
151.03, 154.22


Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2
 
153.95


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1
 
5-14-62
 
30.11, 30.18, 30.99


20
 
1-28-63
 
T.S.O. I


21
 
4-22-63
 
T.S.O. I


22
 
5-6-63
 
T.S.O. VIII


25
 
10-7-63
 
T.S.O. III


26
 
10-7-63
 
T.S.O. III


31
 
6-11-64
 
T.S.O. VIII


32
 
6-11-64
 
T.S.O. I


34
 
11-17-64
 
T.S.O. I


35
 
11-17-64
 
T.S.O. VIII


36
 
1-6-65
 
T.S.O. IX


38
 
1-6-65
 
T.S.O. VIII


44
 
8-2-65
 
T.S.O. IX


57
 
12-4-67
 
T.S.O. IX


61
 
5-6-68
 
T.S.O. IX


64
 
2-10-69
 
T.S.O. I


65
 
2-10-69
 
T.S.O. I


66
 
2-10-69
 
T.S.O. I


68
 
5-12-69
 
T.S.O. I


69
 
6-2-69
 
T.S.O. I


70
 
6-2-69
 
T.S.O. IX


75
 
2-2-70
 
113.01, 113.04 – 113.07, 113.99


76
 
5-18-69
 
95.01–95.05, 95.99


81
 
11-2-70
 
T.S.O. I


82
 
12-7-70
 
T.S.O. VIII


83
 
2-8-71
 
T.S.O. I


84
 
2-8-71
 
T.S.O. I


85
 
2-8-71
 
T.S.O. I


86
 
2-8-71
 
T.S.O. I


87
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. I


88
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. I


89
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. I


90
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. I


91
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. I


92
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. I


93
 
2-16-71
 
T.S.O. I


95
 
4-5-71
 
156.001 – 156.058, 156.070 – 156.077, 156.095 - 156.151, 156.190, 156.194
– 156.202, 156.999


96
 
4-26-71
 
T.S.O. I


102
 
9-20-71
 
T.S.O. VIII


103
 
5-1-72
 
T.S.O. I


107
 
6-5-72
 
T.S.O. I


108
 
6-5-72
 
T.S.O. I


111
 
1-8-73
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


112
 
10-2-72
 
50.01–50.08, 50.99


113
 
2-5-73
 
T.S.O. I


116
 
5-7-73
 
156.056, 156.057


118
 
6-7-73
 
T.S.O. I


119
 
6-7-73
 
T.S.O. I


120
 
6-7-73
 
T.S.O. I


121
 
6-7-73
 
T.S.O. I


122
 
6-7-73
 
T.S.O. I


123
 
6-7-73
 
T.S.O. I


127
 
9-17-73
 
T.S.O. V


128
 
10-1-73
 
T.S.O. I


130
 
7-2-73
 
T.S.O. I


131
 
7-2-73
 
T.S.O. IX


132
 
12-26-73
 
T.S.O. I


136
 
2-4-74
 
50.15–50.21


144
 
9-9-74
 
T.S.O. VIII


147
 
5-5-75
 
T.S.O. I


149
 
7-7-75
 
13.5/2-.5 - 13.5/16-13, 13.5/800-5, 13.5/999-1, 131.01 - 131.05, 131.99,
132.01 - 132.04, 132.99


153
 
3-1-76
 
T.S.O. I


155
 
6-7-76
 
T.S.O. I


156
 
6-7-76
 
T.S.O. I


157
 
6-7-76
 
31.21


158
 
6-7-76
 
T.S.O. II


160
 
9-13-76
 
T.S.O. IX


161
 
3-21-77
 
10.19, 30.01, 30.10, 30.12-30.17, 31.01-31.07, 31.09-31.12, 31.20, 31.30,
31.40, 31.70, 31.80, 31.90, 32.01, 32.30, 32.50, 33.01, 34.01


167
 
10-3-77
 
T.S.O. I


168
 
10-17-77
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


169
 
11-7-77
 
T.S.O. II


170
 
11-7-77
 
T.S.O. II


171
 
1-24-78
 
T.S.O. I


172
 
1-24-78
 
T.S.O. IX


173
 
1-24-78
 
156.020, 156.056


174
 
2-20-78
 
154.85–154.89, 154.91-154.94


175
 
2-20-78
 
150.10, 150.11


176
 
3-6-78
 
Ch. 154, App. A and App. B, , 154.01–154.12, 154.15, 154.20-154.23,
154.30-154.61, 154.63 - 154.77, 154.98, 154.99


177
 
4-3-78
 
T.S.O. I


178
 
4-3-78
 
T.S.O. I


179
 
4-3-78
 
T.S.O. IX


181
 
5-15-78
 
T.S.O. I


182
 
5-15-78
 
T.S.O. I


183
 
5-15-78
 
T.S.O. IX


184
 
5-15-78
 
T.S.O. I


185
 
5-15-78
 
T.S.O. IX


187
 
6-30-78
 
T.S.O. I


190
 
7-10-78
 
T.S.O. VIII


192
 
8-7-78
 
T.S.O. I


193
 
8-7-78
 
T.S.O. I


194
 
10-16-78
 
T.S.O. VI


195
 
10-16-78
 
T.S.O. II


196
 
10-16-78
 
T.S.O. II


197
 
11-6-78
 
34.02


198
 
12-4-78
 
T.S.O. VI


199
 
12-4-78
 
T.S.O. I


200
 
12-4-78
 
T.S.O. I


201
 
12-4-78
 
T.S.O. IX


202
 
12-4-78
 
T.S.O. I


203
 
12-4-78
 
34.03


204
 
12-4-78
 
T.S.O. IX


210
 
2-5-79
 
T.S.O. I


211
 
3-5-79
 
31.50–31.62


213
 
4-2-79
 
T.S.O. II


214
 
5-7-79
 
93.01, 93.11, 93.99


217
 
5-21-79
 
31.07, 31.08, 31.22, 31.31, 31.41


221
 
7-2-79
 
T.S.O. II


223
 
8-22-79
 
T.S.O. V


224
 
8-22-79
 
T.S.O. II


225
 
8-22-79
 
13.5/800-1 - 13.5/800-4


228
 
8-22-79
 
T.S.O. IX


229
 
9-24-79
 
92.01–92.14


230
 
10-8-63
 
T.S.O. III


231
 
11-5-79
 
T.S.O. II


232
 
11-5-79
 
T.S.O. VI


233
 
12-3-79
 
T.S.O. IX


234
 
12-3-79
 
31.50–31.62


243
 
10-13-80
 
93.01, 93.02, 93.99


244
 
10-13-80
 
155.06


247
 
11-3-80
 
13.5/800-3


248
 
12-1-80
 
T.S.O. IX


251
 
8-6-81
 
T.S.O. V


252
 
4-6-81
 
33.02


258
 
6-1-81
 
T.S.O. I


264
 
10-5-81
 
T.S.O. I


265
 
10-5-81
 
T.S.O. I


266
 
10-5-81
 
T.S.O. IX


269
 
12-7-81
 
T.S.O. IX


270
 
12-21-81
 
T.S.O. I


271
 
12-21-81
 
T.S.O. IX


273
 
1-4-82
 
37.01–37.03


274
 
1-4-82
 
37.15–37.17


275
 
2-1-82
 
T.S.O. I


276
 
2-1-82
 
T.S.O. IX


277
 
3-1-82
 
37.40, 37.41


278
 
3-1-82
 
154.01, 154.03, 154.05, 154.08, 154.10, 154.13, 154.14


279
 
4-12-82
 
34.04


287
 
8-2-82
 
110.27, 110.99


288
 
9-13-82
 
T.S.O. I


289
 
9-13-82
 
T.S.O. IX


290
 
9-13-82
 
T.S.O. II


294
 
11-1-82
 
156.191


295
 
11-1-82
 
32.30, 32.50


299
 
12-6-82
 
T.S.O. II


301
 
12-6-82
 
T.S.O. II


303
 
12-6-82
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


305
 
1-3-83
 
T.S.O. I


306
 
1-3-83
 
T.S.O. IX


308
 
1-3-83
 
T.S.O. II


309
 
1-17-83
 
T.S.O. II, 151.001-151.038, 151.077, 151.085, 151.104, 151.998, 151.999


310
 
2-7-83
 
31.21


312
 
2-21-83
 
156.040, 156.100, 156.101


313
 
3-7-83
 
156.071


316
 
7-11-83
 
T.S.O. I


319
 
7-11-83
 
156.021


320
 
7-11-83
 
154.24


322
 
8-1-83
 
36.01


323
 
8-1-83
 
T.S.O. I


326
 
9-12-83
 
T.S.O. IX


327
 
9-12-83
 
T.S.O. IX


329
 
10-3-83
 
150.10–150.12


330
 
11-7-83
 
93.20–93.27, 93.99


331
 
11-7-83
 
95.10–95.15, 95.99


333
 
11-7-83
 
151.023, 151.027


334
 
12-5-83
 
T.S.O. IX


335
 
12-5-83
 
156.021, 156.180 - 156.188


337
 
12-5-83
 
111.01–111.14, 111.16–111.25, 111.36-111.44, 111.46, 111.47, 111.49,
111.50, 111.999


342
 
4-2-84
 
T.S.O. I


344
 
4-16-84
 
112.20–112.29, 112.99


345
 
4-16-84
 
117.01–117.08, 117.99


347
 
4-16-84
 
112.01–112.12, 112.99


350
 
4-16-84
 
37.30, 37.31


352
 
5-30-84
 
T.S.O. II


354
 
6-11-84
 
T.S.O. II


356
 
6-11-84
 
T.S.O. I


358
 
8-6-84
 
112.03


361
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


362
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


363
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


364
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


365
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


366
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


367
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


368
 
9-10-84
 
T.S.O. I


371
 
11-5-84
 
T.S.O. I


372
 
11-5-84
 
T.S.O. I


373
 
11-5-84
 
T.S.O. I


374
 
12-3-84
 
T.S.O. II


375
 
12-3-84
 
T.S.O. II


376
 
1-7-85
 
T.S.O. V


377
 
1-7-85
 
112.12


379
 
1-14-85
 
T.S.O. II


380
 
3-4-85
 
T.S.O. I


382
 
3-4-85
 
T.S.O. I


386
 
5-6-85
 
T.S.O. II


388
 
6-3-85
 
T.S.O. I


393
 
7-22-85
 
T.S.O. I


394
 
7-22-85
 
T.S.O. I


397
 
9-9-85
 
111.41


398
 
9-9-85
 
T.S.O. II


399
 
9-9-85
 
91.01–91.03, 91.20 - 91.31, 91.99


404
 
3-3-86
 
156.040, 156.110, 156.111


405
 
3-3-86
 
T.S.O. I


407
 
4-7-86
 
T.S.O. I


408
 
5-5-86
 
T.S.O. II


412
 
7-7-86
 
T.S.O. VIII


413
 
7-7-86
 
T.S.O. IX


415
 
8-4-86
 
T.S.O. I


416
 
8-4-86
 
38.01–38.05


417
 
9-8-86
 
T.S.O. I


419
 
10-6-86
 
156.056


420
 
12-1-86
 
117.09


421
 
1-5-87
 
T.S.O. II


422
 
2-2-87
 
T.S.O. II


424
 
4-6-87
 
156.111


425
 
5-4-87
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


432
 
7-6-87
 
T.S.O. IX


436
 
8-3-87
 
T.S.O. IX


437
 
8-31-87
 
T.S.O. IX


439
 
12-7-87
 
156.056


441
 
12-7-87
 
T.S.O. IX


442
 
2-22-88
 
111.13, 111.41


443
 
2-22-88
 
T.S.O. II


444
 
3-7-88
 
T.S.O. II


445
 
3-21-88
 
T.S.O. II


446
 
3-7-88
 
T.S.O. II


447
 
5-2-88
 
T.S.O. I


448
 
5-2-88
 
T.S.O. IX


453
 
6-6-88
 
150.10


455
 
6-6-88
 
151.076


457
 
6-20-88
 
34.05


458
 
6-20-88
 
150.01, 150.02


459
 
6-20-88
 
T.S.O. I


460
 
6-20-88
 
T.S.O. IX


461
 
6-20-88
 
T.S.O. IX


463
 
7-11-88
 
T.S.O. I


464
 
7-11-88
 
T.S.O. I


465
 
7-11-88
 
T.S.O. IX


471
 
8-1-88
 
34.05


474
 
8-22-88
 
T.S.O. I


475
 
8-22-88
 
T.S.O. I


476
 
8-22-88
 
T.S.O. I


477
 
8-22-88
 
T.S.O. I


478
 
9-12-88
 
T.S.O. IX


480
 
9-12-88
 
T.S.O. VIII


481
 
9-14-88
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


487
 
11-7-88
 
156.111


488
 
11-7-88
 
T.S.O. IX


489
 
11-7-88
 
T.S.O. IX


490
 
11-7-88
 
T.S.O. I


491
 
11-7-88
 
T.S.O. I


492
 
11-7-88
 
T.S.O. IX


494
 
11-30-88
 
111.13, 111.15


495
 
12-5-88
 
T.S.O. IX


499
 
2-6-89
 
T.S.O. II


501
 
2-6-89
 
T.S.O. II


502
 
2-6-89
 
T.S.O. II


503
 
2-6-89
 
T.S.O. IX


505
 
2-6-89
 
115.01, 115.10-115.18, 115.25-115.29, 115.99


506
 
2-6-89
 
156.057


507
 
2-6-89
 
111.11


508
 
2-6-89
 
111.45


510
 
3-6-89
 
T.S.O. IX


511
 
3-6-89
 
T.S.O. I


512
 
4-3-89
 
T.S.O. IX


513
 
4-3-89
 
T.S.O. I


515
 
6-5-89
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


519
 
6-12-89
 
38.15–38.23, 38.99


520
 
6-19-89
 
110.01–110.26, 110.99, Ch. 110, Appendix


521
 
6-19-89
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


524
 
7-17-89
 
T.S.O. I


525
 
7-17-89
 
T.S.O. I


526
 
7-17-89
 
T.S.O. IX


527
 
7-17-89
 
T.S.O. II


529
 
7-31-89
 
T.S.O. II


530
 
7-31-89
 
T.S.O. II


531
 
8-7-89
 
T.S.O. I


532
 
8-7-89
 
T.S.O. I


533
 
8-7-89
 
T.S.O. I


534
 
8-7-89
 
T.S.O. II


535
 
8-7-89
 
111.35


536
 
8-7-89
 
110.22, 110.99


538
 
8-15-89
 
T.S.O. I


539
 
8-15-89
 
T.S.O. I


541
 
9-11-89
 
154.36


542
 
9-20-89
 
T.S.O. II


543
 
9-20-89
 
T.S.O. I


544
 
9-20-89
 
T.S.O. I


545
 
9-20-89
 
T.S.O. I


546
 
9-20-89
 
T.S.O. IX


547
 
10-2-89
 
T.S.O. II


548
 
10-2-89
 
T.S.O. I


549
 
10-2-89
 
154.85, 154.90


552
 
10-2-89
 
111.51


553
 
10-2-89
 
153.01–153.96, 153.98, 153.99


555
 
10-23-89
 
T.S.O. II


556
 
10-23-89
 
T.S.O. II


558
 
11-6-89
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


560
 
11-20-89
 
52.054, 52.055


561
 
11-20-89
 
T.S.O. III


563
 
12-4-89
 
111.03


564
 
1-8-90
 
111.15


566
 
1-22-90
 
156.101


570
 
1-22-90
 
156.028


571
 
2-5-90
 
151.078, 151.999


572
 
3-19-90
 
154.85, 154.97, Ch. 154, App. D


573
 
3-19-90
 
T.S.O. I


574
 
3-19-90
 
34.03


575
 
4-2-90
 
13.5/999-1, 131.99, 132.99


576
 
4-2-90
 
95.35, 95.99


579
 
4-16-90
 
T.S.O. IX


580
 
5-7-90
 
154.75


581
 
5-7-90
 
T.S.O. II


582
 
5-7-90
 
T.S.O. II


583
 
5-7-90
 
T.S.O. II


584
 
5-7-90
 
156.070, 156.077


585
 
5-7-90
 
T.S.O. IX


586
 
5-7-90
 
111.52, 111.999


588
 
5-21-90
 
T.S.O. I


589
 
5-21-90
 
T.S.O. I


590
 
5-21-90
 
T.S.O. IX


591
 
6-4-90
 
T.S.O. I


592
 
6-4-90
 
T.S.O. I


593
 
6-4-90
 
31.21, 31.31


595
 
6-18-90
 
151.075


596
 
6-18-90
 
32.30, 32.50


599
 
7-2-90
 
156.058


600
 
7-2-90
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


602
 
7-26-90
 
156.200


603
 
8-6-90
 
T.S.O. IV


604
 
8-6-90
 
T.S.O. IV


605
 
8-20-90
 
T.S.O. II


606
 
8-20-90
 
T.S.O. I


607
 
8-20-90
 
T.S.O. IX


609
 
10-10-90
 
T.S.O. II


610
 
9-10-90
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


612
 
10-24-90
 
95.21–95.23


613
 
10-24-90
 
91.28


617
 
11-15-90
 
T.S.O. II


618
 
10-15-90
 
150.50


622
 
11-19-90
 
T.S.O. I


623
 
11-19-90
 
T.S.O. IX


624
 
11-19-90
 
T.S.O. IX


627
 
11-26-90
 
T.S.O. II


628
 
1-7-91
 
T.S.O. II


629
 
1-7-91
 
T.S.O. II


630
 
1-7-91
 
T.S.O. I


631
 
1-7-91
 
T.S.O. I


632
 
1-7-91
 
156.004, 156.056-156.058


634
 
2-4-91
 
34.06


635
 
3-4-91
 
T.S.O. IX


636
 
3-4-91
 
156.071–156.077


637
 
3-4-91
 
T.S.O. II


638
 
3-4-91
 
T.S.O. II


639
 
3-4-91
 
154.12, 154.21, 154.22, 154.36, 154.75


640
 
3-4-91
 
38.35, 38.36


642
 
4-1-91
 
52.095


643
 
4-1-91
 
111.04


644
 
4-1-91
 
T.S.O. I


646
 
4-29-91
 
T.S.O. I


647
 
5-3-91
 
T.S.O. I


648
 
4-29-91
 
T.S.O. IX


649
 
4-29-91
 
T.S.O. IX


651
 
5-20-91
 
T.S.O. IX


652
 
6-3-91
 
151.005, 151.999


654
 
6-3-91
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, 90.01 - 90.10, 90.12, 90.99


655
 
6-17-91
 
T.S.O. II


656
 
6-24-91
 
31.50–31.62


660
 
7-1-91
 
93.03


661
 
7-1-91
 
94.01, 94.03, 94.99


662
 
7-15-91
 
156.072


663
 
7-15-91
 
T.S.O. I


664
 
7-15-91
 
T.S.O. IX


665
 
7-15-91
 
111.13, 111.15


666
 
7-15-91
 
156.072


667
 
7-15-91
 
111.21


668
 
7-15-91
 
156.072


669
 
7-15-91
 
154.52


670
 
8-5-91
 
T.S.O. II


671
 
9-9-91
 
T.S.O. VII


673
 
9-9-91
 
T.S.O. I


676
 
11-4-91
 
T.S.O. IX


677
 
11-20-91
 
T.S.O. I


678
 
12-2-91
 
T.S.O. I


681
 
12-2-91
 
32.105–32.109


683
 
12-11-91
 
T.S.O. II


685
 
1-6-92
 
T.S.O. IV


688
 
2-3-92
 
T.S.O. II


691
 
3-2-92
 
T.S.O. I


692
 
3-2-92
 
T.S.O. I


693
 
3-2-92
 
T.S.O. IX


697
 
3-2-92
 
T.S.O. II


699
 
3-2-92
 
T.S.O. II


700
 
3-2-92
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


701
 
3-2-92
 
T.S.O. IX


702
 
4-6-92
 
Ch. 154, App. B, 154.50, 154.53, 154.68


703
 
4-6-92
 
153.01–153.96, 153.98, 153.99


706
 
4-6-92
 
T.S.O. II


709
 
4-6-92
 
T.S.O. I


710
 
4-13-92
 
37.55–37.65, 37.99


711
 
4-13-92
 
37.75–37.85, 37.99


712
 
5-4-92
 
T.S.O. IX


713
 
6-1-92
 
150.14,  151.20–150.23, 150.99


714
 
6-1-92
 
T.S.O. II


715
 
6-15-92
 
94.01, 94.02, 94.04-94.07, 94.99


717
 
6-15-92
 
150.35–150.37,150.39, 150.41


718
 
6-15-92
 
34.01


720
 
4-6-92
 
T.S.O. II


724
 
8-3-92
 
T.S.O. II


725
 
8-3-92
 
111.15


727
 
8-17-92
 
34.02


729
 
9-21-92
 
T.S.O. VII


730
 
9-21-92
 
156.160–156.162, 156.179


732
 
10-5-92
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II and Sch. III


734
 
10-19-92
 
T.S.O. V


735
 
11-16-92
 
T.S.O. I


736
 
11-16-92
 
T.S.O. I


737
 
11-16-92
 
T.S.O. IX


738
 
11-16-92
 
150.35, 150.37


739
 
11-16-92
 
34.07, 34.99


741
 
12-7-92
 
156.111, 156.180 - 156.188


742
 
12-7-92
 
T.S.O. I


743
 
12-7-92
 
T.S.O. I


744
 
12-7-92
 
T.S.O. IX


748
 
12-21-92
 
111.41


752
 
1-4-93
 
T.S.O. X


753
 
1-18-92
 
T.S.O. X


756
 
3-1-93
 
T.S.O. VI


757
 
4-5-93
 
111.26


759
 
5-10-93
 
T.S.O. II


763
 
7-6-93
 
T.S.O. IX


764
 
7-6-93
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


766
 
7-19-93
 
T.S.O. II


767
 
7-19-93
 
13.5/700-1 - 13.5/700-9


769
 
8-2-93
 
70.2-101.01


770
 
8-30-93
 
31.40


771
 
8-30-93
 
37.95 - 37.97


773
 
10-4-93
 
154.22


774
 
10-18-93
 
37.95 - 37.97


776
 
11-15-93
 
T.S.O. I


777
 
11-15-93
 
T.S.O. I


778
 
11-15-93
 
T.S.O. IX


779
 
12-6-93
 
156.056, 156.057, 156.111


780
 
12-6-93
 
154.22, 154.75, Ch. 154, App. A


782
 
12-20-93
 
111.53


787
 
1-24-94
 
154.08


789
 
1-24-94
 
Ch. 153


790
 
2-2-94
 
31.51


791
 
3-7-94
 
T.S.O. VIII


792
 
3-7-94
 
T.S.O. VIII


793
 
5-7-94
 
T.S.O. VI


794
 
3-21-94
 
32.30, 32.50


795
 
3-21-94
 
156.041


797
 
4-20-94
 
32.115 - 32.118, 32.120 -32.125


798
 
4-18-94
 
32.106


799
 
5-2-94
 
T.S.O. I


800
 
5-2-94
 
T.S.O. I


801
 
5-2-94
 
T.S.O. IX


804
 
6-6-94
 
154.32, 154.68, 154.76


805
 
6-6-94
 
151.25 - 151.33, 151.35, 151.36, 151.99


808
 
7-18-94
 
T.S.O. I


809
 
7-18-94
 
T.S.O. II


810
 
7-18-94
 
32.135 - 32.143


811
 
7-18-94
 
32.126


812
 
7-18-94
 
T.S.O. II


813
 
8-1-94
 
95.45 - 95.49


815
 
8-29-94
 
T.S.O. I


816
 
8-29-94
 
T.S.O. I


818
 
9-19-94
 
T.S.O. IX


819
 
10-3-94
 
156.004, 156.029, 156.056


820
 
10-3-94
 
Ch. 76, Sch. II, III


821
 
10-17-94
 
T.S.O. I


822
 
10-17-94
 
T.S.O. I


823
 
10-17-94
 
T.S.O. IX


824
 
10-17-94
 
T.S.O. IX


825
 
11-7-94
 
13.5/705-1 - 13.5/705-10, 13.5/999-1


826
 
11-21-94
 
T.S.O. IX


827
 
12-5-94
 
10.98


833
 
12-19-94
 
156.004, 156.111


834
 
12-19-94
 
13.5/999-1


838
 
2-6-95
 
T.S.O. II


839
 
2-6-95
 
115.40 - 115.42, 115.99


840
 
3-6-95
 
116.01 - 116.33, 116.99


841
 
4-3-95
 
154.85 - 154.94, 154.97


842
 
4-3-95
 
154.85 - 154.94, 154.97


843
 
4-3-95
 
151.34


844
 
4-3-95
 
T.S.O. III


845
 
4-17-95
 
T.S.O. I


846
 
4-17-95
 
T.S.O. I


847
 
4-17-95
 
T.S.O. IX


848
 
5-1-95
 
T.S.O. II


849
 
6-5-95
 
91.10 - 91.14


850
 
6-5-95
 
91.01, 91.40 - 91.44, 91.99


851
 
6-5-95
 
111.12


852
 
6-19-95
 
T.S.O. II


855
 
6-19-95
 
156.177.1


856
 
7-17-95
 
156.056


857
 
8-7-95
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


858
 
8-7-95
 
52.001 - 52.999


859
 
8-21-95
 
153.02, 153.35


860
 
8-21-95
 
T.S.O. X


861
 
9-5-95
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


863
 
10-2-95
 
T.S.O. VI


864
 
11-6-95
 
154.60 - 154.68, Ch. 154, App. E - I


865
 
11-6-95
 
T.S.O. VIII


867
 
11-6-95
 
Adopting Ordinance


868
 
11-20-95
 
157.01 - 157.07, 157.99


869
 
11-20-95
 
53.01, 53.02


870
 
11-20-95
 
T.S.O. IX


871
 
11-20-95
 
T.S.O. IX


872
 
12-4-95
 
T.S.O. V


879
 
12-18-95
 
36.01


880
 
12-18-95
 
34.08


881
 
1-15-96
 
T.S.O. I


882
 
1-15-96
 
T.S.O. I


883
 
1-15-96
 
T.S.O. IX


884
 
1-15-96
 
T.S.O. I


885
 
1-15-96
 
T.S.O. I


886
 
1-15-96
 
T.S.O. IX


887
 
1-15-96
 
T.S.O. II


888
 
2-5-96
 
T.S.O. I


889
 
2-5-96
 
T.S.O. I


890
 
2-5-96
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


891
 
2-5-96
 
111.13, 111.15, 111.41


892
 
2-5-96
 
30.02


894
 
2-19-96
 
T.S.O. X


897
 
4-1-96
 
34.20 - 34.27


899
 
4-15-96
 
T.S.O. I


900
 
5-20-96
 
93.20 - 93.23


901
 
6-3-96
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


903
 
6-3-96
 
T.S.O. I


904
 
6-3-96
 
T.S.O. II


906
 
6-17-96
 
34.40 - 34.42


907
 
6-17-96
 
T.S.O. VIII


908
 
6-17-96
 
T.S.O. I


909
 
6-17-96
 
T.S.O. IX


910
 
7-1-96
 
T.S.O. II


911
 
7-1-96
 
T.S.O. I


912
 
7-15-96
 
T.S.O. I


913
 
7-15-96
 
T.S.O. IX


914
 
7-15-96
 
T.S.O. VI


915
 
7-15-96
 
52.069


916
 
10-7-96
 
Ch. 51


917
 
10-21-96
 
32.70 - 32.79


918
 
11-4-96
 
T.S.O. I


919
 
11-4-96
 
153.02, 153.35


920
 
11-18-96
 
T.S.O. II


921
 
12-2-96
 
52.140


923
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O. VI


924
 
12-16-96
 
50.30


932
 
1-6-97
 
T.S.O. VI


933
 
1-20-97
 
T.S.O. I


934
 
1-20-97
 
154.51


935
 
1-20-97
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


936
 
1-29-97
 
T.S.O. I


937
 
1-3-97
 
T.S.O. X


938
 
3-3-97
 
T.S.O. I


940
 
4-21-97
 
37.160 - 37.168


943
 
5-19-97
 
T.S.O. VI


944
 
6-16-97
 
T.S.O. I


945
 
6-16-97
 
T.S.O. III


946
 
6-16-97
 
151.37


947
 
7-7-97
 
T.S.O. II


948
 
7-21-97
 
T.S.O. II


949
 
8-4-97
 
110.05


951
 
9-15-97
 
95.45


952
 
10-6-97
 
37.77


953
 
10-6-97
 
T.S.O. I


954
 
10-6-97
 
T.S.O. I


955
 
10-6-97
 
T.S.O. IX


956
 
10-20-97
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, III


957
 
10-20-97
 
T.S.O. IX


959
 
12-15-97
 
111.12


969
 
1-19-98
 
70.15


970
 
2-16-98
 
156.056


971
 
3-2-98
 
T.S.O. IX


972
 
3-2-98
 
T.S.O. X


974
 
3-16-98
 
T.S.O. IX


975
 
3-16-98
 
T.S.O. X


977
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O. IX


978
 
4-6-98
 
32.118, 32.120


980
 
5-4-98
 
T.S.O. IX


981
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. I


982
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. II


983
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. II


984
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. II


985
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. II


986
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. I


987
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. IX


988
 
6-15-98
 
111.15


989
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. X


990
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O. I


991
 
6-15-98
 
156.185


993
 
7-6-98
 
70.2


994
 
7-6-98
 
T.S.O. II


995
 
6-6-98
 
T.S.O. I


996
 
7-6-98
 
T.S.O. X


997
 
9-21-98
 
30.02, 31.21, 31.32


999
 
10-19-98
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, III


1000
 
10-19-98
 
T.S.O. I


1001
 
10-19-98
 
T.S.O. I


1002
 
10-19-98
 
T.S.O. I


1003
 
10-19-98
 
T.S.O. I


1004
 
11-2-98
 
70.01


1008
 
11-16-98
 
T.S.O. I


1010
 
12-7-98
 
T.S.O. II


1011
 
12-21-98
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1019
 
12-21-98
 
T.S.O. I


1020
 
12-21-98
 
156.095


1021
 
2-1-99
 
T.S.O. II


1023
 
2-15-99
 
T.S.O. I


1024
 
2-15-99
 
T.S.O. I


1025
 
2-15-99
 
T.S.O. I


1026
 
2-15-99
 
T.S.O. I


1027
 
2-15-99
 
T.S.O. IX


1028
 
2-15-99
 
T.S.O. IX


1034
 
3-1-99
 
T.S.O. I


1035
 
3-1-99
 
T.S.O. II


1036
 
4-4-99
 
T.S.O. II


1037
 
4-19-99
 
T.S.O. II


1039
 
5-3-99
 
32.30


1040
 
5-17-99
 
T.S.O. I


1041
 
5-17-99
 
T.S.O. IX


1042
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. II


1043
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. II


1044
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. I


1045
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. X


1046
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. X


1047
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. I


1048
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. X


1049
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O. II


1050
 
6-21-99
 
T.S.O. II


1051
 
6-21-99
 
T.S.O. I


1052
 
6-21-99
 
T.S.O. X


1053
 
6-21-99
 
38.45


1059-W
 
8-16-99
 
52.001, 52.003 - 52.006, 52.008, 52.009, 52.020 - 52.024, 52.030, 52.040 -
52.052, 52.060 - 52.070, 52.080 - 52.089, 52.100 - 52.114, 52.140, 52.999


1060-W
 
8-16-99
 
51.01 - 51.09, 51.20 - 51.23, 51.35 - 51.48, 51.60 - 51.70, 51.80 - 51.90,
51.99


1061-D
 
9-7-99
 
T.S.O. IX


1062-D
 
9-7-99
 
156.059


1063-D
 
9-7-99
 
T.S.O. X


1064-A
 
9-7-99
 
T.S.O. II


1066
 
9-20-99
 
97.01 - 97.06


1068-D
 
10-18-99
 
110.27


1069-A
 
11-1-99
 
34.08


1070
 
11-15-99
 
T.S.O. IX


1071
 
11-29-99
 
T.S.O. II, VIII


1082
 
12-20-99
 
111.13, 111.41


1083
 
2-7-00
 
T.S.O. I


1084
 
2-7-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1085
 
2-7-00
 
T.S.O. II


1086
 
3-6-00
 
52.140


1087
 
3-6-00
 
52.140


1090
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O. II


1091
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O. I


1092
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1093
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O. II


1094
 
4-3-00
 
T.S.O. II


1095
 
4-3-00
 
T.S.O. II


1099
 
4-3-00
 
T.S.O. II


1100
 
4-3-00
 
T.S.O. II


1102
 
5-1-00
 
32.127


1105
 
5-15-00
 
32.73


1106
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O. I


1107
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1108
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O. I


1109
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O. I


1110
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O. I


1111
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O. I


1112
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1116
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O. II


1117
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1118
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1119
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1120
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1121
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O. II


1122
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1123
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1124
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. II


1125
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1127
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1128
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. II


1129
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1130
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. II


1131
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1132
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1133
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. II


1134
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1135
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1136
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. X


1137
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. I


1138
 
7-5-00
 
T.S.O. IX


1139
 
7-17-00
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1140
 
7-17-00
 
T.S.O. II


1141
 
7-17-00
 
T.S.O. I


1142
 
8-21-00
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, Sch. III


1143
 
8-21-00
 
T.S.O. II


1144
 
9-5-00
 
37.110 - 37.118, 37.999


1145
 
9-18-00
 
30.02, 31.21, 31.32


1147
 
11-6-00
 
51.04


1148
 
11-6-00
 
52.086


1157
 
11-20-00
 
T.S.O. II


1158
 
11-20-00
 
T.S.O. II


1159
 
12-4-00
 
91.11, 91.13


1161
 
1-15-01
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1162
 
1-15-01
 
37.130 - 37.147


1163
 
2-5-01
 
T.S.O. II


1164
 
3-5-01
 
111.27


1165
 
3-5-01
 
T.S.O. II


1166
 
3-5-01
 
T.S.O. II


1167
 
3-19-01
 
52.069, 52.999


1168
 
4-2-01
 
52.140


1169
 
4-2-01
 
T.S.O. I


1170
 
4-2-01
 
T.S.O. I


1173
 
5-7-01
 
T.S.O. X


1174
 
5-21-01
 
T.S.O. X


1176
 
6-4-01
 
T.S.O. VI


1180
 
7-2-01
 
38.45


1181
 
7-2-01
 
T.S.O. X


1182
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O. I


1183
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O. I


1184
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O. I


1185
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O. X


1186
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O. II


1187
 
8-20-01
 
155.01 - 155.08, 155.99


1188
 
8-20-01
 
T.S.O. VI


1189
 
9-4-01
 
70.11 - 70.14, 70.99


1190
 
9-4-01
 
T.S.O. I


1191
 
9-17-01
 
T.S.O. II


1192
 
10-1-01
 
T.S.O. II


1193
 
10-15-01
 
T.S.O. IV and VIII


1194
 
11-5-01
 
T.S.O. I


1195
 
11-5-01
 
T.S.O. I


1196
 
11-5-01
 
T.S.O. IX


1201
 
11-19-01
 
T.S.O. I


1202
 
11-19-01
 
T.S.O. I


1203
 
11-19-01
 
T.S.O. IX


1206
 
11-19-01
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1207
 
12-3-01
 
T.S.O. VIII


1208
 
12-3-01
 
T.S.O. VIII


1215
 
2-18-02
 
90.01, 90.11


1216
 
3-18-02
 
T.S.O. I


1217
 
3-18-02
 
T.S.O. I and II


1218
 
3-18-02
 
156.090 - 156.094


1224
 
4-15-02
 
T.S.O. VII


1226
 
5-5-02
 
T.S.O. IX


1227
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O. II


1228
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O. I


1229
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O. IX


1230
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O. VIII


1231
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O. I


1232
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O. X


1233
 
5-20-02
 
154.01 - 154.15, 154.20 - 154.24, 154.30 - 154.36, 154.45 - 154.53, 154.60,
154.61, 154.63 - 154.68, 154.75 - 154.77, 154.85 - 154.94, 154.96 - 154.99,
Apps. A - I


1234
 
6-3-02
 
T.S.O. I


1235
 
6-3-02
 
T.S.O. I


1236
 
6-3-02
 
T.S.O. IX


1237
 
6-17-02
 
T.S.O. II


1238
 
6-17-02
 
156.071 - 156.077


1239
 
6-17-02
 
T.S.O. I


1240
 
6-17-02
 
T.S.O. I


1241
 
6-17-02
 
T.S.O. IX


1242
 
6-17-02
 
T.S.O. I


1243
 
7-1-02
 
T.S.O. I


1245
 
7-15-02
 
156.095


1246
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O. IV


1247
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O. IV


1249
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O. II


1250
 
8-19-02
 
T.S.O. I


1251
 
8-19-02
 
T.S.O. IX


1252
 
9-3-02
 
51.89


1253
 
9-3-02
 
52.140


1254
 
9-3-02
 
T.S.O. I


1255
 
9-3-02
 
T.S.O. I


1256
 
9-16-02
 
131.99


1257
 
9-16-02
 
156.078


1258
 
9-16-02
 
T.S.O. X


1259
 
9-16-02
 
T.S.O. III


1260
 
9-16-02
 
T.S.O. III


1261
 
12-2-02
 
T.S.O. II


1262
 
12-16-02
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1272
 
1-6-03
 
T.S.O. I


1273
 
1-20-03
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1274
 
2-17-03
 
150.36, 150.37, 150.41


1275
 
2-17-03
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1276
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. I


1277
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. I


1278
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1279
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1280
 
3-17-03
 
T.S.O. I


1281
 
3-17-03
 
T.S.O. I


1282
 
3-17-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1283
 
4-7-03
 
156.004, 156.030


1284
 
4-7-03
 
T.S.O. I


1285
 
4-7-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1287
 
4-21-03
 
T.S.O. I


1288
 
4-21-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1289
 
4-21-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1290
 
4-21-03
 
T.S.O. II


1293
 
4-21-03
 
T.S.O. I


1297
 
5-5-03
 
31.53


1298
 
5-5-03
 
32.02, 32.10, 32.20, 32.40, 32.60


1301
 
5-30-03
 
T.S.O. II


1302
 
6-2-03
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1303
 
5-19-03
 
T.S.O. X


1308
 
7-21-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1309
 
7-21-03
 
T.S.O. VIII


1311
 
8-4-03
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1313
 
10-20-03
 
T.S.O. I


1315
 
11-17-03
 
111.02, 111.13, 111.15, 111.41


1316
 
11-17-03
 
70.03


1317
 
11-18-03
 
T.S.O. IV


1318
 
11-17-04
 
T.S.O. I


1327
 
12-1-03
 
T.S.O. I


1328
 
12-1-03
 
T.S.O. IX


1329
 
12-1-03
 
T.S.O. X


1330
 
1-5-04
 
36.01


1332
 
2-16-04
 
T.S.O. I


1333
 
3-1-04
 
T.S.O. I


1334
 
3-1-04
 
T.S.O. I


1335
 
3-1-04
 
T.S.O. IX


1341
 
4-20-04
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1342
 
5-3-04
 
156.160 - 156.179


1343
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. I


1344
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. I


1345
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


1346
 
5-17-04
 
38.70 - 38.73, 38.99


1349
 
6-7-04
 
91.42


1350
 
6-7-04
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, III


1352
 
9-7-04
 
156.073, 156.074, 156.091, 156.110


1353
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. I


1354
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. I


1355
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


1356
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


1358
 
9-20-04
 
53.02, 53.03


1359
 
9-20-04
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1360
 
10-4-04
 
70.02


1361
 
11-1-04
 
T.S.O. IV


1362
 
11-1-04
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1370
 
12-20-04
 
151.02


1371
 
1-17-05
 
111.15


1373
 
2-7-05
 
T.S.O. II


1374
 
3-21-05
 
154.85


1375
 
3-21-05
 
T.S.O. IX


1377
 
3-21-05
 
111.13


1380
 
4-18-05
 
T.S.O. IV


1381
 
5-16-05
 
T.S.O. VI


1382
 
6-6-05
 
T.S.O. I


1383
 
6-6-05
 
156.078


1384
 
6-6-05
 
111.13, 111.15, 111.41, 111.100


1385
 
6-20-05
 
T.S.O. X


1386
 
6-20-05
 
T.S.O. X


1387
 
6-20-05
 
T.S.O. X


1388
 
6-20-05
 
T.S.O. X


1389
 
6-20-05
 
32.150


1390
 
7-18-05
 
32.02, 32.10, 32.20, 32.60


1391
 
7-18-05
 
156.057


1392
 
8-1-05
 
T.S.O. X


1393
 
8-1-05
 
T.S.O. IX


1394
 
8-1-05
 
T.S.O. I


1395
 
8-1-05
 
T.S.O. I


1396
 
8-1-05
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, III


1397
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. II


1398
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. II


1399
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. II


1400
 
9-19-05
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1402
 
10-3-05
 
36.01


1403
 
11-21-05
 
151.38


1404
 
11-21-05
 
13.5/24-7


1413
 
3-6-06
 
111.15


1414
 
3-20-06
 
T.S.O. IX


1418
 
4-3-06
 
117.03, 117.10


1419
 
4-3-06
 
112.24, 112.25


1420
 
4-16-06
 
110.08, 110.11, 110.12


1421
 
4-16-06
 
151.25, 151.27, 151.31


1422
 
4-16-06
 
52.140


1424
 
5-1-06
 
T.S.O. X


1426
 
5-1-06
 
31.14


1427
 
5-15-06
 
T.S.O. X


1428
 
5-15-06
 
T.S.O. I


1430
 
6-26-06
 
154.24


1431
 
6-26-06
 
T.S.O. I


1432
 
7-17-06
 
154.85


1433
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. I


1434
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. X


1435
 
8-7-06
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, III


1436
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. IV


1437
 
8-21-06
 
T.S.O. I


1438
 
8-21-06
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, III


1440
 
9-18-06
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1441
 
10-16-06
 
36.01


1442
 
11-6-06
 
52.046


1444
 
11-20-06
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1445
 
11-20-06
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1446
 
12-4-06
 
T.S.O. I


1447
 
12-4-06
 
T.S.O. X


1448
 
12-4-06
 
154.07


1449
 
12-4-06
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1450
 
12-4-06
 
T.S.O. I


1451
 
12-18-06
 
156.004, 156.071 - 156.073, 156.075, 156.078, 156.091, 156.095


1452
 
12-18-06
 
154.07


1462
 
2-19-07
 
T.S.O. IX


1466
 
2-19-07
 
151.09


1467
 
2-19-07
 
155.01 - 155.08, 155.99


1468
 
2-19-07
 
T.S.O. II


1473
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


1474
 
3-5-07
 
151.34


1475
 
3-19-07
 
31.15


1476
 
3-19-07
 
T.S.O. IX


1477
 
3-19-07
 
156.004, 156.071 - 156.076, 156.078, 156.150


1485
 
4-16-07
 
T.S.O. IX


1486
 
4-16-07
 
T.S.O. II


1487
 
4-16-07
 
T.S.O. IX


1488
 
5-7-07
 
T.S.O. X


1490
 
5-15-07
 
T.S.O. II


1491
 
6-18-07
 
T.S.O. II


1492
 
6-18-07
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1493
 
6-18-07
 
T.S.O. II


1494
 
7-2-07
 
T.S.O. II


1496
 
8-6-07
 
10.98


1497
 
8-6-07
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II


1498
 
8-20-07
 
T.S.O. I


1499
 
8-20-07
 
T.S.O. I


1500
 
8-20-07
 
T.S.O. IX


1501
 
8-20-07
 
156.004, 156.056 - 156.058, 156.071 - 156.078, 156.091, 156.093, 156.110,
156.111


1502
 
9-4-07
 
38.45


1503
 
9-17-07
 
T.S.O. IX


1504
 
9-17-07
 
95.45, 95.47, 95.48


1506
 
11-19-07
 
T.S.O. IX, X


1507
 
11-19-07
 
T.S.O. X


1508
 
11-19-07
 
54.01 - 54.23, 54.99, 95.10


1509
 
11-19-07
 
118.01 - 118.07 - 118.15 - 118.17, 118.99


1510
 
12-3-07
 
111.15


1511
 
12-3-07
 
T.S.O. II


1512
 
12-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


1513
 
12-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


1523
 
2-4-08
 
T.S.O. II


1524
 
2-4-08
 
T.S.O. I


1525
 
2-4-08
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1526
 
3-3-08
 
156.168


1527
 
3-3-08
 
156.004


1528
 
3-3-08
 
T.S.O. III


1530
 
4-7-08
 
154.24, 154.51, 156.027, 156.071- 156.077,  156.093


1531
 
4-7-08
 
95.01, 154.52


1532
 
4-7-08
 
156.056


1535
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. II


1537
 
4-21-08
 
111.15


1538
 
6-2-08
 
36.01


1539
 
6-16-08
 
38.45


1541
 
7-7-08
 
111.13, 111.15, 111.41


1542
 
7-21-08
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1543
 
8-4-08
 
154.22, 154.75, 154.77


1544
 
8-4-08
 
156.041


1545
 
8-18-08
 
38.01 - 38.05


1546
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. II


1549
 
9-15-08
 
T.S.O. IX


1550
 
9-15-08
 
T.S.O. II


1551
 
9-15-08
 
T.S.O. IX


1552
 
10-6-08
 
150.50


1553
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. X


1554
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. VII


1556
 
10-20-08
 
T.S.O. IX


1558
 
11-17-08
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1559
 
12-1-08
 
156.160 - 156.179, 156.999


1560
 
12-1-08
 
152.01


1569
 
12-15-08
 
38.01


1570
 
1-19-09
 
115.01, 115.02, 115.30, 156.056, 156.057, 156.058, 156.071 - 156.078,
156.091, 156.095


1571
 
1-19-09
 
T.S.O. II


1572
 
2-2-09
 
Ch. 71, Sch. IV


1573
 
2-16-09
 
T.S.O. II


1574
 
3-2-09
 
37.56, 37.57, 37.63


1575
 
3-2-09
 
T.S.O. II


1580
 
4-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


1581
 
6-1-09
 
T.S.O. IX


1583
 
6-1-09
 
T.S.O. II


1584
 
6-1-09
 
T.S.O. II


1585
 
6-15-09
 
31.13, 38.45


1586
 
7-6-09
 
70.04


1588
 
8-3-09
 
150.15, 151.09, 151.28 -151.30


1589
 
8-3-09
 
154.05, 154.07, 154.11, 154.13, 154.20, 154.21, 154.22, 154.23, 154.30,
154.31- 154.34, Ch. 154, Apps. F, I


1590
 
8-3-09
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1592
 
9-21-09
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1593
 
9-21-09
 
159.01 - 159.09


1594
 
9-21-09
 
156.080, 156.081


1596
 
11-16-09
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, Sch. III


1605
 
12-21-09
 
38.01 - 38.05


1606
 
12-21-09
 
Ch. 71, Sch. III


1607
 
1-4-10
 
159.15 - 159.19


1608
 
1-4-10
 
37.79


1609
 
2-1-10
 
97.01, 97.04


1610
 
2-15-10
 
111.15


1611
 
3-15-10
 
10.98


1614
 
4-19-10
 
51.89


1615
 
4-19-10
 
52.140


1616
 
4-19-10
 
T.S.O. IX


1618
 
5-3-10
 
156.160 - 156.179, 156.999


1620
 
4-19-10
 
111.13, 111.15


1621
 
5-17-10
 
T.S.O. X


1622
 
5-17-10
 
32.124, 32.125, 35.01 - 35.20


1623
 
6-7-10
 
38.45


1625
 
7-19-10
 
119.01 - 119.15


1627
 
9-20-10
 
T.S.O. IX


1628
 
9-20-10
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1629
 
10-4-10
 
T.S.O. II


1639
 
12-20-10
 
T.S.O. X


1640
 
2-21-11
 
36.01


1641
 
2-21-11
 
111.41


1643
 
3-21-11
 
98.01 - 98.05, 98.08 - 98.10


1646
 
4-18-11
 
T.S.O. VII


1647
 
4-18-11
 
97.01 - 97.06


1648
 
4-18-11
 
51.89


1649
 
5-16-11
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1650
 
5-16-11
 
93.10, 93.20, 93.21


1652
 
6-20-11
 
T.S.O. II


1653
 
6-20-11
 
38.45


1654
 
6-20-11
 
T.S.O. IX


1655
 
8-1-11
 
156.139


1658
 
8-15-11
 
159.05


1659
 
8-15-11
 
T.S.O. X


1660
 
8-15-11
 
T.S.O. X


1661
 
8-15-11
 
T.S.O. X


1662
 
9-6-11
 
T.S.O. IX


1663
 
9-6-11
 
T.S.O. X


1664
 
9-19-11
 
111.15


1665
 
9-19-11
 
T.S.O. X


1666
 
9-19-11
 
T.S.O. VI


1668
 
9-19-11
 
37.170 - 37.175


1669
 
10-17-11
 
T.S.O. IX


1670
 
11-7-11
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1671
 
11-21-11
 
T.S.O. IX


1673
 
11-21-11
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1674
 
11-21-11
 
Ch. 71, Sch. III


1683
 
1-16-12
 
T.S.O. II


1684
 
1-16-12
 
31.53


1685
 
1-16-12
 
T.S.O. II


1687
 
4-16-12
 
156.185


1689
 
4-16-12
 
T.S.O. II


1690
 
4-16-11
 
T.S.O. IX


1693
 
5-7-12
 
55.01


1694
 
5-7-12
 
55.02


1695
 
5-7-12
 
T.S.O. II


1696
 
5-7-12
 
51.89


1697
 
5-7-12
 
T.S.O. II


1698
 
6-4-12
 
38.45


1699
 
7-2-12
 
156.056, 156.057


1700
 
7-16-12
 
T.S.O. X


1701
 
7-16-12
 
53.04


1702
 
8-6-12
 
111.15


1703
 
8-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


1704
 
8-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


1705
 
8-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


1706
 
8-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


1707
 
9-4-12
 
T.S.O. II


1708
 
9-17-12
 
120.01


1709
 
10-1-12
 
T.S.O. II


1710
 
10-1-12
 
T.S.O. II


1711
 
10-1-12
 
T.S.O. II


1712
 
10-15-12
 
154.85 , Ch. 154, App. D


1713
 
11-5-12
 
151.34


1714
 
11-5-12
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1720
 
12-3-12
 
T.S.O. I


1722
 
1-7-13
 
111.15


1723
 
1-7-13
 
T.S.O. II


1724
 
1-7-13
 
T.S.O. I


1725
 
1-7-13
 
T.S.O. IX


1726
 
1-7-13
 
T.S.O. X


1727
 
1-21-13
 
T.S.O. II


1728
 
1-21-13
 
T.S.O. II


1729
 
1-21-13
 
T.S.O. II


1730
 
1-21-13
 
T.S.O. I


1731
 
1-21-13
 
T.S.O. I


1732
 
1-21-13
 
T.S.O. IX


1733
 
1-21-13
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1737
 
3-18-13
 
156.041


1742
 
5-6-13
 
156.004 , 156.031 , 156.056 , 156.057


1743
 
5-6-13
 
32.02 , 32.10 , 32.20 , 32.40 , 32.50 , 32.60


1744
 
5-6-13
 
34.40 - 34.42


1745
 
5-6-13
 
70.20 , 70.21 , 70.99


1746
 
6-3-13
 
38.45


1747
 
7-15-13
 
T.S.O. X


1748
 
9-16-13
 
35.14


1752
 
10-21-13
 
50.30 , 51.06 , 51.88 , 51.89 , 52.088 , 52.112


1753
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. I


1754
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. I


1755
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. IX


1756
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. I


1757
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. I


1758
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. IX


1759
 
11-4-13
 
T.S.O. X


1760
 
12-16-13
 
36.01


1761
 
12-16-13
 
31.95 - 31.97


1773
 
1-6-14
 
13.5/24-2 , 131.550/5 , 131.600-4


1775
 
4-7-14
 
T.S.O. IX


1776
 
4-21-14
 
51.89


1777
 
5-5-14
 
31.53, 31.61


1780
 
5-5-14
 
158.01, 158.20 - 158.24, 158.35 - 158.44, 158.99


1782
 
6-3-14
 
38.45


1783
 
6-3-14
 
37.137


1799
 
2-16-15
 
T.S.O. IX


1800
 
3-16-15
 
T.S.O. II


1801
 
3-16-15
 
121.01


1802
 
3-16-15
 
T.S.O. VIII


1804
 
4-20-15
 
T.S.O. IX


1805
 
4-20-15
 
T.S.O. IX


1806
 
5-18-15
 
T.S.O. I


1807
 
5-18-15
 
T.S.O. IX


1808-B
 
6-1-15
 
38.45


1809
 
6-1-15
 
156.197


1810
 
7-20-15
 
111.15


1811
 
8-17-15
 
111.51


1812
 
8-24-15
 
T.S.O. IX


1814
 
9-21-15
 
156.072


1815
 
11-2-15
 
T.S.O. I


1816
 
12-7-15
 
T.S.O. II


1817
 
12-7-15
 
T.S.O. II


1818
 
12-21-15
 
T.S.O. I


1819
 
12-21-15
 
T.S.O. IX


1827
 
1-18-16
 
111.15


1829
 
1-18-16
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1832
 
2-15-16
 
T.S.O. I


1833
 
3-7-16
 
T.S.O. II


1834
 
3-7-16
 
T.S.O. I


1835
 
3-7-16
 
156.078


1836
 
3-7-16
 
T.S.O. X


1838
 
3-21-16
 
111.15


1839
 
3-21-16
 
111.15


1841
 
4-4-16
 
37.57


1842
 
4-18-16
 
T.S.O. II


1845
 
4-18-16
 
52.069


1847
 
5-2-16
 
51.05, 52.087


1848
 
5-16-16
 
38.45


1850
 
5-16-16
 
T.S.O. IX


1852
 
6-6-16
 
111.13, 111.15, 111.41


1853
 
6-6-16
 
111.13, 111.15, 111.41


1858
 
6-20-16
 
T.S.O. I


1859
 
6-20-16
 
T.S.O. IX


1860
 
6-20-16
 
T.S.O. X


1861
 
6-20-16
 
156.182, 156.186


1862
 
7-5-16
 
111.15


1863
 
7-5-16
 
T.S.O. X


1864
 
7-5-16
 
34.06


1866
 
8-1-16
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1867
 
9-6-16
 
131.550/4


1868
 
9-6-16
 
93.21


1869
 
9-6-16
 
34.08


1870
 
10-3-16
 
10.98


1871
 
10-3-16
 
95.60 - 95.64


1872
 
11-7-16
 
151.50


1873
 
11-21-16
 
111.48


1874
 
11-21-16
 
13.5/705-11


1875
 
12-19-16
 
111.41


1876
 
12-19-16
 
156.041


1885
 
2-20-17
 
151.01 - 151.13, 151.25 - 151.38, 151.50 - 151.66, 151.97 - 151.99


1886
 
3-6-17
 
Ch. 72, Sch. I


1887
 
3-6-17
 
30.02, 31.21, 31.32


1888
 
3-20-17
 
111.13, 111.15, 111.41


1890
 
4-3-17
 
T.S.O. IX


1891
 
4-3-17
 
T.S.O. I


1893
 
5-15-17
 
96.01 - 96.06


1894
 
6-5-17
 
38.45


1895
 
6-19-17
 
T.S.O. I


1896
 
6-19-17
 
T.S.O. I


1897
 
6-19-17
 
T.S.O. IX


1901
 
7-17-17
 
Ch. 154, App. G


1902
 
8-7-17
 
111.15


1903
 
8-7-17
 
111.15


1904
 
8-21-17
 
114.01 - 114.07, 114.99


1905
 
9-5-17
 
T.S.O. II


1906
 
11-6-17
 
99.01 - 99.08, 156.004, 156.056, 156.057, 156.111


1907
 
11-20-17
 
37.57


1908
 
11-20-17
 
T.S.O. IX


1916
 
12-18-17
 
111.13


1917
 
12-18-17
 
T.S.O. I


1918
 
12-18-17
 
T.S.O. X


1919
 
1-2-18
 
114.02, 114.05, 114.07


1920
 
1-2-18
 
36.01


1921
 
1-15-18
 
T.S.O. VI


1922
 
2-19-18
 
T.S.O. II


1923
 
3-5-18
 
31.53


1924
 
3-5-18
 
T.S.O. I


1925
 
3-5-18
 
35.10 - 35.14


1926
 
3-19-18
 
T.S.O. IX


1927
 
4-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1928
 
4-2-18
 
T.S.O. IX


1932
 
5-21-18
 
38.45


 
 
 
 
 




 


