Rev. 5/18
VILLAGE OF DEER PARK, ILLINOIS
MUNICIPAL CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 30 BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Chapter 31 VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Chapter 32 PURCHASING PROCEDURES
Chapter 33 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
Chapter 34 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
Chapter 35 Reserved
Chapter 36 VILLAGE GIFT AND DONATION POLICY
Chapter 37 IDENTITY PROTECTION AND IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION POLICIES
Chapter 38 REIMBURSEMENT FOR PROFESSIONAL FEES AND OTHER EXPENSES
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 50 GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Chapter 51 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Chapter 51A PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SERVICE
Chapter 52 POTABLE WATER DISTRIBUTION SERVICES
Chapter 53 RECYCLING
Chapter 54 ELECTRIC AGGREGATION
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 70 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
Chapter 71 PARKING REGULATIONS
Chapter 72 PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCIES
Chapter 73 PERMITTED STREET TRAFFIC
Chapter 74 Repealed O19-08 04/18/19
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 90 ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
Chapter 91 ANIMALS
Chapter 92 FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 93 NUISANCES
Chapter 94 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 95 TREES AND SHRUBS
Chapter 96 PARK PROPERTY
Rev. 5/18
Chapter 97 SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 98 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Chapter 99 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 110 BUSINESS AND OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
Chapter 111 REGISTRATION OF BUSINESSES
Chapter 112 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Chapter 113 HOTEL TAX
Chapter 114 ENTERTAINMENT TAX
Chapter 115 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Chapter 116 PROHIBITION ON SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter 130 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 131 OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Chapter 132 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Chapter 133 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 134 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Chapter 135 GAMBLING OFFENSES
Chapter 136 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 137 WEAPONS
Chapter 138 DRUG OFFENSES
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter 150 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 151 FENCES
Chapter 152 WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Chapter 153 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Chapter 154 GRADE ALTERATIONS, EXCAVATION AND FILLING
Chapter 155 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
APPENDIX A: NEW ROAD CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 156 SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 157 SIGNS
Chapter 158 ZONING CODE
TITLE XVI: TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS
Chapter 160 TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS
Chapter 161 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
1-10-1 Title I
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
§10.01 Title of Code
§10.02 Amendments
§10.03 Interpretation
§10.04 Application to Future Ordinances
§10.05 Captions
§10.06 Definitions
§10.07 Rules of Interpretation
§10.08 Severability
§10.09 References to Sections
§10.10 Reference to Other Sections
§10.11 Reference to Offices
§10.12 Errors and Omissions
§10.13 Official Time
§10.14 Reasonable Time
§10.15 Ordinances Unaffected
§10.16 Effective Date of Ordinances
§10.17 Effective Date of Code
§10.18 Repeal or Modification of Ordinance
§10.19 Ordinances Which Amend or Supplement Code
§10.20 Section Histories; Statutory References
§10.21 Jurisdiction
§10.22 Revocation of License
§10.23 Failure of Officers to Perform Duties
§10.24 Responsibility for Acts
§10.25 General Late Payment Fees
§10.99 General Penalty
§10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Deer Park shall be designated as the Code
of Deer Park and may be so cited.
§10.02 AMENDMENTS.
Any additions or amendments to this Code are incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Deer
Park Municipal Code includes such additions and amendments. (‘77 Code, § 1.01(b))
§10.03 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction,
definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation
of state law.
§10.04 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted
amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided.
1-10-2 Title I
(Rev. 3/15)
§10.05 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this Code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed
for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§10.06 DEFINITIONS.
General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical
words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according
to their technical import.
(A) For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Deer Park. (‘77 Code, § 1.02(b))
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
COUNTY. Lake County, Illinois.
ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES. The most recent edition of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE. Chapter 65, Act 5 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive. MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM
and AFFIRMED.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office, employee,
commission, or department of this municipality unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee,
or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
POLICE DEPARTMENT or CHIEF OF POLICE. These terms refer to whatever agency the Village
has engaged to perform police duties in the Village. (‘77 Code, § 1.02(b))
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively. SHALL. The act referred
to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write. STATE. The
State of Illinois.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this Code by a heading in the chap1-
10-3 Title I
(Rev. 3/15)
ter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of
sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Deer Park, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK or CLERK. The Village Clerk of the Village of Deer Park, and similarly,
the title of any other officer, board or commission shall mean such officer, board or commission
of the Village unless otherwise stated.(‘77 Code, § 1.02(b))
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words “Year of Our Lord”.
§10.07 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the following rules, unless such
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same
ordinance:
(A) And or Or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.
(B) Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an
agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance
of such act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(C) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed
to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.
(D) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to
the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§10.08 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is
held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
§10.09 REFERENCES TO SECTIONS.
Reference to a section of this Code shall be understood also to refer to and include the penalty section
relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. (‘77 Code, §1.06(g))
§10.10 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
1-10-4 Title I
(Rev. 3/15)
§10.11 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this
municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or
words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which
no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied,
omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.
§10.13 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this
municipality for the transaction of all municipal business.
§10.14 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable
notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§10.16 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due
publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§10.17 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.
This code of ordinances shall take effect ten days after passage and publication in book form under the
authority of the Board of Trustees, as provided by law. (‘77 Code, §1.09)
§10.18 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) All general ordinances or parts thereof heretofore adopted by the President and Board of Trustees
and not included in this Code are repealed, except the following which are hereby continued
1-10-5 Title I
(Rev. 3/15)
in full force and effect:
(1) Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issue of municipal notes or bonds;
(2) Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments;
(3) Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries;
(4) Ordinances granting franchises or rights to corporations;
(5) Ordinances relating to the establishments, dedication, opening, grade, naming, improvement,
altering, widening or vacating of any streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public
grounds;
(6) Ordinances respecting the annexation of territory to the village, or the conveyance or acceptance
of real property or easements in real property;
(7) Ordinances authorizing or relating to particular public improvements; and
(8) Any special ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this Code.
(B) The provisions of this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of heretofore existing
ordinances are continuations of such ordinances and not new enactments. Any act done,
offense committed, or right accruing or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred prior hereto shall not be affected, but may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted
or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if the repeal had not been effected. (‘77 Code,
§1.03)
§10.19 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this Code, the chapter
or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the
desired amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate,
with reference to the arrangement of this Code, the proper number of such chapter or
section. In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance,
a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§10.20 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance,
and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of
the code section. Example: (Ord. 10 passed 5-13-60; Amd. Ord. 15 passed 1-1-70; Amd. Ord. 20
passed 1-1-80; Amd. Ord. 25 passed 1-1-85)
(B)
(1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section
reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §3-2-1) (Ord.
10 passed 1-17-80; Amd. Ord. 20d passed 1-1-85).
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of the section,
this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
§38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
The Village shall make available to any person for inspection or
1-10-6 Title I
(Rev. 3/15)
copying all public records as provided in the state Freedom of Information Act.
(Ord. 10 passed 1-1-80) Statutory reference: Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 140, §§1 et seq.
(C) If a section of this Code is derived from the previous code of ordinances of the city published
in 1977 and subsequently amended, the 1977 code section number shall be indicated in the history
by “(‘77 Code, § .)”
§10.21 JURISDICTION.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, this Code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of
the Village. Provisions of this Code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the
limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the Village to regulate such particular acts
outside the corporate limits. (‘77 Code, §1.05)
§10.22 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
The revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any
penalty being enforced. (‘77 Code, §1.06(d))
§10.23 FAILURE OF OFFICERS TO PERFORM DUTIES.
The failure of an officer or employee of the Village to perform an official duty imposed by this Code shall
not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this Code, unless a penalty is
specifically provided in the section creating the duty. (‘77 Code, §1.06(h))
§10.24 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS.
Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this Code, whether he directly commits
the act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids, or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is
punishable as if he had directly committed such act. (‘77 Code, §1.07)
§10.25 GENERAL LATE PAYMENT FEE(S).
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, in the event that any invoice issued by the Village Treasurer or
by any other employee or officer of the Village, or by one of their respective designees, for any amount
due and payable to the Village pursuant to this Code remains unpaid by the due date provided in this
Code, if any, and/or remains unpaid thirty (30) days after the date that such invoice was sent by the
Village to the person(s) obligated to pay same, then in such event(s), the person(s) obligated to pay same
shall also be obligated to and shall immediately pay, in addition to the original invoice, a late payment fee
of thirty dollars ($30.00). In the event any such invoice remains unpaid thirty (30) days after a second
invoice or notice thereof was sent by the Village to the person(s) obligated to pay such invoice, the
person(s) obligated to pay such invoice shall also be obligated to and shall immediately pay, in addition to
the original invoice, a late payment fee of sixty dollars ($60.00). In the event any such invoice and/or any
related late payment fee(s) remain unpaid for ninety (90) days after the date that payment for such invoice
was due, the Village may refer collection of said invoice and all unpaid amounts to a collection agency
engaged by the Village for such purposes.
§10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) General Penalty. Unless another penalty is specifically provided by this Code for violation of any
1-10-7 Title I
(Rev. 3/15)
particular provision, section, or chapter, any person violating any provision of this Code, or any
rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of any code adopted
herein by reference, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00, and shall be responsible
for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to the Village’s attorney
fees, court costs and other costs and expenses incurred by the Village related thereto. Each act of
violation and each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
(B) Applicability. The penalty provided by this Section applies to the amendment of any section of
this Code or a code adopted herein by reference whether or not such penalty is reenacted
in the amendatory ordinance.
(C) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code to the contrary, any court of competent jurisdiction
shall be authorized to enter an order of supervision or conditional discharge as provided
by the Illinois Unified Code of Corrections, 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1, et seq. for
any violation of any provision of this Code, or any other ordinance of the Village.
(D) Settlement of Certain Ordinance Violations. A person accused of a first offense relative to violation
of certain provisions of this Code may settle and compromise the Village’s cause of action
(i.e., claim) against him or her by paying to the Village fifty dollars ($50.00) per offense if paid
to the Village within fifteen (15) days after the citation is issued, unless otherwise stated in
this Chapter. Upon receipt of the payment, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office is authorized to
forbear from initiating a prosecution of the alleged offense(s) involved. The Village Board may
from time to time approve and adopt by motion or resolution a list of certain offenses which may
be so settled. Any offense not so settled by prepayment within the time specified shall be subject
to the minimum fine(s) as set forth in Section 10.99(A) above.
(E) Remedial Hearing Date May Be Required. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code to
the contrary by which the pre-hearing settlement of a citation or notice to appear or a notice of violation
(“initial charging document”) is authorized, any enforcement officer or agent of the
Village may provide on the initial charging document that the appearance of the defendant at an
administrative hearing or in court shall be required if such enforcement officer or agent of the
Village reasonably believes, based upon one or more prior offenses of the same or similar nature
or other circumstances, that the defendant’s appearance is necessary and should be required
to assure that the defendant thereafter takes appropriate remedial measures to comply
with the applicable provisions of this Code or of any other applicable ordinance(s) of the Village.
(Ord. 2012-06 passed 03/19/12; Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15, 12-22 passed 9/17/12)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL I-Chapt 10-General Provisions-3-15 .docx
3-30-1 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
General Provisions
§30.01 Governing Body
§30.02 Elections and Terms of Office
§30.03 Compensation
§30.04 Standing and Special Committees
Meetings; Rules of Order
§30.15 Meetings
§30.16 President to Preside
§30.17 Rules of Order
§30.18 Disturbances at Meetings
§30.19 Rules for Participation in Meetings Via Electronic Means
§30.20 Regulations for Recording of Public Meetings
§30.21 Rules Governing Public Comments at Public Meetings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§30.01 GOVERNING BODY.
The Village of Deer Park shall be governed by a Board of Trustees which shall be elected at large and shall
consist of a President and six Trustees.
§30.02 ELECTIONS AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
A. The term of office of the Trustees shall be four years and until their successors are elected. After the
first election, three Trustees shall be elected by the electors of the Village for a four-year term at the
regular Village election held on the third Tuesday in April of each odd numbered year, as provided by
statute.
B. The term of office of the Village President shall be four years. He shall be elected by the electors of
the Village at the regular Village election held on the third Tuesday in April of each fourth year.
C. Vacancies in the offices of Trustee or Village President shall be filled as prescribed by the ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50.
§ 30.03 COMPENSATION.
The Village President, and the Trustees, shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by ordinance, subject to
the provisions of the ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-50-5 and 3.1-50-10.
§ 30.04 STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
The President shall appoint the members of the standing and special committees, and shall designate the
chairperson of each committee. (‘77 Code, § 2.08)
3-30-2 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
MEETINGS; RULES OF ORDER
§30.15 MEETINGS.
A. The Board of Trustees shall hold its regular meetings at Vehe Barn Community Center, unless otherwise
ordered, on the third Thursday of each month at 7:00 p.m., except when such date falls on a legal
holiday in which event the meeting may be held on the next succeeding business day, or at such other
times as it may by ordinance prescribe. No notice of regular meetings shall be required, except as required
by law.
B. The Board of Trustees shall meet as a Committee of the Whole (“COW”) on the third Thursday of each
month, except when such date falls on a legal holiday in which event the meeting may be held on the next
succeeding business day, or at such other times as it may by ordinance prescribe. The meeting shall begin
at 7:30 p.m. following the regular Village Board meeting in the Vehe Barn Community Center, unless otherwise
ordered. In the event there is not sufficient business to bring before the COW the meeting may be
cancelled by the President and notice of said cancellation shall be given to the members and posted at the
Village Hall, as well as provided to all media who have filed an annual request for such notice. The President
shall chair the COW meetings. The Clerk shall be responsible for the preparation and submittal of all
meeting minutes.
1. Committee of the Whole Matters: Business coming before the COW will generally be in four
general categories: Administration and Communication and Safety; Development related to
Commercial and Residential Properties and Ordinances; Infrastructure Including Parks, Roads and
Drainage; and Special Projects. These general categories shall consist of the following matters:
a. Administration, Communication and Safety: This category will include, but not be limited
to, the study and review of recommendations from staff regarding:
i. Monthly reports of the Administrator and Treasurer;
ii. The employment of an auditing firm to perform the annual audit of the Village’s
financial records;
iii. Fiscal year budget and appropriations ordinance;
iv. Matters of internal management and control policies and procedures, which shall
include matters of insurance, tort liability, public relations, contractual employee
performances, evaluations and training, records management, and the use of related
technologies and licensing for the same;
v. Matters of both federal and state legislation and proposed intergovernmental
agreements;
vi. Matters pertinent to the application for and administration of federal and state
grants;
vii. Legal matters and litigation;
viii. Personnel policies and procedures, salary structures, and related employment matters;
ix. Matters relative to community communications and events;
3-30-3 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
x. Public safety which shall include, but not be limited to, protection of persons and
property, crime prevention, fire prevention/protection, and pedestrian and vehicle
safety, including traffic control measures and procedures;
xi. Environmental protection and enforcement measures relative to public health issues
and public nuisances, including control measures for the transport of hazardous
materials through the Village; and
xii. Activities related to emergency management and disaster planning for the delivery
of services to respond to requests for emergency medical services and
disaster assistance in the wake of floods, hazardous material accidents, and
other natural or manmade disasters.
b. Development Related to Commercial and Residential Properties and Ordinances: This
category will include, but not be limited to the study and review of recommendations from
staff and advisory review bodies regarding:
i. Concept plans presented by developers and individuals;
ii. Proposed zoning amendments, special uses, zoning variations, planned developments,
and annexation agreements; and
iii. Proposed regulations or amendments to the Zoning Code, Subdivision Code, site
development codes, and village municipal codes.
c. Infrastructure Including Parks, Roads and Drainage: This category will include, but not be
limited to, the review of staff recommendations and study matters with respect to:
i. The construction, use, grade, drainage, maintenance and repair of Village roads,
right of way, and all appurtenances therein;
ii. The operation of all Village parks with respect to their maintenance, alterations,
and improvements and recommend such park rules and regulations as deemed
appropriate;
iii. Village structures and property owned and leased by the Village and formulate
decisions with respect to their maintenance, repairs, demolition, and alterations;
and
iv. Transportation planning.
d. Special Projects: Any other issues that need Village Board review and approval.
2. Village Board Action: Following a COW meeting, any matters needing formal action by the
Village Board will be placed on the agenda of a future regular Village Board meeting.
C. The President or any three of the Trustees may call special meetings of the Board at any time. The
Clerk shall notify all members of the Board of such meeting at least two days before the same is
held, by delivering a written notice, stating the time and place of such meeting, to each member personally,
or by leaving the notice at his residence.
3-30-4 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
D. Whenever all of the members of the Board of Trustees are present at any special meeting, the requirement
of notice of such special meeting shall be deemed waived.
(Ord. 2008-08 passed 6/18/08; Amd. 2017-06 passed 4/17/17, 2017-14 passed 8/17/17)
§30.16 PRESIDENT TO PRESIDE.
The Village President shall be the presiding officer of all regular and special meetings of the Board of
Trustees, and at all times when the Board meets as Committee of the Whole.
§30.17 RULES OF ORDER.
A. Order of Business. The order of business of the Village Board of Trustees shall be as follows:
1. Call to order, roll call and determination of a quorum.
2. Minutes of the preceding Board Meeting and minutes of any commission or committee submitting
reports to the Board for inclusion in the record of the Village.
3. Reports and communications from the President and other officers as set forth below.
(a) President.
(b) Trustees and their standing committees.
(c) Clerk.
(d) Treasurer.
(e) Village Administrator.
(f) Attorney.
(g) Plan Commission.
(h) Board of Appeals.
(i) Other Commissions or Committees.
4. Petitions, resolutions and ordinances.
5. Old business.
6. New business.
7. Public discussion and/or comments from the floor.
8. Adjournment.
B. Rescinded Action. No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be rescinded at any special meeting
of the Board of Trustees unless there be present at such special meeting as many members of the
Board of Trustees as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken, as provided by
statute.
C. Resolutions. Any resolutions submitted to the Board of Trustees shall be reduced to writing before being
voted upon on request of any two members of the Board.
D. Suspension of Rules. The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at
any time by the consent of a majority of the members present at any meeting.
E. Robert’s Rules of Order. Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the Board of Trus3-
30-5 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
tees except when in conflict with any of the foregoing rules.
F. Quorum. A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business, but no ordinance
or resolution creating a liability against the Village shall be passed except upon the favorable vote
of a majority of the elected members, as provided by statute.
G. Committees. Special committees shall be created from time to time as directed by the Board of Trustees.
H. All standing and special committees shall consist of three members each, including the Chairperson,
unless the Board shall direct otherwise. All committees shall be appointed by the Village President.
§30.18 DISTURBANCES AT MEETINGS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any meeting of the Board of Trustees or of any committee
thereof.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less $1 nor more than $50 for
each offense.
§30.19 RULES FOR PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS VIA ELECTRONIC MEANS.
Members of any public body of the Village, including but not limited to members of the Village Board, may
participate in meetings via electronic means, provided no such participation in such meetings shall occur via
such means unless in compliance with the following rules:
A. Purpose: The purpose of these rules is to prescribe rules for the participation by members of a public
body of the Village in meetings of such public body in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings
Act when such meeting is conducted wholly or partially via electronic means. These rules for participation
in meetings by members of any public body of the Village via electronic means are intended
to be consistent with and supplement the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
B. Minutes of Meetings: Minutes of the public body of the Village shall reflect and record whether
the members were physically present or present by means of video or audio conference.
C. Limitations on Participation in Meetings Via Electronic Means: The following rules shall apply for
the participation in any meeting at which any member of a public body of the Village is participating
through the use of audio, video, or other electronic conference means:
1. If a quorum of the members of the public body of the Village is physically present as required
by the Illinois Open Meetings Act, a member of that body may attend the meeting by other
means if the member is prevented from physically attending because of: (a) personal illness
or disability, (b) employment purposes or the business of the public body, or (c) a family or
other emergency. “Other means” or “electronic means”, for the purposes of this Section,
shall mean attendance by video, audio, or other electronic means.
2. A quorum of members of a public body of the Village must be physically present at the location
of an open meeting. A quorum of members of a public body of the Village must also
be physically present at the location of a closed meeting. Other members who are not physically
present at any open or closed meeting of such a public body may participate in the
meeting by other means consistent with the Rules set forth in this Section and the Illinois
Open Meetings Act.
3. If a member of a public body of the Village wishes to attend a meeting by other means, the
3-30-6 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
member must notify the Village Clerk or other recording secretary of the public body before
the meeting, unless such advance notice is impractical.
4. At the commencement of any such meeting of a public body of the Village, the presiding
officer shall announce such method of attendance of those participating by other means to the
public and the reason.
5. If the presiding officer of a public body of the Village attends the meeting through the use of
other means, he or she shall vacate the chair and a duly elected or appointed temporary
chair who is physically present shall preside.
6. When one or more members of a public body attend a meeting of such public body via other
means, all votes shall be by roll call.
7. No more than two (2) members of a public body of the Village may attend a meeting through
the use of other means at the same remote location.
8. When other means are used to allow a member of a public body to participate in a meeting
without being physically present, each time a member using such other means wishes to speak,
such member shall endeavor to identify himself or herself by name and be recognized by
the presiding officer before speaking.
9. The Village staff or consultants of the Village are authorized to participate in the proceedings
of any public body of the Village by other means.
D. Member(s) Considered Present: Any member of a public body of the Village shall be considered present
wherein the member is present by other means whereby voices are audibly received at the
physical location of the quorum of the public body.
E. The Village Board hereby allows its members to attend a meeting of any Village Board or Village
Board committee via electronic means to the extent permitted by and in accordance with these Rules.
Other public bodies of the Village may do likewise on a case-by-case basis or as part of the rules of
such public body, but such participation by electronic means shall be in compliance with this Section.
(Ord. 2009-15, Passed 10-19-09)
§30.20 REGULATIONS FOR RECORDING OF PUBLIC MEETINGS.
A. The following regulations are hereby prescribed to govern the right to make such recordings of Village
meetings required to be open pursuant to the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/2.05, et seq.)
(“public meetings”).
B. Any person(s) recording such public meetings shall do so: (a) in a quiet, unobtrusive, and respectful
manner, and (b) in a manner so as to not disturb and/or disrupt any of the proceedings of such
public meeting(s).
C. All equipment being used to record such public meetings via tape, film, video, or otherwise, and
the persons operating such equipment, shall be located in a manner which will not block the view of
others in attendance.
D. All such recording equipment and personnel operating such equipment shall be located in such a manner
so as not to block any exit or to create a “trip” hazard within the meeting room.
E. Any person attending, participating in, and/or speaking at such a public Village meeting should rec3-
30-7 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
ognize the fact that, pursuant to 5 ILCS 120/2.05, the Village is legally required to allow the recording
of such public meetings and those in attendance and cannot prevent and/or control the dissemination,
use and/or republication of such recording(s).
F. It is the hope of the Village that all public comments offered at any public Village meeting will be
fair and accurate and reflect an appreciation for a high degree of civility and mutual respect among residents
of the Village and their elected and appointed officials.
G. At each public meeting, the Village President or other designated person chairing such meeting, or his
or her designee, shall announce to those present that: “This meeting is a limited public forum for
public comments, but any statements made and/or opinions expressed therein do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Village but represent only the views of the persons making such statements
and/or presenting such opinions who are solely responsible for the content thereof.”
H. It is the hope of the Village and its Corporate Authorities that any such recordings and/or the dissemination,
use and/or republication of such recordings will be done, not in a malicious and/or deceptive
manner, or in a manner which may intimidate any reasonable person(s) or discourage them
from participating in public discussion and/or debate, but in such a manner which will further open
and transparent municipal government and which will foster civility and mutual respect among the residents
of the Village and their elected and appointed officials.
§30.21 PUBLIC COMMENTS AT PUBLIC MEETINGS.
A. Limited Public Forum:
1. All public meetings of public bodies of the Village shall be and are hereby declared to be a
limited public forum for comments by members of the public as required by the Illinois
Open Meetings Act, but any statements made and/or opinions expressed by members of the
public in attendance at such public meeting(s) do not reflect the views of the Village or of any
officer, employee, or public body of the Village, but rather, represent only the views of the
persons making such statements and/or presenting such opinions who are solely responsible
for the content thereof.
2. Any member of the public making comments at any public meeting(s) of any public body
of the Village shall do so in a manner so as to not disturb and/or disrupt any of the proceedings
of such public meeting(s).
3. All members of the public in attendance at a public meeting of any public body of the Village
shall have an opportunity to be heard during that portion or those portions of the public
body’s agenda designated for public comment on the agenda for such meeting, or if there is
no such item on the agenda, then at the end of the public body’s agenda prior to adjournment.
Any member of the public offering comments at a public meeting of any public body
of the Village shall make such comments during that portion or those portions of the public
body’s agenda designated for public comment on the agenda for such meeting, or if there is
none, then at the end of the public body’s agenda prior to adjournment. Any member of the
public wishing to offer comments at such a public meeting shall wait to make such comments
until recognized by the chair for such purpose, provided, however, the chair of the public body,
or the public body by a vote of at least a majority, may move the time designated for public
comment(s) on a particular issue to what the chair or public body deems to be a more appropriate
or convenient place on the agenda of the public body.
4. Limitations:
3-30-8 Title III
(Rev. 08/17)
a. The chair of the public body, or the public body by a vote of at least a majority of a
quorum, may limit public comments to maintain, encourage, and foster civility. The
chair may take such actions as are required to maintain an orderly and civil meeting.
The chair may declare as out of order patently offensive or obscene comments or
gestures.
b. The chair may impose reasonable limitations on public comment presented at any
public meeting, such as time limits and/or limitations on repetitious, irrelevant or
immaterial testimony, which ruling(s) may be overruled by a majority of at least a
quorum of the public body. Time limits, if imposed, shall be fair and even-handedly
administered. The chair may rule on all questions related to the relevancy of any public
comment(s), which ruling(s) may be overruled by a majority of at least a quorum of
the public body. The chair may also impose reasonable conditions and/or limitations on
public comments, including but not limited to time limitations, after giving due
consideration to factors present in particular proceedings, including, but not limited to,
the following:
i. The complexity of the issue;
ii. Whether the member of the public offering comments possesses special expertise;
iii. Whether the public comments are a matter of taste or personal opinion or
concern an issue or proposal;
iv. The degree to which the person’s comments relate to the factors which can be
legally considered relative to any particular issue or proposal.
c. Any member of the public making comments at a public meeting shall be required to
sign in on a list or form provided by the Village and provide his or her name and address
and identify in a general way on such list or form the issue(s) on which such person
wishes to comment.
d. A member of the public may appear and make comments at a public meeting on
his or her own behalf or may be represented by an attorney. Any attorney representing
any party or objector(s) at such public meeting shall file a written appearance
and include thereon the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all of his or her
clients, and any such attorney shall also be subject to the same rules of conduct as provided
by this Village Code.
5. Recording: Any member of the public attending, participating in, and/or speaking at such a public
Village meeting should recognize the fact that, pursuant to the Illinois Open Meetings Act, the Village
is legally required to allow the recording of such public meetings and those in attendance and
cannot prevent and/or control the dissemination, use, and/or republication of such recording(s).
(Ord. 2011-04, Passed 3-21-11)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL III-Chapt 30-Board of Trustees - 8-17.docx
3-31-1 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
§31.001 Appointments
§31.002 Terms of Office; Vacancies
§31.003 Assignment of Duties
§31.004 Inspection of Records
§31.005 Moneys Received
§31.006 Oath and Bond
§31.007 Compensation; Salaries
§31.008 Conservators of the Peace; Powers to Make Arrests
§31.009 Termination of Office
§31.010 Travel Expense Reimbursement
Village President
§31.020 Election; Term of Office
§31.021 Powers and Duties
§31.022 Oath and Bond
§31.023 Appointment and Removal of Officers
§31.024 Official Signature
§31.025 Powers of Peace Officer
§31.026 President Pro-Tem
§31.027 Compensation
Village Clerk
§31.040 Appointment and Term
§31.041 Oath and Bond
§31.042 Office
§31.043 Powers and Duties
§31.044 Absence of Disability; Clerk Pro-Tem
§31.045 Compensation
Village Treasurer
§31.055 Office Created
§31.056 Appointment and Compensation
§31.057 Oath and Bond
§31.058 Powers and Duties
Village Administrator
§31.070 Creation of Office
§31.071 Appointment; Term; Removal
§31.072 Compensation and Employment Agreement
3-31-2 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
§31.073 Oath and Bond
§31.074 Powers and Duties
§31.075 Acting Administrator
§31.076 Matters Directed to the Administrator’s Attention
§31.077 Authority of Elected Officials
Village Attorney
§31.085 Attorney on Retainer
§31.086 Powers and Duties
§31.087 Compensation
Village Engineer
§31.100 Engineer on Retainer
§31.101 Powers and Duties
§31.110 Reserved (Repealed by Ord. No. 16-15 , passed 11/21/16)
§31.111 Reserved (Repealed by Ord. No. 16-15 , passed 11/21/16)
§31.120 Reserved (Repealed by Ord. No. 17-01 , passed 1/17/17)
Tourism Committee
§31.201 Establishment, Purposes and Goals
§31.202 Appointment and Qualifications
§31.203 Terms of Members
§31.204 Meetings
§31.205 Objectives and Duties of the Tourism Committee
§31.206 Limitation on Powers
§31.207 Annual Report
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§31.001 APPOINTMENTS.
The President with the consent of the Board of Trustees shall make appointments to fill all appointive
offices. Employees of all departments shall be selected by the President, in the absence of provisions to
the contrary as provided in this Municipal Code and/or in Illinois statutes. (‘77 Code, §3.06(a), Rev. by
Ord. No. 2011-12 passed 6/20/11)
§31.002 TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
Every appointive officer of the Village shall hold office for a term of one year or until his successor, is
appointed and qualified unless it is otherwise provided by provision of this Code. Employees selected
shall serve so long as their services are desired. (‘77 Code, § 3.06(b))
§31.003 ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.
3-31-3 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
The President shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer any duty which is not assigned by
ordinance to some other specific officer and shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective
powers or duties of officers. (‘77 Code, § 3.06(c))
§31.004 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
All records kept by any officer of the Village shall be open to inspection by the President, or any member
of the Board, at all times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or provision of
this Code. (‘77 Code, § 3.06(d))
§31.005 MONEYS RECEIVED.
Every officer of the Village shall at least once every day turn over all moneys received by him in his
official capacity to the Village Administrator with a statement which shows the source from which the
same was received. (‘77 Code, § 3.06(e))
§31.006 OATH AND BOND.
(A) Every officer of the Village shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath required by
ILCS Ch. 65, Ch. 5, § 3.1-10-25. (‘77 Code, § 3.06(f))
(B) Every officer of the Village shall, if required by the Board, before entering upon the duties
of office, give a bond in at least the minimum amount required by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-
30 as may be determined by the Board and with such sureties as it may approve, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office or position. (‘77 Code, § 3.06(g))
§31.007 COMPENSATION; SALARIES.
All officers and employees of the Village shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time
to time by ordinance. No officer or employee receiving compensation from the Village shall be entitled to
retain any portion of any fees collected by him in the performance of his duties as municipal officer or
employee in the absence of a specific ordinance provision to that effect. (’77 Code, §3.06(h); Amd. Ord.
No. 2011-12 passed 6/20/11)
§31.008 CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE; POWERS TO MAKE ARRESTS.
The President and Trustees and members of the Police Department, are hereby declared to be conservators
of the peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to the conservators of the peace by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes. (‘77 Code, §3.06(I))
§31.009 TERMINATION OF OFFICE.
Every officer of the Village, upon the termination of his office, shall deliver to his successor all books and
records which may be the property of the Village, and if no successor has been appointed within one
week after the termination of office, such property shall be delivered either to the Village Clerk or to the
Village Treasurer. (‘77 Code, §3.06(j))
§31.010 TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.
3-31-4 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
(A) Interpretation: This Section shall be interpreted to be consistent with the Local Government Travel
Expense Control Act, 50 ILCS 150/1 et seq.
(B) Definitions: As used in this Section:
(1) Entertainment includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters, circuses,
sporting events, or any other place of public or private entertainment or amusement, unless
ancillary to the purpose of the program or event.
(2) Travel means any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees and officers
of the Village or direct payment to private agencies providing transportation or related
services.
(C) Official Business Requiring Expenses: Travel, meal, and lodging expenses will only be allowed
for official business of the Village which is necessary to the functioning or improvement of the
Village. If the business can be done remotely, no expenses shall be allowed. All effort shall be
taken to avoid expenses. This includes scheduling meetings within the Village as opposed to an
offsite location.
(D) Entertainment Expenses: No entertainment expenses shall be reimbursed.
(E) Maximum Reimbursement: The maximum reimbursements allowed for expenses shall be:
(1) Mileage: The current rate for mileage set by the Internal Revenue Service.
(2) Meals (breakfast, lunch, dinner): $50.00/day.
(3) Lodging: $300.00/night.
(4) Other travel: $350.00 per round trip.
(F) Emergencies: In emergencies, amounts in excess of the above maximum limits may be permitted
by the corporate authorities.
(G) Expense Form: All anticipated and incurred expenses shall only be approved if submitted in the
proper manner, including the information required in Section 31.010(I).
(H) Approval by the Administrator: The Administrator is responsible for approving expenses incurred
by employees which are under the amounts in Section 31.010(E). If the Administrator is the one
incurring the expense, then the expense shall be approved by the President.
(I) Approval by the Village Board: Any expenses incurred or to be incurred over the maximum levels
in Section 31.010(E), and any expenses incurred or to be incurred by members of the Village
Board, may only be approved if the following information is provided by the employee or trustee
in writing, signed and dated and approved by the President and Board of Trustees by a roll-call
vote at an open meeting:
(1) Name and position (employee, trustee, etc.);
3-31-5 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
(2) Date(s) for which reimbursement is requested;
(3) Nature of the official business requiring this expense;
(4) Detailed estimate of anticipated expenses OR explanation of expenses incurred; and
(5) Any receipts for expenses already incurred must be attached to the submission; if a longer
explanation is required, additional information shall be attached.
(J) Public records: This policy and all forms submitted relative to this policy are public records.
(K) No Right to Reimbursement: Nothing in this policy shall be construed as a right for any employee
or officer to be reimbursed for expenses. No reimbursement may be given without approval by
the Administrator or the Village Board. Employees and officers should, to the extent possible, obtain
prior approval of their anticipated expenses before incurring any expenses.
(Ord. 017-02 passed 1-17-17)
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
§31.020 ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.
The President shall be elected for a term of four years. He shall be President of the Board of Trustees as
provided by statute. (‘77 Code, § 3.01(a))
§31.021 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The President shall be the chief executive officer of the Village and shall perform all such duties
as may be required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall have general supervision over
all the executive officers of the Village and over all of the employees of the Village. He shall
have the power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any Village officer or employee
at any reasonable time. (‘77 Code, §3.01(b))
(B) The President shall settle any question as to the respective powers or duties of any appointed officer
or employee of the Village. He shall have the power to delegate to any such officer any duty
which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform the duty.
(‘77 Code, §3.01(c))
§31.022 OATH AND BOND.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the President shall give a surety bond conditioned upon his
faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of $3,000. He shall take the oath of office prescribed by
statute and shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
(‘77 Code, § 3.01(d))
§31.023 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.
(A) The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
all officers whose appointment is not otherwise provided for by law, and whenever a vacancy occurs
in any office, which by law or ordinance he is empowered and required to fill, he shall with3-
31-6 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
in 30 days after the happening of such vacancy, communicate to the Board the name of his appointee
to such office, and pending the concurrence of the Board in such appointment, he
may designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such office. (‘77 Code,
§3.01(e))
(B) The President shall have the power to remove any officer appointed by him on any formal
charge whenever he is of the opinion that the interests of the Village demand such removal.
He shall report the reasons for such removal to the Board at a meeting to be held not less than
five days, nor more than ten (10) days after such removal. If the President shall fail, or refuse
to file with the Clerk, a statement of the reasons for such removal or if the Board, by a twothirds
vote of all its members authorized by Law to be elected, by “yeas” and “nays,” to be
entered upon its record, disapprove of such removal, such officer shall thereupon become restored
to the office from which he was removed, but he shall give a new bond and take a new oath
of office. (‘77 Code, §3.01(f))
§31.024 OFFICIAL SIGNATURE.
The President shall sign all Village warrants, commissions, permits and licenses granted by authority of
the Board, except as otherwise provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require
his official signature. (‘77 Code, §3.01(g))
§31.025 POWERS OF PEACE OFFICER.
The President may exercise within the Village limits the powers conferred upon sheriffs by law to
suppress disorder and keep the peace. (‘77 Code, §3.01(h))
§31.026 PRESIDENT PRO-TEM.
During the temporary absence or disability of the President, the Board of Trustees shall elect one of its
number to act as President Pro-Tem, who during the absence or disability of the President shall perform
the duties of the office. (‘77 Code, §3.01(I))
§31.027 COMPENSATION.
The President shall receive compensation as determined by the Board of Trustees for the performance of
the duties of President. (‘77 Code, § 3.01(j))
VILLAGE CLERK
§31.040 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
The President shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, a qualified Village
Clerk. Such appointment shall be valid unless and until the Village Clerk resigns or is removed from
office, provided that after April 30, 2007, the term of the Village Clerk cannot exceed that of the Village
President. When a new Village President takes office, he shall either reappoint the existing Village Clerk
or may appoint a new Village Clerk to that position. (‘77 Code, § 3.02(a)) (Am. Ord. 04-18, passed 4-19-
04)
§31.041 OATH AND BOND.
3-31-7 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
The Clerk, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by law,
and shall execute a bond to the Village in the penal sum of $3,000 or such amount as may be fixed by
resolution, with sureties as shall be approved by the President and Board of Trustees, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of his office, and the payment of all moneys that may be received by
him, according to law and ordinance. The bond shall be filed with the Village Treasurer. (‘77 Code,
§3.02(b)
§31.042 OFFICE.
The Clerk shall keep his office at such place as the Board of Trustees may direct. The office shall be open
at such reasonable hours as the Clerk may set pursuant to directions of the President. (‘77 Code, §3.02(c))
§31.043 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided by the corporate authorities, and all papers
belonging to the municipality the custody and control of which are not given to other officers.
(B) The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the corporate authorities including executive sessions and
keep a full record of their proceedings in the journal, except if the Clerk is the subject matter of
the meeting and his or her presence creates a conflict of interest. The record of those proceedings
shall be made available for public inspection within 7 days after being approved or accepted by
the corporate authorities as the official minutes of their proceedings.
(C) Copies of all papers duly filed in the Clerk's office and transcripts from the journals and other
records and files of the Clerk's office, certified by the Clerk under the corporate seal, shall be evidence
in all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced.
(D) The Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the
corporate authorities. Immediately following each ordinance the Clerk shall make a memorandum
of the date of the passage and of the publication or posting, where required, of the ordinance. This
record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents,
passage, and of the publication or posting of ordinances.
(E) The Clerk shall have other duties prescribed by the corporate authorities.
§31.044 ABSENCE OR DISABILITY; CLERK PRO-TEM.
In the event of temporary absence or disability of the Village Clerk, the President shall appoint a Village
Clerk Pro-Tem by and with the consent of the majority of the Board of Trustees. (‘77 Code, § 3.02(m))
§31.045 COMPENSATION.
The Village Clerk shall receive suitable compensation as determined by the Board of Trustees for the
performance of the duties of Village Clerk. (‘77 Code, § 3.02(n))
VILLAGE TREASURER
§31.055 OFFICE CREATED.
3-31-8 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
There is hereby created the office of Treasurer of the Village. (‘77 Code, § 3.03(a))
§ 31.056 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
(A) The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
a qualified Village Treasurer. The Village Treasurer need not reside in the Village. Such appointment
shall be valid unless and until the Village Treasurer resigns or is removed from
such office, provided that the term of the Village Treasurer cannot exceed that of the Village
President. When a new Village President takes office, he shall either reappoint the existing Village
Treasurer or can appoint a new Village Treasurer to that position. (‘77 Code, §3.03(b); Am.
Ord. 03-3, passed 1- 20-03)
(B) The Treasurer shall receive compensation as determined by the Board of Trustees for the performance
of the duties of Treasurer.
§31.057 OATH AND BOND.
The Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall take the oath prescribed by law, and
shall execute a surety bond to the Village, in a penal sum required by statute. (‘77 Code, §3.03(c))
§31.058 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the Village and shall keep the Treasurer’s
books and accounts in the manner prescribed by ordinance. These books and accounts shall always
be subject to the inspection of any member of the corporate authorities.
(B) The Treasurer shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and the debits and credits
belonging to the fund or appropriation.
(C) The Treasurer shall give every person paying money into the treasury a receipt, specifying the
date of payment and upon what account paid. The Treasurer shall file copies of these receipts
with the Clerk, with the Treasurer's monthly reports. If the Treasurer has possession of money
properly appropriated to the payment of any warrant lawfully drawn upon the Treasurer, the
Treasurer shall pay the money specified in the warrant to the person designated by the warrant.
(D) Reports: At the end of every month, and oftener if required by the corporate authorities, the
Treasurer shall render an account under oath to the corporate authorities, or to an officer designated
by ordinance, showing the state of the treasury at the date of the account and the balance of
money in the treasury. The Treasurer shall accompany the account with a statement of all money
received into the treasury and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by
the Treasurer.
(E) Receipts and Expenditures: The Treasurer shall report to the corporate authorities, as often as
they require, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the Village, as shown
by the Treasurer's books, up to the time of the report.
(F) Within 6 months after the end of each fiscal year, the Treasurer shall annually prepare and file
with the Clerk an account of moneys received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal
year as specified by statute. Upon receipt of the account from the Treasurer, the Clerk shall
publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers published in the Village.
3-31-9 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
(G) The Treasurer shall perform other duties as requested by the President and/or the Board of Trustees.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
§31.070 CREATION OF OFFICE.
There is hereby created the office of Village Administrator of the Village of Deer Park, Lake and Cook
County, Illinois. (‘77 Code, § 3.035(a)) (Ord. 79-2, passed 2-24-79)
§31.071 APPOINTMENT; TERM; REMOVAL.
(A) The Administrator shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees. He shall be chosen
on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his
actual experience and his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office
hereinafter set forth. Neither the President nor any of the Trustees shall receive such appointment
during the term for which he shall have been elected or within two years after the expiration
of his term.
(B) The Village Administrator shall remain in office so long as he performs his duties to the satisfaction
of the President and the Board of Trustees.
(C) The Village Administrator may be removed by the Village Board by a majority vote of the entire
Board at any time. The Administrator may request a written statement of the reasons for
removal, which the Village Board shall furnish to the administrator within 20 days after the filing
of such request. During this period, the administrator may be suspended from office with
or without pay. The action of the Village Board in removing the administrator shall be final. (‘77
Code, § 3.035(b)) (Ord. 79-2, passed 2-24-79)
§31.072 COMPENSATION AND EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT.
The Administrator’s rate of compensation shall be set by the Village Board and may be adjusted from
time to time as it deems appropriate. Subject to the terms and conditions of state law and this Code, the
Village Board and the Administrator shall enter into an employment agreement which specifies in writing
the level of compensation of the Administrator, fringe benefits including levels of support for the Administrator’s
continuing professional education, agreements for separation pay upon termination of the Administrator’s
employment, other appropriate agreements describing the working relationship between the
Administrator and corporate authorities, and the Village Board’s performance expectations for the Administrator.
This agreement should be reviewed and revised by mutual agreement of the parties at periodic
intervals of no more than one year’s duration.
§31.073 OATH AND BOND.
Before taking office, the Village Administrator shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed in ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-3-9, which oath shall be filed in the Village Office, and the Village shall furnish a
fidelity bond in the amount of $12,000 conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, with an
insurance corporation satisfactory to the corporate authorities and licensed to do business in the state as
surety. Such bond shall be filed with the Village Clerk after being approved by the President and Board of
Trustees, and the premium on the bond shall be paid by the Village. (‘77 Code, § 3.035(d)) (Ord. 79-2,
3-31-10 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
passed 2-24-79)
§31.074 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Administrator shall be responsible to the President and Board of Trustees for the proper administration
of all affairs of the Village. In discharging this responsibility, the Administrator shall:
(1) Direct, supervise, and coordinate the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of
the Village, except as otherwise provided by law;
(2) Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove all Village employees
and appointive administrative officers except when otherwise provided for by law. All appointments
and removals shall be based solely upon merit and on the qualifications or disqualifications
of the individuals involved, without regard to race, sex, religious convictions, or political
belief or affiliation. The Administrator may authorize any administrative officer, subject to the
Administrator’s direction and supervision, to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates
in that officer’s department, office or agency;
(3) Attend all Village Board meetings. The Administrator shall have the right to take part in all discussions,
but shall not vote;
(4) Provide for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the Village;
(5) Serve as Village Budget Officer and prepare and submit to the Village Board, by the date set by
the Village Board, a recommended annual budget for Village operations and a recommended capital
program. When the annual budget or capital program have been approved by the Village
Board, the Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of said budget or capital program;
(6) Submit to the Village Board and make available to the public a complete report on the finances
and administrative activities of the Village as of the end of each fiscal year;
(7) Make such other reports as the Village Board may require concerning the operations of Village
departments, offices, and agencies;
(8) Keep the Village Board fully advised of the present financial condition and future needs of the
Village;
(9) Advise the Village Board on pending decisions of public policy and recommend the adoption of
such measures as the Administrator may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or
welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services;
(10) Be responsible for procurement of commodities and services for all Village departments, offices,
and agencies, and promulgate purchasing rules which shall be followed by employees in the procurement
of goods and services;
(11) Propose to the Village Board such personnel rules and regulations as the Administrator deems
necessary to manage the personnel policies of the Village;
3-31-11 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
(12) Be responsible for the conduct of all collective bargaining processes of the Village, and recommend
to the Village Board collective bargaining agreements for consideration and possible final
approval by the Village Board. The Administrator shall be responsible for administering all employee
organization contracts reached through the collective bargaining process;
(13) Provide staff support services for the President and the Board of Trustees;
(14) Perform such other duties as may be specified by law or Village ordinance or as may from time to
time be requested by the Village Board.
§31.075 ACTING ADMINISTRATOR.
If, because of a temporary absence, disability, or illness, the Administrator is unable to carry out the functions
of this office, the President and Board of Trustees may appoint a member of the Village’s senior
administrative staff to serve as Acting Administrator and carry out the duties of the office during the absence.
§31.076 MATTERS DIRECTED TO THE ADMINISTRATOR’S ATTENTION.
No citizen or elected officer of the Village shall dictate the appointment of any person to, or their removal
from, office by the Administrator or by any of the Administrator’s subordinates. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, elected Village officers shall deal with the administrative service through the Administrator.
Elected Village officers shall not give orders to any subordinates of the Administrator, either publicly or
privately.
§31.077 AUTHORITY OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to diminish or detract from the statutory powers and authority of
the Village’s elected officials.
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
§31.085 ATTORNEY ON RETAINER.
A Village Attorney shall be retained and employed by the President, by and with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees. (‘77 Code, § 3.04(a))
§31.086 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Village Attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the Village President, Board of Trustees and Village
Clerk on matters pertaining to their duties and Village interests, shall represent the Village in litigation
except where the Board of Trustees directs otherwise, shall draft all contracts, ordinances or other
documents needed by the Village, and shall render such other legal services as may be required by the
President and Board of Trustees. (‘77 Code, §3.04(b))
§31.087 COMPENSATION.
The Village Attorney shall receive compensation for his services as shall be determined from time to time
by the Board of Trustees. (‘77 Code, § 3.04(c))
3-31-12 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
VILLAGE ENGINEER
§31.100 ENGINEER ON RETAINER.
The Village may retain the services of an engineer as a consultant from time to time as determined by the
Board of Trustees, who may be described as Village Engineer. (‘77 Code, §3.05(a))
§31.101 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The Village Engineer shall keep accurate maps, plats and records of all public works, lands
or property owned by the Village. (‘77 Code, § 3.05(b))
(B) The Village Engineer shall advise the President and Board of Trustees, and other Village officials,
on all engineering matters referred to him, and shall perform such duties as are provided
by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto such other duties as from time to time may be imposed
upon him by the President and the Board of Trustees. He shall, from time to time, as required
by the President and Board of Trustees, make reports regarding public improvements,
repairs of streets, and other public works, and shall make suggestions to the President and Board
of Trustees regarding the same as shall, in his judgment, seem best and proper. (‘77 Code,
§3.05(c))
§31.120: Reserved
TOURISM COMMITTEE
§31.201 ESTABLISHMENT, PURPOSES AND GOALS.
(A) There is hereby established an advisory committee consisting of five (5) members, known as
the Tourism Committee (“Tourism Committee”).
(B) The goals and purposes of the Tourism Committee are to attract, retain and expand quality
retail and commercial businesses so as to increase local sales tax revenues, create new employment
opportunities, diversify the local economy, and effectively utilize remaining available
property so as to enhance the desirability of Deer Park as a place to visit and live.
§31.202 APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS.
(A) The members of the Tourism Committee shall be appointed and removed by the Village President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(B) The Tourism Committee will be chaired by the Trustee responsible for tourism. Other membership
shall include a second Village Trustee and three residents selected at large by the Village
President with advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(C) The members of the Tourism Committee shall be appointed on the basis of experience and background,
including but not limited to experience and/or background in the planning, retail
and/or commercial development areas.
(D) Tourism Committee members shall be residents of the Village.
3-31-13 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
(E) No person shall serve more than two terms as chairperson of the Tourism Committee.
§31.203 TERMS OF MEMBERS.
The term of each Tourism Committee member shall expire at the end of the respective fiscal year for the
Village. Committee members may be reappointed by the Village President with advice and consent of the
Village Board of Trustees.
§31.204 MEETINGS.
(A) All Tourism Committee meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by
the Tourism Committee at the beginning of each Village fiscal year, or at any time upon the call
of the chairperson or majority of the Tourism Committee members. All Tourism Committee
meetings shall be held in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1, et seq.
(B) Immediately upon its organization, the Tourism Committee shall elect from its membership
a secretary. The person so selected shall serve for the respective fiscal year and may be re-elected
to the same position for one additional year.
(C) The Committee secretary shall take and keep written minutes of all Tourism Committee meetings
or other related proceedings and shall forward copies of such minutes to the Village Clerk,
after the approval thereof, for the official records of the Village. Preparing the minutes shall be
the responsibility of the secretary of the Committee, who shall be a member of the Committee.
(D) Roberts Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of all Tourism Committee meetings to the extent
that parliamentary issues are not addressed by any rules of procedure that may be adopted
by the Committee.
§31.205 OBJECTIVES AND DUTIES OF THE TOURISM COMMITTEE.
The Tourism Committee shall function in an advisory capacity to the Village President and Board of
Trustees, with the following objectives:
(A) Review signage design and make recommendations that enhance the Village and provide visibility
to retail operations;
(B) Make recommendations for advertising in regional directories, magazines and event media;
(C) Suggest a community event per fiscal year that will increase non-resident and resident participation;
(D) Make recommendations regarding the use of the Village Web Site to promote retail, commercial
and other enterprises to advertise upcoming events to attract nonresident overnight visitors;
(E) Convene biannual meetings with representatives from Atira Hotels and Deer Park Town Center
or other representatives of retail business in Deer Park to review use and application of hotel tax;
(F) Inventory available open space and property available for development to ascertain highest and
best use for the benefit of Deer Park residents;
3-31-14 Title III
(Rev. 1/17)
(G) Cooperate with local Chamber of Commerce and other regional development groups to the extent
that their objectives are consistent with the Village;
(H) To make recommendations to the Board of Trustees from time to time as to measures which
may further the purposes and goals of the Tourism Committee; and
(I) To undertake such tasks as may be requested by the Board of Trustees in order to further
the purposes and the goals of the Tourism Committee.
§31.206 LIMITATION ON POWERS.
The Tourism Committee shall not be authorized to expend funds of the Village or to contract in its name
or the name of the Village without the prior authorization of the Board of Trustees.
§31.207 ANNUAL REPORT.
Each March, the Tourism Committee shall provide the President and Board of Trustees with an annual
report addressing economic development/tourism within the Village in the past twelve (12) months,
specific Committee activities and economic/tourism prospects and trends within the Village. (Ord. No.
2010-17, Passed 11/1/10; Amd. Ord. No. 2012-11, Passed 4/16/12)
C:\Users\Pam\Documents\My Files\ZRFM\DP\Code\TTL III-Chapt 31-Village Officials and Employees 1-17.docx
3-32-1 Title III
(03/19)
CHAPTER 32: PURCHASING AND EXPENDITURE AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURES
Section
§32.01 Expenditure Authority of Village Administrator
§32.02 Expenditure Authority of Village President
§32.03 When Requests For Proposals or Public Bidding on Contracts is Required
§32.04 Exemptions
§32.05 Emergency Contracts
§32.06 Invalid Purchase Contracts
§32.07 Equal Employment Practices and Business Enterprise Policy and Program
§32.08 Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Policy and Program
§32.01 EXPENDITURE AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall be and is hereby authorized to engage services
and/or to make purchases of material, equipment, services or supplies and other expenditures authorized by
the annual appropriation ordinance then in effect, provided that each such purchase or expenditure or matter
by the Village Administrator that will create an obligation in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) shall first be authorized by the Corporate Authorities of the Village, unless otherwise specifically
provided by said corporate authorities, unless otherwise provided by the Corporate Authorities in this
Code or otherwise.
§32.02 EXPENDITURE AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE PRESIDENT.
The Village President shall be and is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and to engage the services
and/or to make purchases of material, equipment, services or supplies and other expenditures authorized by
the annual appropriation ordinance then in effect, provided that each such c o n t r a c t , purchase,
expenditure or matter by the Village President that will create an obligation in excess of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) shall first be authorized by the Corporate Authorities of the Village, unless
otherwise provided by said Corporate Authorities in this Code or otherwise. (Ord. 2017-12 passed 7/20/17)
§32.03 WHEN REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS OR PUBLIC BIDDING ON CONTRACTS IS REQUIRED.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no purchase of any article or commodity that costs more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be made, except in case of emergency, or except with specific approval
of the Corporate Authorities, unless written proposals have been requested from two (2) or more sellers of
such article or commodity.
To the extent required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, any work or other public improvement which will
not be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when the expense thereof will
exceed $25,000, shall be constructed either (a) by a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising
for bids or (b) without advertising for bids if authorized by a vote of two-thirds of all the trustees
then holding office. Such bids are to be ultimately submitted to the Village Board for review and approval.
Advertising for bids shall take place on the Village’s website and in the construction trade publication
Dodge Reports (Dodge Data & Analytics LLC) or other specified construction lead service.
(Ord. 19-04, passed 3/14/19)
3-32-2 Title III
(03/19)
§32.04 EXEMPTIONS.
The following categories of contracts and/or expenditures shall be exempt from the requirements of Section
32.03:
Contracts with any state, local, or federal government or any agency thereof;
Professional services including, but not limited to, attorneys, real estate appraisers, planner, auditors, health
inspectors, and building inspectors; and
Other purchases or contracts specifically exempted from competitive bidding requirement by Illinois compiled
statutes.
(Ord. 19-04, passed 3/14/19)
§32.05 EMERGENCY CONTRACTS.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code to the contrary, in the event of an emergency affecting
public health, welfare or safety so declared by the Village President, a contract may be let or a purchase
made for work, supplies, materials or services, to the extent necessary to resolve such emergency without
any public advertisement for bids. The President shall inform the Village Treasurer of such expenditure or
contract and the amounts to be expended. The Treasurer shall prepare an addendum to the monthly cash
disbursement statement.
A finding of such an emergency shall be made in an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the Board of
Trustees then holding office no later than the first regular Village Board meeting held after such emergency
expenditure or contract was entered into.
§32.06 INVALID PURCHASE CONTRACTS.
Any purchase or contract executed in violation of this Chapter shall be null and void as to the Village and
if public funds have been expended thereupon, the amount thereof may be recovered in the name of the
Village. (Ord. 2012-11, Passed 04/16/12)
§32.07 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES AND BUSINESS ENTERPRISE POLICY AND
PROGRAM.
(A) Definitions: The words, terms, and phrases used in this Section shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5) and the Business Enterprise for Minorities,
Females, and Persons with Disabilities Act (30 ILCS 575), except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.
(B) Declaration of Village Policies:
Equal Employment Practices and Business Enterprise Policy and Program: It is hereby declared to
be the policy of the Village of Deer Park to comply with the equal employment practices of 2-105
(775 ILCS 5/2-105) of the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5) and the business enterprise
program practices for minority-owned businesses, female-owned businesses, and businesses owned
by persons with disabilities of the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Females, and Persons with
3-32-3 Title III
(03/19)
Disabilities Act (30 ILCS 575) and to require any contractor, vendor, financial institution or labor
organization contracting with the Village to comply with these same Illinois statutes.
(C) Requirements for Contracts with the Village:
(1) The Village shall not contract with any contractor, purchase goods or services from any
vendor, maintain any financial relations with any financial institution, or use the services
of any labor organization or member thereof, which, after an investigation by the Village,
is found by the Village Administrator, to be in violation of the applicable provisions of this
Section, of the Business Enterprise for Minorities, Females, and Persons with Disabilities
Act (30 ILCS 575) or the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5), and/or of any other
applicable state or federal regulations, except where such contractor, vendor or financial
institution is the sole source of the particular product or service being sought by the Village
and such product or service is essential for the governmental operations of the Village.
(2) The Village shall not contract with any contractor or vendor, maintain any financial relation
with any financial institution, or use the services of any labor organization or member
thereof, which does not first submit to the Village a written commitment to provide equal
employment opportunity. Such commitment shall:
(a) Set out and agree to maintain specific employment practices and policies sufficient
to achieve the Village policies established by this Section;
(b) Agree to make a good faith effort to meet the policies and goals established by this
Section relative to the award of contracts involving Village funds or funds administered
by the Village. Goals will be established annually by the Village Administrator,
or his or her designee;
(c) Agree to submit to the Village upon request written evidence of the effectiveness
of the above required practices, policies and goals;
(d) Agree to submit to the Village upon request statistical data concerning employee
composition or membership composition on any legally protected status and job
descriptions;
(e) Agree to distribute copies of the commitment set forth in this Section to all persons
who participate in recruitment, screening, referral and selection of job applicants,
prospective job applicants, or members.
(f) Agree to require any subcontractor to submit to the Village a written commitment
which contains the provisions required by subsections. (1).through (5).of this subsection.
(3) All contracts by and between the Village and any contractor, vendor, financial institution
or labor organization contracting with the Village shall contain the following clauses:
“The contractor, vendor, financial institution, or labor organization (collectively, “entities”)
will not discriminate (as defined in the Illinois Human Rights Act) against any employee,
applicant for employment, or members. The entities will take such actions as may
be reasonably necessary to comply with the provisions of Sections 32.07 and 32.08 of
Chapter 32 of the Deer Park Municipal Code and, in particular, the Policies of the Village
3-32-4 Title III
(03/19)
as set forth in Sections 32.07 and 32.08 thereof and will require any subcontractor to submit
to the Village written commitment to do the same. The entities will distribute copies of this
commitment to all persons who participate in recruitment, screening, referral and selection
of job applicants, prospective job applicants, members or prospective subcontractors. The
entities agree that the language of the commitment shall be and is hereby incorporated by
reference, as if set out verbatim and in its entirety in all Village contracts.”
(4) Any contractor, vendor, financial institution or labor organization contracting with the Village
will be required to submit to the Village, upon written request by the Village Administrator,
compliance reports containing such information as to the practices, policies, programs
and statistics of employee or membership composition based upon any legally protected
status and job description, as may be prescribed by the Village Administrator and
will require any subcontractor to submit a compliance report upon written request by the
Village Administrator.
(5) If any contractor, vendor, financial institution or labor organization contracting with the
Village fails to comply with the provisions of this Section, the Village, at its option, may
do any or all of the following:
(a) Cancel, terminate or suspend the contract in whole or in part;
(b) Declare the contractor, vendor, financial institution or labor organization ineligible
for further contracts for one calendar year;
(c) The Village Administrator is hereby authorized to direct the Village Attorney to
initiate the prosecution of violations of this Section to seek penalties pursuant to
Section 10.99 of the Deer Park Municipal Code, and other appropriate relief,
against any contractor, vendor, financial institution, or labor organization which
fails to comply with any applicable provisions of this Section. Fines shall be imposed
for each day that such entity shall be found to be or to have been in violation
of this Section by a court of competent jurisdiction or by an administrative adjudication
hearing officer for the Village, and each day shall be deemed a separate
offense. Penalties assessed under this Section may be recovered from the entity by
setoff against the unpaid portion of the contract price, or by other lawful means.
(d) Impose such other sanctions as may be determined to be appropriate by the Village
Administrator pursuant to this Section and/or the other provisions of this Code.
(D) Village Program(s): It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator, or his designee, to develop
and maintain program(s) to achieve the Village policies established in this Section.
(E) Exceptions: This Section does not apply to a religious corporation, association, educational institution
or society whose primary purpose and function is religious with respect to the employment
of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such
corporation, association, educational institution, or society of its activities.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 01/20/14)
3-32-5 Title III
(03/19)
§32.08 DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (DBE) POLICY AND PROGRAM.
(A) The Village of Deer Park (“Village”) is committed to a policy of nondiscrimination and hereby
establishes a “Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Policy and Program (DBE)”. It is the policy and
commitment of the Village not to discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in
the award and performance of any Village contract or in the administration of its Disadvantaged
Business Enterprise (DBE) Policy and Program. The Village will take all necessary and reasonable
steps to assure that small business enterprises, certified and defined as DBEs pursuant to 49 CFR
Part 26, shall have a fair opportunity to participate in Village contracts. As part of its DBE policy
commitment, the Village will make every effort to achieve the following objectives of 49 CFR Part
26:
(1) Ensure nondiscrimination in the award and administration of contracts;
(2) Create.a.level.playing.field.on.which.DBEs.can.compete.fairly.for.federally-assisted
contracts;
(3) Ensure that the Village’s DBE Policy and Program is narrowly tailored in accordance with
applicable law;
(4) Ensure only firms that fully meet eligibility standards of 49 CFR Part 26 are permitted to
participate as DBEs;
(5) Help remove barriers so DBEs can fully participate in contracts;
(6) Assist the development of firms so they can compete successfully in the marketplace outside
the DBE Policy and Program;
(7) Provide appropriate flexibility to recipients of Federal financial assistance in establishing
and providing opportunities for DBEs; and
(8) Ensure that implementation of the Village’s DBE Policy and Program is accorded the
same priority as compliance with all other legal obligations required by the Village’s financial
assistance agreements with the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Federal
Railroad Administration, and/or any other governmental agencies.
(B) The Village President and the Village Administrator are specifically delegated responsibility to
ensure proper DBE participation in the Village’s procurement process. However, all Village officials
and Village staff share in the responsibility for making the Village’s DBE Policy and Program
a success.
(C) This statement is made available to DBE and non-DBE business communities that perform work
for the Village. The Village Board is committed to the DBE Policy and Program and shall take all
reasonable steps to ensure achievement of this goal.
(D) In accordance with 49 CFR 26.13(a), as amended, the Village shall not discriminate on the basis of
race, color, national origin, or sex in the implementation of a project and in the award and performance
of any third-party contract, or subagreement supported with Federal assistance derived from
the U.S. DOT, the FRA, and/or other governmental agency in the administration of its Disadvantaged
Business Enterprise (DBE) program or the requirements of 49 CFR Part 26, as amended. The
Village shall take all necessary and reasonable steps set forth in 49 CFR Part 26, as amended, to
3-32-6 Title III
(03/19)
ensure nondiscrimination in the award and administration of all third-party contracts and subagreements
supported with Federal assistance derived from the U.S. DOT and/or the FRA and/or other
governmental agency. 49 CFR Part 26, as amended, is hereby incorporated herein by reference and
made a part of this Chapter and part of any agreement for any Federal assistance awarded by the
U.S. DOT, the FRA, and/or any other governmental agency. Implementation of this DBE policy
and program is a legal obligation of the Village, and failure to carry out its terms shall be treated
as a violation of this Chapter. Upon notification by the Federal Government or the State to the
Village of its failure to implement this DBE Policy and Program, the U.S. DOT, the FRA, and/or
other governmental agency may impose sanctions as provided for under 49 CFR Part 26, as
amended, and may in appropriate cases, refer the matter for enforcement under 18 U.S.C. 1001, as
amended, and/or the Program Fraud Remedies Act, 31 U.S.C. 3801 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 01/20/14)
CHAPTER 33: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
Section
§33.01 Adoption of Act
§33.02 Ethics Committee
§33.01 ADOPTION OF ACT.
(A) The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5/ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-
40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to
as the "Act" in this Section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers
and employees of the Village of Deer Park to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
(B) The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act, by any
officer or any employee is hereby prohibited.
(C) The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee is hereby
prohibited.
(D) The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee is
hereby prohibited.
(E) For purposes of this Section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5
ILCS 430/70-5(c).
(F) The penalties for violations of this Section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS
430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
(G) This Section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing enactment which regulates
the conduct of officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies
are less restrictive than this Section, however, the provisions of this Section shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
(H) Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective date of this Section shall be
incorporated into this Section by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance,
offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that
makes its provisions optional for adoption shall not be incorporated into this Section by reference
without formal action by this governmental entity.
(I) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section shall
be repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to
any further appeals or rehearings. This Section shall be deemed repealed without further action if
the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
(J) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional but upholds the
constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the
remainder of the Act as adopted by this Section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this Section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed
without further action by this governmental entity.
(Am. Ord. 06-15, passed 10-16-06)
_____________________________________________________________________________
3-33-1 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
§33.02 ETHICS COMMISSION
(A) Commission Created. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics
Commission of the Village of Deer Park (“the Village”). The Commission shall be comprised of
five (5) members appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. No person shall be appointed as a member of the Commission who is related, either by
blood or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the Village. No more
than three (3) members of the Commission shall belong to the same political party at the time such
appointments are made. Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed.
(B) First Meeting of Commission. At the first meeting of the Commission, the initial appointees shall
draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two (2) commissioners serve 4-year terms and three (3)
commissioners shall serve 5-year terms. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to 5-year
terms. Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
At the first meeting of the Commission, the commissioners shall choose a chairperson from their
number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or any three (3) commissioners. A
quorum shall consist of three (3) commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require
the affirmative vote of three (3) members.
(C) Removal of Commissioner. The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, may remove a commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in
office after service on the commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the
written charges against the commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person
or by counsel upon not less than 10 days’ notice. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
(D) Commission Powers and Duties of Commission: The Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
(1) To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise
of its powers.
(2) Upon receipt of signed, notarized, written complaints to investigate and issue
recommendations for disciplinary actions, and refer violations of this Chapter to the
appropriate attorney for prosecution. The Commission shall, however, act only upon the
receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this Chapter and not upon its own
prerogative.
(3) To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require
additional information and documents from persons who may have violated the provisions of
this Chapter.
(4) To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers
pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the Village
to cooperate with the Commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal
to cooperate with requests by the Commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or
discharge.
(5) To develop and recommend to the Corporate Authorities an ethics code and/or amendments
to such a code, which code shall be applicable to all officers and employees of the Village as
addition(s) to and/or amendment(s) to this Chapter, if approved by the Corporate Authorities.
(6) The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of
this Chapter.
_____________________________________________________________________________
3-33-2 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(E) Complaints.
(1) Complaints alleging a violation of this Chapter shall be filed with the Ethics Commission.
(2) Within five (5) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the Village officer or employee who is the
subject of such complaint (“the respondent”) that a complaint has been filed against him or
her and a copy of the complaint. The Commission shall also send by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of such complaint to the complainant within
five (5) business days after receipt by the Commission. The notices to the respondent and the
complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the hearing which shall be
held by the Commission to determine the sufficiency of such complaint and to establish
whether probable cause exists to proceed with the prosecution for any violation(s) of this
Chapter. The Commission shall utilize the assistance of Special Counsel approved by the
Board of Trustees to assist the Commission in reviewing and investigating such complaint(s)
and the Commission’s hearing relative thereto.
(3) Upon public notice consistent with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, and after not less than ten
(10) business days’ notice to the complainant and the respondent, the Commission shall meet
to review the sufficiency of a complaint and, if a complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a
violation of this Chapter, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence
presented, to recommend further action on such complaint. The hearing may be closed to the
public, but only to the extent authorized by the Open Meetings Act. The Commission shall
issue the Commission’s ruling(s) on the sufficiency of any complaint and on probable cause
to proceed, within twenty (20) business days after close of the Commission’s hearing on the
complaint.
If a complaint is deemed by the Commission sufficient to allege a violation of this
Chapter and there is a determination by the Commission of probable cause, then the
Commission shall notify in writing the attorney designated by the Corporate Authorities of
the Village to prosecute such actions and recommend to such attorney that the complaint be
prosecuted and adjudicated judicially. If a complaint is deemed by the Commission not
sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of
the decision to dismiss such complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
If a complaint is deemed by the Commission sufficient to allege a violation of this
Chapter, then the Commission shall notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate
authorities to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and its
recommendation relative thereto and all additional documents in the custody of the
Commission concerning the alleged violation, provided, however, such recommendations
shall not be binding on such attorney.
(4) The Commission may also recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including
discharge, if a person is found by a court of competent jurisdiction guilty of a violation of this
Chapter.
(5) Any complaint alleging any violation of this Chapter shall be filed with the Commission not
later than one (1) year after the alleged violation.
(Ord. 2010-02, Passed 1/18/10)
_____________________________________________________________________________
3-33-3 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
Section
§34.01 Establishment
§34.02 Coordinator
§34.03 Functions
§34.04 Service as Mobile Support Team
§34.05 Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
§34.06 Emergency Action
§34.07 Compensation
§34.08 Reimbursement by State
§34.09 Purchases and Expenses
§34.10 Acceptance of Services, Gifts, Grants or Loans
§34.11 Oath
§34.12 Office
§34.13 Appropriation; Levy of Taxes
§34.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
In order to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by
enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in accordance with
and under authority of “The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act,” 20 ILCS 3 305/1 et seq., and
the State regulations promulgated thereunder (the “Act”), there is established hereby the Deer Park
Emergency Management Agency (the “Village EMA”) which shall be under the jurisdiction and control
of the Village President.
§34.02 COORDINATOR.
(A) The Coordinator of the Village EMA (the “Coordinator”) shall be appointed for an indefinite period
of time by the Village President.
(B) The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and
operation of the Village EMA, subject to the direction and control of the Village President, the
State EMA, and the Lake County EMA, as provided by the Act.
(C) In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability of the Coordinator to serve as such, the
Village President, of any person designated by him, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new
appointment is made as provided in this Chapter.
§34.03 FUNCTIONS.
(A) The Village EMA and the Coordinator shall perform such functions within the corporate limits of
the Village as shall be prescribed by the State Emergency Operations Plan prepared by the State
EMA and by local ordinance, and shall execute and enforce the orders, rules and regulations as may
be promulgated by the Governor under authority of the Act, and in addition shall perform such
duties outside the corporate limits of the Village as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid
agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided in the Act, or pursuant to any agreement entered into as an exercise of intergovernmental
cooperation authorized under the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-34-1 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) The Village EMA is charged hereby with the responsibility for the preparation, coordination and
implementation of a Village Emergency Operations Plan (the “Village EOP”) for its geographic
boundaries that complies with planning, review, and approval standards promulgated by the State
EMA. The Village EOP shall describe the organization, mission, and functions of the Village
government and supporting services for responding to and recovering from disasters. The Village
EMA shall prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials a clear and complete statement of the
emergency responsibilities of all local departments and officials and of the disaster chain of
command.
(C) The Village EMA shall have available for inspection at its office all orders, rules and regulations
made by the Governor, or under the Governor’s authority.
(D) The Village EMA may apply to the State EMA for accreditation or to the Lake County EMA for
certification, in accordance with the State EMA regulations, 29 Il. Admin. Code Sec. 301, Subpart
E.
§34.04 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
(A) All or any member of the Village EMA may be designated as members of a mobile support team
created by the Director of the State Emergency Management Agency (the “State Director”) as
provided by law.
(B) The leader of the mobile support teems shall be designated by the Coordinator.
(C) Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer, while serving on call
to duty by the Governor or the State Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers,
duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State reasonable
compensation as provided by law.
§34.05 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
The Coordinator may develop or negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipalities, political
subdivisions or taxing districts of the State for reciprocal disaster response and recovery assistance in case
a disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted. The mutual aid agreement shall not, however, be
effective unless and until approved by each of the political subdivisions. It shall be the duty of the Village
EMA to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual aid agreements. No such
agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village President.
§34.06 EMERGENCY ACTION.
(A) If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon
the United States or the occurrence within the State of major disaster resulting from enemy
sabotage or other hostile actions or from man made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
Village EMA to cooperate fully with the State EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law.
(B) A local disaster may be declared only by the Village President, or his or her interim emergency
successor, as provided in Section 7 of the “Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act.” A
declaration of local disaster shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of 7 days
except by or with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees. An order or proclamation declaring,
______________________________________________________________________________
3-34-2 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
continuing, or terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be
filed promptly with the Village Clerk. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the
Village Emergency Operations Plan and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance
thereunder.
§34.07 COMPENSATION.
Members of the Village EMA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called for training by
the State Director, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to
the position held; members who are npt Village employees or officers shall receive for such training time
such compensation as may be established by the Village Board of Trustees.
§34.08 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
The Village Treasurer shall receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the State to
the Village for expenses incident to training members of the Village EMA as prescribed by the State
Director, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the corporate limits of the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to emergency services and
disaster agency activities as provided by law.
§34.09 PURCHASES AND EXPENSES.
(A) The Village President may, on recommendation of the Coordinator, authorize any purchase or
contract necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively any man-made or natural
disaster and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of such disaster.
(B) In the event of man-made or natural disaster, the Coordinator is authorized, on behalf of the
Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment, or materials as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the
incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the
purchase of supplies and materials, and the appropriation, expenditure, and disposition of public
funds and property, as authorized by the Act; Provided that, if the Village Board of Trustees meets
at that time, the Coordinator shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that
body.
§ 34.10 ACCEPTANCE OF SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS.
Whenever the federal or state government or any political subdivision, agency or officer thereof or
whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the Village, services, equipment, supplies,
materials or funds by way of gift or grant, for purposes of emergency management, the Village President
may accept such offer and upon such acceptance may authorize an officer of the Village to receive such
services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the Village.
§ 34.11 OATH.
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village EMA shall, before entering upon his or her
duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
______________________________________________________________________________
3-34-3 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
“I, ____________________________________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm)
that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the
United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of
evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to
enter. And I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I ever
been, a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States of America or of this State by force or violence; and that
during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Deer Park Emergency Management
Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States of America or of this
State by force or violence.”
§ 34.12 OFFICE.
The Village President is authorized to designate space in a Village building, or elsewhere, for the Village
EMA as its office.
§ 34.13 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
The Village Board of Trustees may make an appropriation for Village EMA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition for Village EMA purposes only, a tax not to exceed 0.05% of
the full fair cash value, as equalized or assessed by the Lake County Department of Revenue, of all the
taxable property in the municipality for the current year, as provided by the Act and the Illinois Municipal
Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-3-16; provided, however, that the amount collectible under such levy shall in no event
exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. The annual tax shall be in addition to the amount authorized
to be levied for general corporate purposes.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 4-15-02)
______________________________________________________________________________
3-34-4 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 35
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT (“FOIA”) RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
§35.01: Public Records
§35.02: Freedom of Information Act Officer
§35.03: Procedure for Filing a FOIA Request with the Village
§35.04: Inspection of Records; Time and Place for Inspection
§35.05: Procedure for Fulfilling FOIA Requests
§35.06: Time Frame for Production of Records; Extension of Time to Produce Records
§35.07: Fees; Requests for Waiver of Fees
§35.08: Exempt and Non-Exempt Records
§35.09: Denial of Records; Request for Review by Public Access Counselor (“PAC”)
§35.10: Denial of Records; Exemption(s)
§35.11: Appeal to Denial of Request
§35.12: Binding Opinion
§35.01: PUBLIC RECORDS:
A. The Village recognizes that pursuant to 5 ILCS 140/1, the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5
ILCS 140) (“FOIA”) provides that it is a primary obligation of public bodies to provide records.
B. The Village also recognizes that pursuant to 5 ILCS 140/3.3 of the FOIA, public bodies are not
required to interpret or advise requesters as to the meaning or significance of public records.
C. The Village also recognizes that pursuant to 5 ILCS 140/1 of the FOIA, public bodies are not
obligated to create a public record which was not already created or prepared by the public body.
D. Pursuant to the authority contained in the FOIA, the Village hereby promulgates as the following
rules and regulations, but to the extent that said rules and regulations might otherwise be interpreted
as inconsistent with the FOIA, the FOIA shall govern in all respects.
§35.02: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER (5 ILCS 140/3.5):
A. Position Created: There is hereby created the position of “Freedom of Information Act Officer”
(“FOIA Officer”). There may be one or more FOIA Officer(s) designated. The Corporate
Authorities of the Village will designate one or more officials or employees of the Village to act as
a Freedom of Information Officer, and the Village shall disclose the identity of its FOIA Officer(s)
on either its website or by means of a list of such officers available for public access. The list of
FOIA Officer(s) shall also be provided to the State’s Public Access Counselor (“PAC”).
B. Duties and Responsibilities: The FOIA Officer(s), or his or her designee, shall have the following
duties and responsibilities:
(1) Training: Initially, within six (6) months after January 1, 2010, all FOIA Officers shall
successfully complete, via electronic means, a training course administered by the Illinois
Public Access Counselor (the “PAC”). All FOIA Officer(s) shall thereafter complete
additional training on an annual basis. New FOIA Officers must complete the curriculum
within thirty (30) days after their appointment to the position.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-1 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(2) The FOIA Officer shall be responsible for:
(a) Receiving FOIA requests;
(b) Ensuring timely responses to FOIA requests;
(c) Issuing FOIA responses;
(d) Developing a list of documents or categories of records that the Village will
immediately disclose upon request;
(e) Meeting with requesters to inspect records in his or her presence.
(3) Upon receiving a FOIA request, the FOIA Officer shall do the following:
(a) Note the date the Village received the written request;
(b) Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a notation of
that date on the written request;
(c) Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all documents
submitted with the request until the request has been complied with or denied; and
(d) Create a file for the retention of each original request, a copy of the response, a record
of written communications with the requester, and a copy of other related
communications.
(4) The FOIA Officer or his or her designate is authorized to issue notices of extension of time
for production of records as well as notices of denial for production of records.
C. Posting of FOIA Officer and Related Information (5 ILCS 140/4):
In compliance with the provisions of the Illinois FOIA, the Village shall prominently display at its
administrative office at the Village Hall, make available for inspection and copying, and send
through the mail, if requested, any or all of the following:
(1) A brief description of itself, including a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving
its functional subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number and location
of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and part-time employees, and the
identification and membership of any board, commission, committee, or council which
operates in an advisory capacity relative to the operation of the public body, or which
exercises control over its policies or procedures, or to which the public body is required to
report and be answerable for its operations; and
(2) A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request information and public
records, a directory designating the Freedom of Information Officer or Officers, the address
where requests for public records should be directed, and any fees allowable under the FOIA.
(3) The Village shall also post this information on any website the Village maintains.
§35.03: PROCEDURE FOR FILING A FOIA REQUEST WITH THE VILLAGE:
A. Pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (“FOIA”) (5 ILCS 140), requests for inspection of or
copies of records shall be made in writing and directed to the Village’s FOIA Officer, but no
standard form for such request is required. Requests may be made by mail, electronic mail,
facsimile request, or personal delivery of a written request. If a requester wishes, the FOIA Officer
will provide the requester with a “Freedom of Information Act Request Form” for his or her use.
The FOIA Officer, at his or her discretion, may also consider verbal FOIA requests.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-2 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
B. Questions regarding access to Village records shall be directed to the FOIA Officer, or his or her
designate. In consideration of the type, size, and complexity of the document(s) requested, it may
be necessary for a requester to make an appointment with the FOIA Officer to answer questions or
review documents.
C. Recurrent Requesters:
(1) Pursuant to Section 5 ILCS 140/2(g) of the FOIA, a “recurrent requester” is defined as one who
“in the 12 months preceding the request, has submitted to the same public body (i) a minimum
of 50 requests for records, (ii) a minimum of 15 requests for records within a 30-day period, or
(iii) a minimum of 7 requests for records within a 7-day period”, excepting requests made by
news media and non-profit, scientific, or academic organizations “when the principal purpose
of the request is (i) to access and disseminate information concerning news and current or
passing events, (ii) for articles of opinion or features of interest to the public, or (iii) for the
purpose of academic, scientific, or public research or education”.
(2) Within five (5) business days after receipt of a request from a “recurrent requester”, the Village
shall notify the requester in writing: (a) that the Village is treating the request as a request under
5 ILCS 140/2(g) (“recurrent requester”) of the FOIA, (b) the reason(s) the request is being
treated in this way, and (c) that the Village will send its initial response to the request within
twenty-one (21) days of receipt of the request.
(3) Within twenty-one (21) business days after receipt of such a request, the Village shall again
respond to the requester, which response shall include an estimate of time required to fulfill the
request; an estimate of the fees to be charged, and other estimated costs, and, if applicable,
notification that the requester may be required to pay the fees and charges in full before the
requested records are copied; and/or notification that the request is unduly burdensome and
extend an opportunity to the requester to reduce the request to a manageable proportion; or
provide the requested records.
(4) If the requested records were not provided to the requester within the aforesaid twenty-one (21)
business day period, unless the records are exempt from disclosure, the requested records shall
be sent to the recurrent requester within a reasonable period thereafter, considering the size and
complexity of the request.
§35.04: INSPECTION OF RECORDS; TIME AND PLACE FOR INSPECTION:
A. The FOIA Officer or his or her designee shall obtain the file or files requested and allow the
requester to inspect them in his or her presence. Should the requester request copies of all or a
portion of the information, the requester must indicate in writing, or on the FOIA request form what
copies are desired, and the FOIA Officer or his or her designee will make the requested copies and
provide them to the requester within the time frame prescribed by the FOIA, provided, however,
that such information is not determined to be exempt.
B. For any request made to inspect and/or photocopy a public record containing information that is
both exempt from disclosure and not exempt from disclosure, the Village shall make only the nonexempt
information available for inspection and/or photocopying by redacting the exempt
information from the document.
C. Hours: Public records may only be inspected at the Village Hall during the hours when it is
regularly open.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-3 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
D. Business Days: Monday through Friday, both inclusive, except holidays, are defined or fixed by
any statute of the State are hereby declared to be “business days”.
E. Search, Location and Reproduction of Records: Only Village personnel shall be permitted to
search Village files to locate records requested, and only Village personnel shall be permitted to
operate Village equipment to reproduce the requested copies.
§35.05: PROCEDURE FOR FULFILLING FOIA REQUESTS:
Upon receiving a FOIA request, the FOIA Officer, or his or her designee, shall:
A. Note the date the Village received the written request;
B. Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a notation of that date on
the written request (5 business days, or for requests for commercial purposes or for requests made
by “recurrent requesters” as defined herein, 5 business days for an initial response, with a follow-up
response within 21 days after receipt of the request, and a final response within a reasonable period
thereafter, considering the size and complexity of the request);
C. Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all documents submitted with
the request until the request has been complied with or denied; and
D. Meet with requesters, if necessary, to inspect records in his or her presence.
E. Create a file for the retention of each original request, a copy of the response, a record of written
communications with the requester, and a copy of other related communications.
F. Assemble and duplicate the requested records, except for records which are exempt, and redact any
records which may be partially exempt, and/or coordinate retrieval of the requested records with the
facility storing the records for the Village.
G. Keep, and/or request from the designated personnel, and maintain a record of those hours over eight
(8) hours which were spent by personnel in retrieving a requested record; and
H. Notify the requester in writing of the status of production of the requested records, i.e., that such
records are ready and available for the requester, that production of the records is denied in whole
or in part and the reasons therefor, and/or the amount of any fees and/or costs associated with the
request, where applicable, prior to copying and/or production of such requested records, and
whether such fees and/or costs must be paid by the requester prior to the Village’s copying of such
records.
§35.06: TIME FRAME FOR PRODUCTION OF RECORDS; EXTENSION OF TIME TO
PRODUCE RECORDS:
A. Pursuant to the FOIA, the Village is generally required to produce the requested records within five
(5) business days of receipt of the request, excluding the day the request was received by the
Village, except where the request is made for commercial purposes, and except where the request is
made by a “recurrent requester” as provided in this Chapter.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-4 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
B. “Commercial enterprise” as used in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) shall include
both profit and not-for-profit ventures, organizations and entities. The Village may inquire as to
whether the records requested are sought to advance a commercial purpose, and if a requester
attempts to procure a public record for a commercial purpose without disclosing that the use is for a
commercial purpose, that constitutes a violation of the FOIA. (5 ILCS 140/3.1) The Village’s
response to such commercial requests shall be as follows:
(1) Within twenty-one (21) business days after receipt of such a commercial request, the Village
shall respond in writing to the requester, which response shall include an estimate of time
required to fulfill the request; an estimate of the fees to be charged, and other associated costs
as provided in Section 1-17-7 of this Chapter, and, if applicable, notification that the
requester may be required to pay the fees and charges in full before the requested records are
copied; and/or notification that the request is unduly burdensome, extending an opportunity to
the requester to reduce the request to a manageable proportion; or provide the requested
records.
(2) If the requested records were not provided to the commercial requester within the aforesaid
twenty-one (21) business day period, unless the records are exempt from disclosure, the
requested records shall be sent to the commercial requester within a reasonable period
thereafter, considering the size and complexity of the request.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a request is delivered on a day which is not a business day, or
after the close of business, the request shall be deemed made on the first business day subsequent
thereto.
D. If, upon review of the request, the FOIA Officer, or his or her designee, finds that he or she is not
able to compile all of the necessary information immediately, another time may be arranged within
the prescribed time frame for the requester to return to receive a response to the request.
E. The FOIA Officer, or his or her designee, may extend the time limit for responding to a request by
an additional five (5) business days where:
(1) The requested record is in a place other than the office in charge of the record.
(2) The request requires an extensive search.
(3) The records have not been found in time and additional efforts are necessary to retrieve them.
(4) The record requires examination to determine if it should be exempt from viewing.
(5) Compliance with the request would cause undue burden or interfere with the operations of the
Village. (Repeated requests for the same information by the same person shall be deemed
unduly burdensome under this provision).
F. If it is necessary to extend the time limit for production of records, the requester will be notified in
writing by the FOIA Officer or his or her designee within five (5) business days of receipt of the
request and such notice will give the reason for the extension. Failure to respond to the request
within five (5) business days is considered a denial of the request.
§35.07: FEES; REQUESTS FOR WAIVER OF FEES:
A. Each requester is required pay to the Village the appropriate fees for copies of Village records and
will receive a receipt for same. In the case of commercial requests, a requester shall also be
required to pay to the Village other charges as set forth below. No records will be distributed to the
requester unless and until all charges associated with the request are paid to the Village in full. The
Village will charge the following fees as set forth in the FOIA:
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-5 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(1) Black and white, letter or legal size copies: There is no charge for providing the initial 50
pages, after which the cost will be $.15 per page.
(2) Color or Irregular Sized Copies: The fee for color or irregular sized copies shall be the actual
cost incurred by the Village for reproducing the records.
(3) Certification of document: The fee for certification of a document shall be $1.00.
(4) Records in Electronic Format: If the Village maintains the respective document(s) in
electronic format, such document(s) must be furnished in the electronic format if the
requester so requests. The Village is not required to produce records kept in electronic format
in an alternate manner. The fee charged for producing records in an electronic format shall be
the actual cost incurred by the Village for purchasing the recording medium.
(5) With respect to requests for commercial purposes, in addition to the fees set forth in
subsections (1) through (4) above, such requesters shall also be required to pay the following:
(a) The requester shall be required to pay to the Village ten dollars ($10.00) per hour for
each hour after the first eight (8) hours spent by personnel in searching for or retrieving
a requested record.
(b) The requester shall be required to pay to the Village the actual cost of retrieving and
transporting public records from an off-site storage facility when the public records are
maintained by a third-party storage company under contract with the Village.
(c) With respect to those charges provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, the Village
shall provide to the requester an accounting of all fees, costs, and personnel hours
expended in connection with the request.
B. All payments for production of records shall be made in the form of cash or certified or cashier’s
check made payable to the Village.
C. Requests to waive any fee(s) for reproduction of document(s) must be made in writing to a FOIA
Officer of the Village and must state how the information requested “primarily benefits the general
public”. The FOIA Officer shall be authorized to determine whether such request for a waiver shall
be honored.
D. Each copy, other than electronic media, may be certified if requested and paid for by the requester.
Documents may be furnished without charge if the requester is unable to pay for them, and the
purpose of such request is determined by the FOIA Officer to be in the public interest.
§35.08: EXEMPT AND NON-EXEMPT RECORDS:
A. The FOIA Officer, or his or her designee, may not give out information which is in a file marked by
an asterisk (*) in the catalogue of existing files. This information has been predetermined to be
exempt from disclosure under the Illinois Freedom on Information Act.
B. Any record marked with a double asterisk (**) has been determined to be partially exempt. One or
more authorized officers or employees of the Village shall review the file and will provide any nonexempt
information to requester. Records having both exempt and non-exempt material shall be
provided to the requester in a redacted format revealing only the non-exempt material.
C. In addition, while not so marked, information may not be disclosed if it falls within one or more of
the following exempt categories:
(1) Disclosure of the requested information is specifically prohibited by Federal or State law or
rules and regulations implementing Federal or State law [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(a)].
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-6 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(2) The information requested is “private information” unless disclosure is required by another
provision of the FOI Act, a State or Federal law, or a court order [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(b)]
(3) The information requested is a file(s), document(s), and/or other data or database(s)
maintained by one or more law enforcement agencies and specifically designed to provide
information to one or more law enforcement agencies regarding the physical or mental status
of one or more individual subjects. [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(b-5)/P.A. 96-0558]
(4) The document(s) requested relate to personal information contained within public records, the
disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy,
unless the disclosure is consented to in writing by the individual subjects of the information.
“Unwarranted invasion of personal privacy” means the disclosure of information that is
highly personal or objectionable to a reasonable person and in which the subject’s right to
privacy outweighs any legitimate public interest in obtaining the information. The disclosure
of information that bears on the public duties of public employees and officials shall not be
considered an invasion of personal privacy. [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(c)]
(5) The document(s) requested are in the possession of the public body and were created in the
course of administrative enforcement proceedings, and any law enforcement or correctional
agency for law enforcement purposes, and that disclosure would do one or more of the
following [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(d)]:
(a) interfere with pending or actually and reasonably contemplated law enforcement
proceedings conducted by any law enforcement or correctional agency that is the
recipient of the request;
(b) interfere with active administrative enforcement proceedings conducted by the public
body that is the recipient of the request;
(c) create a substantial likelihood that a person will be deprived of a fair trial or an
impartial hearing;
(d) unavoidably disclose the identity of a confidential source, confidential information
furnished only by the confidential source, or persons who file complaints with or
provide information to administrative, investigative, law enforcement, or penal
agencies; except that the identities of witnesses to traffic accidents, traffic accident
reports, and rescue reports shall be provided by agencies of local government except
when disclosure would interfere with an active criminal investigation conducted by the
agency that is the recipient of the request;
(e) disclose unique or specialized investigative techniques other than those generally used
and known or disclose internal documents of correctional agencies related to detection,
observation or investigation of incidents of crime or misconduct, and disclosure would
result in demonstrable harm to the agency or public body that is the recipient of the
request;
(f) endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement personnel or any other person;
or
(g) obstruct an ongoing criminal investigation by the agency that is the recipient of the
request.
(6) The document(s) requested are records that relate to or affect the security of correctional
institutions and detention facilities [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(e)].
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-7 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(7) The document(s) requested are preliminary drafts, notes, recommendation, memoranda and
other records in which opinions are expressed, or policies or actions are formulated, except
that a specific record or relevant portion of a record shall not be exempt when the record is
publicly cited and identified by the head of the public body.[5 ILCS 140/7(1)(f)]
(8) The document(s) requested would disclose trade secrets and commercial or financial
information obtained from a person or business where the trade secrets or commercial or
financial information are furnished under a claim that they are proprietary, privileged or
confidential, and that disclosure of the trade secrets or commercial or financial information
would cause competitive harm to the person or business, and the claim directly applies to the
records requested, including all trade secrets and commercial or financial information
obtained by a public body, including a public pension fund, from a private equity fund or a
privately held company within the investment portfolio of a private equity fund as a result of
either investing or evaluating a potential investment of public funds in a private equity fund.
This exemption does not apply to the aggregate financial performance information of a
private equity fund, nor to the identity of the fund’s managers or general partners. This
exemption does not apply to the identity of a privately held company within the investment
portfolio of a private equity fund, unless the disclosure of the identity of a privately held
company may cause competitive harm. Nothing contained in this exemption is to be
construed to prevent a person or business from consenting to disclosure. [5 ILCS
140/7(1)(g)].
(9) The document(s) requested constitute proposals or bids for a contract, grant or agreement,
including information which if it were disclosed would frustrate procurement or give an
advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contract or agreement with the body, until
an award or final selection is made. Information prepared by or for the body in preparation of
a bid solicitation is exempt until an award or final selection is made [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(h)].
(10) The document(s) requested are valuable formulae, computer geographic systems, designs,
drawings or research data obtained or produced by any public body when disclosure could
reasonably be expected to produce private gain or public loss. The exemption for “computer
geographic systems” does not extend to requests made by news media as defined in Section 2
of the FOIA when the requested information is not otherwise exempt and the only purpose of
the request is to access and disseminate information regarding the health, safety, welfare, or
legal rights of the general public [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(i)].
(11) The document(s) requested are architects’ plans, engineers’ technical submissions, and other
construction related technical documents for projects not constructed or developed in whole
or in part with public funds and the same for projects constructed or developed with public
funds, including but not limited to power generating and distribution stations and other
transmission and distribution facilities, water treatment facilities, airport facilities, sport
stadiums, convention centers, and all government owned, operated, or occupied buildings, but
only to the extent that disclosure would compromise security. [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(k)].
(12) The document(s) requested are minutes of meetings of public bodies closed to the public as
provided in the Open Meetings Act until the public body makes the minutes available to the
public under Section 2.06 of the Open Meetings Act [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(l)].
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-8 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(13) The document(s) requested constitute or reflect communications between a public body and
an attorney or auditor representing the public body that would not be subject to discovery in
litigation, and materials prepared or compiled by or for a public body in anticipation of a
criminal, civil or administrative proceeding upon the request of an attorney advising the
public body, and materials prepared or compiled with respect to internal audits of public
bodies [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(m)].
(14) The document(s) requested are records relating to a public body’s adjudication of employee
grievances or disciplinary cases, but this exemption does not extend to the final outcome of
cases in which discipline is imposed [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(n)].
(15) The document(s) requested relate to administrative or technical information associated with
automated data processing operations, including but not limited to software, operating
protocols, computer program abstracts, file layouts, source listings, object modules, load
modules, user guides, documentation pertaining to all logical and physical design of
computerized systems, employee manuals, and any other information that, if disclosed, would
jeopardize the security of the system or its data or the security of materials under this
exemption [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(o)].
(16) The document(s) requested relate to records relating to collective negotiating matters between
public bodies and their employees or representatives, but any final contract or agreement is
subject to inspection and copying [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(p)].
(17) The document(s) requested relate to test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data
used to determine the qualifications of an applicant for a license or employment [5 ILCS
140/7(1)(q)].
(18) The document(s) requested relate to records, documents and information relating to real
estate purchase negotiations until those negotiations have been completed or otherwise
terminated. With regard to a parcel involved in a pending or actually and reasonably
contemplated eminent domain proceeding under the Eminent Domain Act, records,
documents and information relating to that parcel are exempt except as may be allowed under
discovery rules adopted by the Illinois Supreme Court. The records, documents and
information relating to a real estate sale are exempt until a sale is consummated [5 ILCS
140/7(1)(r)].
(19) The document(s) requested relate to any and all proprietary information and records related to
the operation of an intergovernmental risk management association or self-insurance pool or
jointly self-administered health and accident cooperative or pool, including any claims, loss
or risk management information, records, data, advice or communications [5 ILCS
140/7(1)(s)].
(20) The document(s) requested relate to information contained in or related to examination,
operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of a public body
responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions or insurance companies,
unless disclosure is otherwise required by State law [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(t)].
(21) The document(s) requested relate to information that would disclose or might lead to the
disclosure of secret or confidential information, codes, algorithms, programs, or private keys
intended to be used to create electronic or digital signatures under the Electronic Commerce
Security Act [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(u)].
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-9 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(22) The document(s) requested relate to vulnerability assessments, security measures, and
response policies or plans that are designed to identify, prevent, or respond to potential
attacks upon a community’s population or systems, facilities, or installations, the destruction
or contamination of which would constitute a clear and present danger to the health or safety
of the community, but only to the extent that disclosure could reasonably be expected to
jeopardize the effectiveness of the measures or the safety of the personnel who implement
them or the public. Information under this exemption may include such things as details
pertaining to the mobilization or deployment of personnel or equipment, to the operation of
communication systems or protocols, or to tactical operations [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(v)].
(23) The document(s) requested relate to maps and other records regarding the location or security
of generation, transmission, distribution, storage, gathering, treatment, or switching facilities
owned by a utility, by a power generator, or by the Illinois Power Agency [5 ILCS
140/7(1)(x)].
(24) The document(s) requested relate to information contained in or related to proposals, bids, or
negotiations related to electric power procurement under Section 1-75 of the Illinois Power
Agency Act and Section 16-111.5 of the Public Utilities Act that is determined to be
confidential and proprietary by the Illinois Power Agency or by the Illinois Commerce
Commission [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(y)].
(25) The document(s) requested relate to the names, addresses, or other personal information of
persons who are minors and are also participants and registrants in programs of park districts,
forest preserve districts, conservation districts, recreation agencies, and special recreation
associations [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(dd)] (P.A. 97-0385).
(26) The document(s) requested relate to the names, addresses, or other personal information of
participants and registrants in programs of park districts, forest preserve districts,
conservation districts, recreation agencies, and special recreation associations where such
programs are targeted primarily to minors [5 ILCS 140/7(1)(ee)] (P.A. 97-0385).
(27) The document(s) requested relate to one or more of the following statutory exemptions to the
extent provided for by such specific statute(s):
(a) Firm performance evaluations under Section 55 of the Architectural, Engineering, and
Land Surveying Qualifications Based Selection Act;
(b) Information contained in a local emergency energy plan submitted to a municipality in
accordance with a local emergency energy plan ordinance that is adopted under Section
11-21.5-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
(c) Information and data concerning the distribution of surcharge moneys collected and
remitted by wireless carriers under the Wireless Emergency Telephone Safety Act;
(d) Law enforcement officer identification information or driver identification information
compiled by a law enforcement agency or the Department of Transportation under
Section 11-212 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
(e) Records and information provided to a residential health care facility resident sexual
assault and death review team or the Executive Council under the Abuse Prevention
Review Team Act;
(f) Information that is prohibited from being disclosed under Section 4 of the Illinois
Health and Hazardous Substances Registry Act;
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-10 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(g) Security portions of system safety program plans, investigation reports, surveys,
schedules, lists, data, or information compiled, collected, or prepared by or for the
Regional Transportation Authority under Section 2.11 of the Regional Transportation
Authority Act or the St. Clair County Transit District under the Bi-State Transit Safety
Act;
(h) Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Personnel Records Review Act;
(i) Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Illinois School Student Records
Act;
(j) Information the disclosure of which is restricted under Section 5-108 of the Public
Utilities Act.
(k) Names and information of people who have applied for or received Firearm Owner’s
Identification (“FOID”) Cards under the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act (P.A.
097-0080).
[5 ILCS 140/7.5(f),(i),(j),(k),(l),(o),(p),(q),(r),(s),(v)]
(l) Personally identifiable information which is exempted from disclosure under
Subsection (g) of Section 19.1 of the Illinois Toll Highway Act. (P.A. 97-0342)
§35.09: DENIAL OF RECORDS; REQUEST FOR REVIEW BY PUBLIC ACCESS
COUNSELOR (“PAC”):
A. If information is requested for a commercial purpose, and the request is denied by the Village, the
requester may not file a request for review with the Public Access Counselor (“PAC”).
B. If a request for information is treated by the Village as a request for a commercial purpose and the
request is denied by the Village, the requester may file a request for review with the PAC for the
limited purpose of reviewing whether the Village properly determined that the request was made
for a commercial purpose.
§35.10: DENIAL OF RECORDS; EXEMPTION(S):
If requested information cannot be released due to its exempt nature, or if a request is unduly
burdensome, the FOIA Officer, or his or her designee, shall complete a “Denial of Request for
Records” form and mail same to the requester along with a blank “Notice of Appeal” form. The
Denial of Request for Records form shall include: (i) the decision to deny the request; (ii) the
reasons for the denial, including a detailed factual basis for the application of any exemption
claimed; (iii) the names and titles or positions of each person responsible for the denial; (iv) the
right to review by the Public Access Counselor, if applicable, and the address and phone number
for the Public Access Counselor; and (v) the right to judicial review. If an exemption is claimed,
then the denial shall include the specific reason(s) for the denial, including a detailed factual basis
and a citation to support legal authority.
A copy of each such denial letter and the completed request form shall also be provided to the
Village President and the Village Attorney. Copies of all notices of denial shall be retained by the
FOIA Officer, or his or her designee, in a central file that is publicly accessible and indexed by type
of exemption.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-11 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
§35.11: APPEAL TO DENIAL OF REQUEST:
If a request for records is denied, and the requester has a right to seek judicial review of such denial
pursuant to 5 ILCS 140/11, or has a right to seek judicial review of the Village’s determination that
the request was made for commercial purposes, the requester may, within sixty (60) days from
receipt of such denial, pursuant to 5 ILCS 140/9.5, file an appeal to the denial of production of
records directed to the Illinois Public Access Counselor, whose address is:
Public Access Counselor Public Access Counselor
Office of the Attorney General Office of the Attorney General
100 West Randolph, 12th Floor 500 S. 2nd Street
Chicago, IL 60601 Springfield, IL 62706
Tel. (312) 814-5526 Tel. (877) 299-3642
Fax: (217) 782-1396
E-mail: publicaccess@atg.state.il.us
The Illinois Public Access Counselor will respond to such appeal and issue a binding opinion
within sixty (60) days after the request for review (appeal) unless a request for extension of thirty
(30) business days is given by the PAC. The PAC’s binding opinion must make findings of fact
and conclusions of law and shall be issued to the requester and public body. The PAC’s binding
opinion is subject to administrative review by either party.
§35.12: BINDING OPINION:
A binding opinion issued by the Attorney General shall be considered final for the purpose of
administrative review. Any action for administrative review of a binding opinion must be
commenced in Cook or Sangamon County.
(Ord. 2011-16, Passed 10/17/11)
______________________________________________________________________________
3-35-12 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 36: VILLAGE GIFT AND DONATION POLICY
Section:
§36.01 Acceptance and Recognition of Gifts; Policy
§36.02 Potential Donors Should Consult with Their Legal Counsel and Tax Advisers
§36.03 Restricted and Unrestricted Gifts
§36.04 Cash Gifts
§36.05 Gifts of Real Estate
§36.06 Gifts of Tangible Personal Property
§36.07 Gifts-In-Kind
§36.08 Gifts of Appreciated Securities
§36.09 Life Insurance as a Gift
§36.10 Bequests to the Village
§36.11 Honorary or Memorial Gifts
§36.01 ACCEPTANCE AND RECOGNITION OF GIFTS; POLICY:
This Chapter shall and does hereby establish the Village’s policy relative to acceptance of gifts and
donations to the Village and shall be commonly known as the “Village Gift and Donation Policy”:
A. Although the Village accepts most, but not all, gifts that are offered by donors, it shall be by the
authority of the Corporate Authorities of the Village, in their sole discretion, to accept by
Resolution, or to not accept any gift proposed to be made to the Village. Acceptance of any gift
identified in this Chapter and valued in excess of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) shall be by
Resolution of the Corporate Authorities. Cash gifts, and gifts which are readily or eventually
convertible to cash (stocks, bonds, insurance policies, etc.), are the most easily accepted. Gifts of
real property (land, buildings, etc.) and tangible personal property (artwork, jewelry, historical
artifacts, etc.) are accepted on a case-by-case basis, but only after the Corporate Authorities of the
Village, or their designee, has made a review of such factors as: fair market value, existence of
restrictions, reservations, easements, other limitations, marketability of the property, clear title,
location, environmental assessment, costs to the Village associated with ownership, and the
likelihood of use for the Village’s purposes and mission.
B. All gifts of real estate and/or tangible personal property shall be made to the Village by the
appropriate deed and/or bill of sale executed by the property owner and shall be recognized and
accepted by a Resolution of the Corporate Authorities before such gift(s) shall become effective.
C. Monetary gifts in excess of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), and gifts of intangible personal
property and/or gifts-in-kind with an apparent value of in excess of Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00), shall be recognized and accepted by a Resolution of the Corporate Authorities before
such gift(s) shall become effective.
D. The “delivery date”, or date of any such gift, shall be the date of acceptance by Resolution of the
Corporate Authorities.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-36-1 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
§36.02 POTENTIAL DONORS SHOULD ALWAYS CONSULT WITH THEIR LEGAL
COUNSEL AND TAX ADVISERS
Before a donor makes any gift or donation to the Village, the Village recommends that the proposed
donor first consult with his or her attorney and/or tax adviser to determine the income tax, inheritance tax,
estate and gift tax implications, and all the legal implications, which may impact a donor by such a
proposed donation.
§36.03 RESTRICTED AND UNRESTRICTED GIFTS:
A. An “unrestricted gift” is a gift or donation that is given to the Village without any restrictions on its
use.
B. A “restricted gift” is a gift or donation earmarked by the donor for a specific fund, program, or
purpose.
C. The Village accepts both restricted and unrestricted gifts, but restricted gifts for a specific fund,
program or purpose not previously established by the Village will require the prior approval, and/or
other necessary action, by the Corporate Authorities of the Village prior to the Village’s acceptance
of said gift.
§36.04 CASH GIFTS:
A. A gift of cash is the most common way of making a gift to the Village and also is the simplest way
to show your support for the Village and its programs and services. One of the advantages of a
cash gift is that it allows the Village to make immediate use of the gift.
B. Cash gifts may be made to the Village by check or money order payable to the “Village of Deer
Park”.
C. Corporate matching gift programs allow a donor to direct his or her employer’s matching dollars to
the benefit of the Village. Donors are encouraged to contact his or her employer’s Personnel
Department or Human Resources Department to determine whether his or her employer offers a
corporate gift-matching program.
§36.05 GIFTS OF REAL ESTATE:
A. Gifts of real estate will almost always require an appraisal which meets the requirements of the
Internal Revenue Service. The appraisal fee will generally be the obligation of the donor. (Please
refer to §36.02 above.)
B. If a donor contributes a partial interest in real property, then the partial interest must be appraised.
The appraisal fee will generally be the obligation of the donor.
C. Gifts of real property (land, buildings, etc.) and tangible personal property (artwork, jewelry,
historical artifacts, etc.) are accepted on a case-by-case basis, but only after the Corporate
Authorities of the Village, or their designee, has made a review of such factors as: fair market
value, existence of restrictions, reservations, easements, other limitations, marketability of the
property, clear title, location, environmental assessment, costs to the Village associated with
ownership, and the likelihood of use for the Village’s purposes and mission.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-36-2 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
§36.06 GIFTS OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY:
A. “Tangible personal property” commonly is an asset that can be touched and moved. Examples of
tangible personal property would include artwork, jewelry, collections, automobiles, furniture, rare
coins and stamps, boats, books, antiques, etc.
B. A gift of tangible personal property may be an appropriate gift to the Village and, in addition, such a
gift may generate a charitable tax deduction for the donor.
C. A gift of tangible personal property may be subject to certain Internal Revenue Service rules
regarding the charitable deductions and may often require an appraisal which meets the requirements
of the Internal Revenue Service. The appraisal fee will generally be the obligation of the donor.
(Please refer to §36.02 above.)
D. Whether or not a particular gift of tangible personal property will be accepted and actually put into
service by the Village will be based on a decision of the Corporate Authorities of the Village, after
receiving the recommendation(s) of the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, and shall be
based upon several factors, including but not limited to the age, serviceability, utility, and cost(s) of
maintenance of the item.
§36.07 GIFTS-IN-KIND:
“Gifts-in-kind” are non-cash donations of materials or long-lived assets that support and serve the mission
of the Village. Such gifts may include like equipment, software, printed materials, works of art, and
equipment, may be subject to certain Internal Revenue Service rules regarding the charitable deductions,
and may often require an appraisal which meets the requirements of the Internal Revenue Service. The
appraisal fee will generally be the obligation of the donor. (Please refer to §36.02 above.)
§36.08 GIFTS OF APPRECIATED SECURITIES:
Gifts in the form of common stock or other publicly traded securities may also be accepted by the Village.
(Please refer to §36.02 above.)
§36.09 LIFE INSURANCE AS A GIFT:
Residents and other friends of the Village may make significant financial commitments to the Village by
using life insurance as a means of giving. The use of a new life insurance policy, where the Village is
named owner and beneficiary, may be an acceptable method of donation to the Village. (Please refer to
§36.02 above.)
§36.10 BEQUESTS TO THE VILLAGE:
A. As an expression of dedication and generosity to the Village, individuals may pledge parts of their
personal estates in support of the Village, by which such individuals are providing, in perpetuity,
support of the Village’s programs and services. (Please refer to §36.02 above.) The Village may, at
the sole discretion of its Corporate Authorities, accept donation such bequests.
B. Types of charitable bequests to the Village may include:
(1) General Bequest: The most familiar typical type of bequest is the general bequest, which
specifies that the Village will receive a designated sum of money from the estate. This type
of bequest would be considered a primary charge against the estate from which it is made.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-36-3 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(2) Percentage Bequest: The percentage bequest states that the Village will receive a certain
predetermined percentage of an estate.
(3) Specific Bequest: When making a specific bequest, the donor is directing that one or more
particular property(ies) be transferred to the Village, such as for example, a certain piece of
real estate, the stock from one specific company, or some other specific property. A specific
bequest can be satisfied only with the property designated.
(4) Residuary Bequest: A residuary bequest directs that the Village receive either everything
remaining in the donor’s estate or a designated percentage of the donor’s estate after all
necessary costs, all general bequests, and all specific bequests are satisfied. The Village
would receive only as much, or as little, as is left after all primary obligations are satisfied.
(5) Contingent Bequest: A contingent bequest is “contingent” on some event. For example, a
primary bequest can be made for a relative, with the contingency that if that relative is not
living at the time of the donor’s death, the bequest would pass to the Village.
C. The Village may accept such bequests, subject to the other terms and conditions of this Chapter, but
strongly encourages those persons considering such a bequest to the Village to discuss their
intentions with the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, in advance of making or arranging
for such a bequest in order to assure the maximum effective use of each bequest.
§36.11 HONORARY OR MEMORIAL GIFTS:
A. “Honorary gifts” recognize individuals, anniversaries, or special events.
B. “Memorial gifts” recognize lifetime accomplishment of individuals who have passed away.
C. Honorary or memorial gifts can be unrestricted or designated for use in a particular Village fund,
purpose, or program. All such gifts are recognized with a card sent to the honoree or family of the
memorialized individual by the Village President or the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 2010-14, Passed 08/16/10)
______________________________________________________________________________
3-36-4 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 37: IDENTITY PROTECTION AND
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION POLICIES
Section:
§37.01: Purpose
§37.02: Definitions
§37.03: Scope
§37.04: Identity Protection Policy
§37.05: Identity Theft Prevention Policy
§37.06: Additional Identity Theft Prevention Program
§37.07: Responding to Red Flags
§37.08: Periodic Updates to Plan
§37.09: Program Administration
§37.01: PURPOSE:
The risk to the Village, its employees, residents, agents, service providers, and customers from data loss
and identity theft is of significant concern to the Village and can be reduced only through the combined
efforts of every employee and contractor. The purpose of this Chapter is to comply with the Fair and
Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003 and 16 CFR §681.2 in order to detect, prevent, and mitigate
identity theft by identifying, detecting, and responding to identity theft red flags and to comply with the
Illinois Identity Protection Act (5 ILCS 179/1, et seq.) in order to protect social security numbers from
unauthorized disclosure.
§37.02: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
ACT: The Illinois Identity Protection Act (5 ILCS 179/1, et seq.).
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
COVERED ACCOUNT: (A) An account that the Village offers or maintains, primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or
transactions, such as a utility account; and (B) Any other account that the Village offers or
maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and
soundness of the creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance,
reputation, or litigation risks.
CREDIT: The right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and
defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor.
CUSTOMER: A person that has a covered account with the Village.
IDENTITY THEFT: A fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another
person without authority.
PERSON: A natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency,
trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-1 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
PUBLICLY POST OR PUBLICLY DISPLAY: To intentionally communicate or otherwise
intentionally make available to the general public.
RED FLAG: A pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity
theft.
SENSITIVE INFORMATION: Includes the following information:
(A) Credit card information, including any of the following:
(1) Credit card number (in part or whole)
(2) Credit card expiration date
(3) Cardholder name
(4) Cardholder address
(B) Tax identification numbers, including:
(1) Social Security Number
(2) Business Identification Number
(3) State or Federal Employer Identification Number(s)
(C) Payroll information, including, among other information:
(1) Paychecks
(2) Pay stubs
(D) Other personal information belonging to any resident, agent, service provider, customer,
employee, or contractor, including but not limited to:
(1) Date of birth
(2) Address
(3) Phone numbers
(4) Maiden name
(5) Names
(6) Customer number
SERVICE PROVIDER: A person that provides a service directly to the Village.
VILLAGE: The Village of Deer Park, Cook and Lake Counties, Illinois.
§37.03: SCOPE:
These policies and this protection program apply to employees, contractors, consultants, temporary
workers, and other workers at the Village, including all personnel affiliated with third parties.
§37.04: IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY:
Pursuant to the Illinois Identity Protection Act (5 ILCS 179/1, et seq.) (“the Act”), in order to protect
social security numbers (SSNs) from unlawful use and/or unauthorized disclosure, the following Identity
Protection Policy is hereby adopted:
(A) The Village and all officers, employees, and agents will comply with the Act.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-2 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) All employees of the Village identified as having access to SSNs in the course of performing their
duties for the Village will be trained to protect the confidentiality of SSNs. Training will include
instructions on the proper handling of information that contains SSNs from the time of collection
through the destruction of the information.
(C) Only employees who are required to use or handle information or documents that contain SSNs will
have access to such information or documents.
(D) SSNs requested from an individual will be provided in a manner that makes the SSN easily
redacted if required to be released as part of a public records request.
(E) All officers, employees, and agents of the Village will redact SSNs from the information or
documents before allowing the public inspection or copying of the information or documents.
(F) When collecting a SSN or upon request by the individual, a statement of the purpose or purposes
for which the agency is collecting and using the SSN will be provided.
(G) The Village and all officers, employees, and agents of the Village will not:
1. Publicly post or publicly display in any manner an individual’s SSN.
2. Print an individual’s SSN on any card required for the individual to access products or
services provided by the person or entity.
3. Require an individual to transmit his or her SSN over the Internet, unless the connection is
secure or the SSN is encrypted.
4. Print an individual’s SSN on any materials that are mailed to the individual, through the U.S.
Postal Service, any private mail service, electronic mail, or any similar method of delivery,
unless State or federal law requires the SSN to be on the document to be mailed.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this policy and the Act, SSNs may be
included in applications and forms sent by mail, including, but not limited to, any material
mailed in connection with the administration of the Unemployment Insurance Act, any
material mailed in connection with any tax administered by the Department of Revenue, and
documents sent as part of an application or enrollment process or to establish, amend, or
terminate an account, contract, or policy or to confirm the accuracy of the SSN. A SSN that
is permissibly mailed under this policy and the Act will not be printed, in whole or in part, on
a postcard or other mailer that does not require an envelope or be visible on an envelope
without the envelope being opened.
(H) Except as otherwise provided in this policy and the Act, the Village and all officers, employees, and
agents will not:
1. Collect, use, or disclose a SSN from an individual, unless (i) required to do so under State or
federal law, rules, or regulations, or the collection, use, or disclosure of the SSN is otherwise
necessary for the performance of that agency’s duties and responsibilities; (ii) the need and
purpose for the SSN is documented before collection of the SSN; and (iii) the SSN collected
is relevant to the documented need and purpose.
2. Require an individual to use his or her SSN to access an Internet website.
3. Use the SSN for any purpose other than the purpose for which it was collected.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-3 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(I) Subsection (H) does not apply in the following circumstances:
1. The disclosure of SSNs to agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors of the Village or
disclosure by the Village to another governmental entity or its agents, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors if disclosure is necessary in order for the Village to perform its
duties and responsibilities; and, if disclosing to a contractor or subcontractor, prior to such
disclosure, the Village will first request and receive from the contractor or subcontractor a
copy of the contractor’s or subcontractor’s policy that sets forth how the requirements
imposed on the Village under this policy and the Act to protect an individual’s SSN will be
achieved, which policy shall be in a form acceptable to the Village.
2. The disclosure of SSNs pursuant to a court order, warrant, or subpoena.
3. The collection, use, or disclosure of SSNs in order to ensure the safety of: State and Village
employees; persons committed to correctional facilities, local jails, and other lawenforcement
facilities or retention centers; wards of the State; and all persons working in or
visiting a State or Village facility.
4. The collection, use, or disclosure of SSNs for internal verification of administrative purposes.
5. The disclosure of SSNs by a State agency to the Village for the collection of delinquent child
support or of any State debt or to the Village to assist with an investigation or the prevention
of fraud.
6. The collection or use of SSNs to investigate or prevent fraud, to conduct background checks,
to collect a debt, to obtain a credit report from a consumer reporting agency under the federal
Fair Credit Reporting Act, to undertake any permissible purpose that is enumerated under the
federal Gramm Leach Bliley Act, or to locate a missing person, a lost relative, or a person
who is due a benefit, such as a pension benefit or an unclaimed property benefit.
(J) The Village and all officers, employees, and agents will not encode or embed a SSN in or on a card
or document, including but not limited to, using a bar code, a chip, magnetic strip, or other
technology, in place of removing the SSN as required by this policy and the Act.
(K) This policy and the Act do not apply to:
1. The collection, use, or disclosure of a SSN as required by State or federal law, rule or
regulation.
2. Documents that are recorded with a county recorder or required to be open to the public
under any State or federal law, rule, or regulation, applicable case law, Supreme Court Rule,
or the Constitution of the State of Illinois.
(L) A written copy of this Identity Protection Policy will be filed with the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village within thirty (30) days after approval of the policy by its incorporation into
the Deer Park Municipal Code. The Village will advise its employees of the existence of this
Policy and make a copy of this Policy available to each of its employees and will also make this
Policy available to any member of the public, upon request. If this Policy is amended, then a
written copy of the amended Policy will be filed with the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village and all employees will be advised of the existence of the amended Policy, and a copy of the
amended Policy will be made available to each of the Village’s employees.
(M) In order to comply with the provisions of the Act, the Village will implement this Policy within
twelve (12) months after the date this Identity Protection Policy is approved.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-4 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(N) To the extent that the standards for the collection, use, or disclosure of SSNs and identity protection
are stricter than the standards under the Act with respect to the protection of those SSNs, then, in
the event of any conflict with the provisions of the Act, the stricter standards adopted by the State
or the Village shall control.
(O) This policy and the Act do not supersede any more restrictive law, rule, or regulation regarding the
collection, use, or disclosure of SSNs.
§37.05: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION POLICY:
Village personnel are encouraged to use common sense judgment in securing confidential information to
the proper extent. Furthermore, this Chapter shall be read and interpreted in conjunction with the Illinois
Freedom of Information Act and the Illinois Identity Protection Act. If an employee is uncertain of the
sensitivity of a particular piece of information, he or she should contact their supervisor.
(A) Hard Copy Distribution: Each employee, contractor, and subcontractor performing work for the
Village will comply with the following policies:
(1) File cabinets, desk drawers, overhead cabinets, and any other storage space containing
documents with sensitive information will be locked when not in use.
(2) Storage rooms containing documents with sensitive information and record retention areas
will be locked at the end of each workday or when unsupervised.
(3) Desks, workstations, work areas, printers and fax machines, and common shared work areas
will be cleared of all documents containing sensitive information when not in use.
(4) Whiteboards, dry-erase boards, writing tablets, etc., displaying any sensitive information, in
common shared work areas will be erased, removed, or shredded when not in use.
(5) When documents containing sensitive information are discarded they will be placed inside a
locked shred bin or immediately shredded. Municipal records, however, may only be
destroyed in accordance with the Local Records Act and the Village’s records retention
policy.
(B) Electronic Distribution: Each employee, contractor, and subcontractor performing work for the
Village will comply with the following policies:
(1) Internally, sensitive information may be transmitted using approved Village e-mail. All
sensitive information must be encrypted when stored in an electronic format.
(2) Any sensitive information sent externally must be encrypted and password protected and only
to approved recipients. Additionally, a statement such as this should be included in the email:
“This message may contain confidential and/or proprietary information and is intended
for the person/entity to whom it was originally addressed. Any use by others is strictly
prohibited.”
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-5 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
§37.06: ADDITIONAL IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM:
(A) Covered Accounts: A covered account includes any account that involves or is designed to permit
multiple payments or transactions. Every new and existing customer account that meets the
following criteria is covered by this program:
(1) Business, personal and household accounts for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk of
identity theft; or
(2) Business, personal and household accounts for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to
the safety or soundness of the Village from identity theft, including financial, operations,
compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.
(B) Red Flags: The following red flags are potential indicators of fraud. Any time a red flag, or a
situation closely resembling a red flag, is apparent, it shall be investigated for verification:
(1) Alerts, notifications or warnings from a consumer reporting agency;
(2) A fraud or active duty alert included with a consumer report;
(3) A notice of credit freeze from a consumer reporting agency in response to a request for a
consumer report; or
(4) A notice of address discrepancy from a consumer reporting agency as defined in Section
334.82(b) of the Fairness and Accuracy in Credit Transactions Act.
(5) Red flags also include consumer reports that indicate a pattern of activity inconsistent with
the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as:
(a) A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
(b) An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;
(c) A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established
credit relationships; or
(d) An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a
financial institution or creditor.
(6) Suspicious Documents:
(a) Documents provided for identification that appear to have been altered or forged.
(b) The photograph or physical description on the identification is not consistent with the
appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the identification.
(c) Other information on the identification is not consistent with information provided by
the person opening a new covered account or customer presenting the identification.
(d) Other information on the identification is not consistent with readily accessible
information that is on file with the Village, such as a signature card or a recent check.
(e) An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the appearance of
having been destroyed and reassembled.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-6 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(7) Suspicious Personal Identifying Information:
(a) Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when compared against
external information sources used by the Village. For example:
(i) The address does not match any address in the consumer report;
(ii) The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued or is listed on the Social
Security Administration’s Death Master File; or
(iii) Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with
other personal identifying information provided by the customer. For example,
there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth.
(b) Personal identifying information provided is associated with known fraudulent activity
as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the Village. For example, the
address on an application is the same as the address provided on a fraudulent
application.
(c) Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly associated with
fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the Village.
For example:
(i) The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a prison; or
(ii) The phone number is invalid or is associated with a pager or answering service.
(d) The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons opening an account or
other customers.
(e) The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the address or
telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of other customers or other
persons opening accounts.
(f) The customer or the person opening the covered account fails to provide all required
personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the
application is incomplete.
(g) Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with personal identifying
information that is on file with the Village.
(h) When using security questions (mother’s maiden name, pet’s name, etc.), the person
opening the covered account or the customer cannot provide authenticating information
beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report.
(8) Unusual use of, or suspicious activity related to, the covered account:
(a) Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered account, the Village
received a request for new, additional, or replacement goods or services, or for the
addition of authorized users on the account.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-7 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(b) A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known
patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or
makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments.
(c) A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of
activity on the account. There is, for example:
(i) Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
(ii) A material change in purchasing or usage patterns.
(d) A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy period of time is
used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and
other relevant factors).
(e) Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions
continue to be conducted in connection with the customer’s covered account.
(f) The Village is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements.
(g) The Village is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a
customer’s covered account.
(h) The Village receives notice from customers, victims of identity theft, law enforcement
authorities, or other persons regarding possible identity theft in connection with
covered accounts held by the Village.
(i) The Village is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft, a law enforcement
authority, or any other person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person
engaged in identity theft.
§37.07: RESPONDING TO RED FLAGS:
(A) Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, an employee should act quickly as a rapid
appropriate response can protect customers and the Village from damages and loss.
(1) Once potentially fraudulent activity is detected, gather all related documentation and write a
description of the situation. Present this information to the Village Administrator, or his or
her designee, for determination.
(2) The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, will complete additional authentication to
determine whether the attempted transaction was fraudulent or authentic.
(B) If a transaction is determined to be fraudulent, appropriate actions should be taken immediately.
Actions may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Canceling the transaction;
(2) Notifying and cooperating with appropriate law enforcement;
(3) Determining the extent of liability of the Village; and
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-8 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(4) Notifying the actual customer that fraud has been attempted.
(5) Any other actions the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, deems appropriate to
further prevent or mitigate identity theft.
§37.08: PERIODIC UPDATES TO THE PROGRAM:
(A) At periodic intervals as may be established in the program, or as required, the program will be reevaluated
to determine whether all aspects of the program are up to date and applicable in the
current business environment.
(B) Periodic reviews will include an assessment of which accounts are covered by the program.
(C) As part of the review, red flags may be revised, replaced or eliminated. Defining new red flags may
also be appropriate.
(D) Actions to take in the event that fraudulent activity is discovered may also require revision to
reduce damage to the Village and its customers.
(E) The Corporate Authorities may consider the following factors in exercising its discretion in
amending the program:
(1) The Village’s experiences with identity theft;
(2) Updates in methods of identity theft;
(3) Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft;
(4) Updates in the types of accounts that the Village offers or maintains; and
(5) Updates in service provider arrangements.
§37.09: PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION:
(A) Involvement of Management:
(1) The Identity Protection and the Identity Theft Prevention Program (hereinafter collectively
known as “the Program”) will not be operated as an extension to existing fraud prevention
programs, and its importance warrants the highest level of attention.
(2) Operational responsibility for the program is delegated to the Village Administrator, or any
Village employee, official, or independent contractor to whom the Village Administrator
delegates such responsibility (i.e., his or her designee).
(3) The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall report to the Corporate Authorities on
the effectiveness of the program and the compliance with the regulatory requirements.
(4) The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may also propose recommendations or any
amendments to the program to the Corporate Authorities.
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-9 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) Staff Training:
(1) Staff training shall be conducted for all employees, officials and contractors who may
reasonably be anticipated to come into contact with accounts or personally identifiable
information that may constitute a risk to the Village or its customers, including but not
limited to its employees, residents, agents, contractors, and/or service providers.
(2) The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may delegate staff training responsibilities
to a person or persons who will be responsible for ensuring identify theft training for all
requisite employees and contractors.
(3) The applicable Village employees should receive an initial training in all elements of this
policy and additional training as changes to the program are implemented by the Corporate
Authorities.
(C) Oversight of Service Provider Arrangements:
(1) It is the responsibility of the Village to ensure that the activities of all service providers are
conducted in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent,
and mitigate the risk of identity theft.
(2) A service provider that maintains its own identity theft prevention program, consistent with
the guidance of the red flag rules and the Illinois Identity Protection Act (5 ILCS 179/1, et
seq.) and validated by appropriate due diligence, may be considered to be meeting these
requirements.
(3) Any specific requirements should be specifically addressed in the appropriate contract
arrangements.
(Ord. No. 2011-08, passed 05/16/11)
______________________________________________________________________________
3-37-10 Title III
(Rev. 05/12)
3-38-1 Title III
(Rev. 12/17)
CHAPTER 38: REIMBURSEMENT FOR PROFESSIONAL
FEES AND OTHER EXPENSES
Section:
§38.01: Definitions
§38.02: Review
§38.03: Reimbursement
§38.04: Deposits for Applications, Petitions, and/or Other Requests or Inquiries
§38.05: Administration of Escrow
§38.06: Estimate
§38.07: Disbursements
§38.08: Replenishments
§38.09: Final Disbursement
§38.01: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
PERSON: All individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations or any other legal entities.
PROFESSIONAL FEES AND OTHER EXPENSES: Fees incurred by the Village for professional consultation
by engineers, land planners, attorneys, environmentalists, conservationists, arborists, architects,
landscaping architects, hydrologists, surveyors, soil experts, and/or such other professionals, experts, or
consultants (“professional services”) retained by the Village to review, in whole or in part, any
application, petition, request, and/or inquiry to the Village, and/or other out-of-pocket expenses incurred
by the Village relative to such matter, including but not limited to charges for the publication and/or mailing
of legal notices, recording secretaries, court reporters, and Village staff time assessed on an hourly basis as
the Village deems necessary.
§38.02: REVIEW:
Whenever any person is required by this Code, or any other ordinance of the Village, or any state or federal
law, to submit, or wishes to submit, any plans, specifications or other documents to the Village to be
reviewed and/or approved by the Village, or to have any other matter or thing reviewed, approved, or
inspected by the Village, or making other inquiry of the Village, and in connection therewith, it shall be
necessary for the Village to retain any professional services and/or incur other expenses related thereto, the
person making such request and/or inquiry of the Village and/or submitting documents to the Village for
review and/or approval, and/or requesting a special inspection, shall be required to and shall be fully
responsible to pay and/or reimburse the Village for all fees charged by said professionals or other expenses
incurred in reviewing, approving and/or inspecting the matter or in responding to any inquiry.
For purposes of this Chapter, the requirement to pay for professional fees and other expenses incurred by
the Village shall apply to and shall extend to, but shall not be limited to, such time until the Village
Administrator, or his designee, certifies that all professional fees and other out-of-pocket expenses incurred
by the Village have been paid in full.
§38.03: REIMBURSEMENT:
It is further the purpose of this Chapter to require the deposit of the necessary funds by any applicant(s),
petitioner(s), requester(s), or any person(s) making inquiry of the Village, prior to professional fees or
3-38-2 Title III
(Rev. 12/17)
other expenses being incurred by the Village in those instances in which the Village requires that the
applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or person(s) seeking such review and/or approval or making such
inquiry to pay for and/or reimburse the Village for any professional fees and/or other expenses incurred by
the Village in connection with such application, petition, request, inquiry or other matter.
§38.04: DEPOSITS FOR APPLICATIONS, PETITIONS, AND/OR OTHER REQUESTS OR
INQUIRIES
A. Reimbursement For Expenses: The applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or person(s) making
inquiry, as the case may be, shall be required to reimburse the Village for all expenses incurred by
the Village relative to the review of their respective application, petition, request and/or inquiry,
including but not limited to any application for any permit, any petition, and/or other requests or
inquiries, or for subdivision plat approval, whether preliminary or final approval; any petition for
annexation; any petition for a special use or for a planned development; any petition for an
amendment to the text of the Village Zoning Code; any petition for variation from the Zoning Code,
change to the Village Zoning Map; review and/or approvals by any Building Review Board; and/or
for any combination of any of the foregoing.
B. Professionals, Experts and/or Consultants: The Village may, at its discretion, retain such professionals,
experts and/or consultants as it deems necessary for a full and complete review and
consideration of any application, petition, request, or inquiry required by this Code. Such professionals,
experts and/or consultants may include, but shall not be limited to, attorneys, engineers, land
planners, environmentalists, conservationists, arborists, architects, landscape architects, hydrologists,
surveyors, soil experts and such other professionals, experts or consultants, and Village
staff time assessed on an hourly basis, as the Village deems necessary and the cost of such services
and other out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Village relative to such a matter shall be borne by
the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or person(s) making inquiry as hereinafter provided.
C. Minimum Initial Deposit for Reimbursement of Expenses: Any application, petition, request, and/or
inquiry, when filed, must be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as specified in this Code or other
Village ordinances, plus one or more deposit(s) into a non-interest-bearing, non- segregated account
held by the Village Treasurer, all as specified from time to time in this Chapter, including but not
limited to the nonrefundable filing fees and minimum initial deposits as follows:
PURPOSE OF APPLICATION
AND/OR PETITION
NON-REFUNDABLE
FILING FEE
REFUNDABLE
DEPOSIT REQUIRED
Variation for a Single Family Residence $250.00 $2,500.00
Simplified Variation, as determined by the Administrator $150.00 $1,000.00
Zoning Code Amendment $500.00 $5,000.00
Other Special Use(s) $500.00 $5,000.00
Planned Development:
Pre-Application Review None $1,000.00
Preliminary and Final Review $1,000.00 $10,000.00
Subdivision $500.00 $5,000.00
Review by the Building Review Board None $1,500.00
Other Requests and/or Inquiries None $1,000.00
D. Additional Deposits for Reimbursement of Expenses: The applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s),
3-38-3 Title III
(Rev. 12/17)
or person(s) making inquiry, as the case may be, shall be obligated to provide the Village with
additional deposits as required in the amounts as described in this Code. Additional deposits shall be
made within fourteen (14) days of the Village’s request for such deposit(s). Failure to make such
deposits may result in the Village withholding services, and/or continuing, postponing, and/or
delaying any Village activity relative to said application, petition, request, or inquiry until such time
as the deposit is paid in full.
E. Payment of Expenses by Village: Payment by the Village of the foregoing expenses shall be made
using the aforementioned deposit(s). Detailed records of all fees and charges shall be kept by the
Village and made available to the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), and/or person(s) making
inquiry at no charge.
F. Reimbursement of Unused Deposits: Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any portion of any
deposit(s) not expended by the Village shall be applied to reimbursement to the Village for any
unpaid professional fees or other expenses incurred by the Village relative to such application,
petition, request, or inquiry prior to being refunded to the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or
person(s) making inquiry at such time as the Village Administrator, or his designee, certifies that all
professional fees and expenses incurred by the Village related to the matter have been paid in full
and no further expenditures or charges by the Village are reasonably anticipated to be incurred
related to the matter.
G. Payment of Final Invoice: The Village may elect to bill the applicant(s) for a final invoice rather
than request an additional deposit as long as the amount is known and there are no additional
charges anticipated.
H. Unpaid Reimbursements for Expenses: All amounts due the Village and remaining unpaid after said
thirty (30) day period shall accrue interest at a rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month
and, in addition, the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or person(s) making inquiry shall also
be obligated to pay to the Village such other administrative fee(s) as may be specified from time to
time in this Code.
I. The funds deposited in such escrow shall be used by the Village for the payment of and/or for the
reimbursement to the Village for professional fees and/or other expenses incurred or to be
incurred, but the obligation of the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s) and/or other person(s)
making in inquiry to reimburse the Village shall not be limited by the amount on deposit from
time to time, and in addition to the foregoing and not by way of limitation, the Village may bring
any action at law to collect any amounts due under any of the foregoing provisions.
J. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to any request for public records made
pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1, et seq.).
§38.05: ADMINISTRATION OF ESCROW:
The Village Administrator, or his designee, shall be responsible for the administration of escrow of funds
in all those instances in which this Code, this Chapter, and/or any other ordinance of the Village, requires
any applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or other person(s) making inquiry to reimburse the Village for
any professional fees and other expenses the Village may incur in reviewing, approving, and/or processing
that application, petition, request, inquiry, or matter. This Chapter shall apply to all instances in which this
Code, this Chapter, and/or any other ordinance of the Village, requires that any applicant(s),
3-38-4 Title III
(Rev. 12/17)
petitioner(s), requester(s), or any person(s) making inquiry reimburse the Village for any costs incurred, or
to be incurred, by the Village for professional fees and/or other expenses related to the matter, and such
requirement for reimbursement and/or payment to the Village shall apply to those provisions of this Code
presently in effect or hereafter adopted which require applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or any
person(s) to reimburse the Village for professional fees and other expenses incurred or to be incurred
relative to a matter.
§38.06: ESTIMATE:
The Village Administrator, or his designee, will, upon receipt of a matter which may or will require
professional services to be rendered to the Village or other expenses to be incurred by the Village, obtain
an estimate of the amount of the cost of expected services and other expenses based on the nature of the
matter, its complexity, the relative need for professional services, and the expected duration of the matter.
The Village Administrator, or his designee, will so notify the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or
other person(s) making inquiry in writing of the estimate of the necessary funds to be deposited with the
Village to defray the cost of all professional fees and other expenses the Village might incur in the course
of reviewing, approving and/or processing the matter submitted by the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(
s), or other person(s) making inquiry. The Village Administrator, or his designee, shall also include
in this communication a request that the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or other person(s) making
inquiry deposit with the Village within fourteen (14) days of the date of said communication said sum to
be placed in escrow by the Village. The application, petition, request, inquiry, or matter shall not thereafter
be reviewed or acted upon by the Village unless and until said sum is received by the Village Administrator,
or his designee. Upon receipt of said sum, the Village Administrator, or his designee, shall deposit the same
in a non-segregated, non-interest-bearing escrow account.
Simultaneously with the sending of notice to the applicant(s), petitioner(s), requester(s), or other person(s)
making inquiry, the Village Administrator, or his designee, will also notify the professionals whom the
Village expects to utilize to review the matter and request that those professionals bill no less frequently
than monthly on said matter, and otherwise keep the village apprised of time and cost expended in their
respective professional service to the Village relative to this matter.
§38.07: DISBURSEMENTS:
The escrow funds as deposited shall be utilized by the Village from time to time to pay for professional
review and other expenses and any and all disbursements therefrom shall be approved by the Village
Administrator, or his designee, or the village board, and a copy of each disbursement shall be transmitted
by the Village Administrator, or his designee, to the person and/or entity that deposited the funds.
§38.08: REPLENISHMENTS:
The Village Administrator, or his designee, will periodically review the escrow funds on deposit to ensure
that adequate funds are available to pay all professional fees and other expenses relating to said matter. In
the event that the Village Administrator, or his designee, determines at any time that sufficient funds are
not available in escrow to pay for and/or reimburse the Village for any costs incurred by the Village relative
to the matter, the Village Administrator, or his designee, shall so notify the applicant(s), petitioner(s), or
person(s) making a request or inquiry and request the deposit with the Village of additional funds to defray
the anticipated additional costs in accordance with the standards set forth in this Chapter. The applicant(s),
petitioner(s), requester(s) and/or person(s) making an inquiry shall have fourteen (14) days from the date
of such request by the Village for additional funds in order to deposit said additional funds with the
Village. The professionals previously engaged by the Village relative to any such
3-38-5 Title III
(Rev. 12/17)
matter shall be advised to do no further work on such matter until said additional funds have been received
by the Village. In the event that such additional funds are not deposited with the Village in a timely manner,
the Village shall take no further action on the matter and shall so advise the applicant(s), petitioner(s),
requester(s) and/or person(s) making an inquiry relative to suchmatter.
§38.09: FINAL DISBURSEMENT:
At the conclusion of the matter, whether through a final determination by the Village or by the withdrawal
of the request, and after all outstanding professional fees and other expenses incurred by the Village in
review of the matter have been satisfied in full, the Village Administrator, or his designee, shall return any
remaining balance of the escrowed funds, if any, to the depositor.
(Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-21-2013; Amd. Ord. 2013-28, passed 12-18-2013; Amd. Ord. 2017-21 passed 12-21-17)
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
§50.01 Owner’s Responsibility to Dispose of Garbage
§50.02 Container Specifications
§50.03 Burning of Garbage and Refuse
§50.04 Deposit of Garbage on Property Other than Dump Ste Prohibited
§50.05 Village Designated Garbage Collector
§50.01 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY TO DISPOSE OF GARBAGE.
The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the Village shall remove from his premises or otherwise
dispose of, all garbage, ashes, rubbish, and refuse, and shall keep the premises free and clear of any
accumulation of any such refuse. (‘77 Code, § 12.06(a)) Penalty, see §10.99
§50.02 CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.
Pending disposal of garbage from any premises, the garbage shall be deposited in watertight containers
with close fitting covers. Pending disposal from any premises, cans, bottles, metalware and similar
inorganic household rubbish shall be deposited in rigid containers. All garbage and refuse shall be so
stored as not to invite insects or rodents or be unsightly or a nuisance. (‘77 Code, § 12.06(b)) Penalty,
see §10.99
§50.03 BURNING OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
No person shall burn out of doors any garbage, rubbish or refuse. Wood and charcoal fires are permitted
except construction debris may not be burned. Leaves, branches, and sticks may not be burned except on
weekends during the hours 10:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. from April 1 through May 31 and from October
15 through November 30 of each year, provided, however, burning shall be prohibited on any October 31
if it falls on a Saturday or Sunday. No fire is permitted which may endanger any structure, tree or garden
or be a nuisance. (‘77 Code, § 12.06(c); Amd. Ord. 2012-07, Passed 03/19/12) Penalty, see §10.99
§50.04 DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE ON PROPERTY OTHER THAN DUMP SITE PROHIBITED.
No person shall deposit any garbage, rubbish or refuse on any street or public place, or on any public or
private property not his own except at any dump site which may be authorized by the Board of Trustees.
(‘77 Code, § 12.06(d)) Penalty, see § 10.99
§50.05 VILLAGE DESIGNATED GARBAGE COLLECTOR.
The Village shall have the power to grant from time to time an exclusive contract with a garbage collector
for weekly collection of refuse and recyclable products with the Village. No owner of property shall use
a garbage collector other than that designated by the Village during the term of such exclusive contract.
(a) Violation by Non-Village Designated Garbage Collector. No person or corporation, other than the
person or corporation to which the Village has granted an exclusive contract with the Village, shall
remove any garbage, rubbish or refuse from any property within the Village. Any person or
corporation who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 per offense and responsibility for
______________________________________________________________________________
5-50-1 Title V
(Rev. 5/12)
reasonable attorneys’ fees of the Village incurred to cure the violation. Each incident in which a
person or corporation removes any garbage, rubbish or refuse shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Violation by Property Owner. Any property owner who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500
per offense and responsibility for reasonable attorneys’ fees of the Village incurred to cure the
violation. Each incident in which a property owner shall cause a non-Village designated garbage
collector to service his property shall be deemed a separate offense.
(c) Non-Village Designated Garbage Collector. A non-Village designated garbage collector shall
mean a garbage collector without a grant of exclusive contract with the Village.
(Ord. passed 10-21-96; Amd. Ord. 2012-07, Passed 03/19/12)
______________________________________________________________________________
5-50-2 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
5-51-1 Title V
(Rev. 11/16)
CHAPTER 51: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Section
51.01 Exposure to Sewage
51.02 Compliance with Lake County Health Code
51.03 Application for Permit
51.04 Objections
51.05 Fees
51.06 Certificate of Occupancy
51.01 EXPOSURE OF SEWAGE.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged untreated sewage, the effluent from any septic
tank, disposal field or mechanical treatment plant or any industrial or business wastewater directly or
indirectly to any stream, ditch, drainage, system, drainage pipe, storm water sewer, ground surface, or
abandoned well or maintain or operate an individual sewage disposal system in such manner that it
becomes offensive, dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
51.02 COMPLIANCE WITH LAKE COUNTY HEALTH CODE.
(A) All future private sewage disposal systems (also frequently referred to as septic systems or individual
septic disposal systems) proposed to be constructed or expanded, modified or substantially
repaired within the Village shall comply with the provisions of the Lake County Onsite
Wastewater Treatment Systems requirements as provided in Chapter 171 of the Lake County
Code or similar Lake County provisions regulating onsite wastewater treatment systems that may
be created or amended.
(B) All ongoing operations of private sewage disposal systems within the Village shall be subject to
the jurisdiction of Lake County including, but not limited to, purposes of enforcement of any violations
and any matters regarding ongoing maintenance and operation of any existing sewage disposal
systems.
(C) It shall be the duty of the property owner or occupant to give Lake County free access to the
property at reasonable times for the purpose of regulating onsite wastewater treatment facilities/
septic systems.
51.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Prior to undertaking any work involving a sewage disposal system proposed to be constructed or expanded,
modified or substantially repaired, the property owner must submit a copy of the permit issued by
Lake County for the proposed work to the Village Building Permit Coordinator.
51.04 OBJECTIONS.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code regarding appeals of building
regulations or decisions, any objections by an applicant to a determination by Lake County regarding the
issuance of a permit under the Lake County Code must be appealed through the procedures established by
Lake County.
5-51-2 Title V
(Rev. 11/16)
51.05 FEES.
The applicant shall be responsible for all fees due to the Lake County Health Department.
51.06 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
Before a certificate of occupancy permit can be issued, the Building Inspector must submit a written certificate
of compliance with the following requirements:
(A) The installation of all septic system components must be inspected and approved by the Lake
County Health Department;
(B) Unless otherwise required by Lake County, the seepage area must be graded and seeded or sodded
and protected if necessary from erosion during the germination period; and
(C) Two copies of the record drawing showing the location of any structures on the property, any septic
components and any wells.
(Amd. Ord. 16-15 passed 11/21/16)
C:\Users\Pam\Documents\My Files\ZRFM\DP\Code\TTL V - Chapt 51 -Private Sewage Disposal System 11-16.docx
5-51A-1 Title V
(6/19)
CHAPTER 51A: PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SERVICE
Section
§51A.001 Purpose
§51A.002 Short Title
§51A.003 Definitions
§51A.004 Conformance with MWRD Requirements
§51A.005 Use of Public Sewers Required
§51A.006 Connection Fees
§51A.007 Building Sewers and Connections
§51A.008 Use of Public Sanitary Sewer System
§51A.009 Protection of Public Sanitary Sewer System
§51A.010 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§51A.011 Penalties
§51A.012 Traps Required
§51A.013 Injury to System Prohibited
§51A.014 Bills
§51A.015 Termination of Service for Nonpayment
§51A.016 Notice of Delinquency
§51A.017 Foreclosure of Lien
§51A.018 Payment of Bills for Sewer Service
§51A.019 Applicability to All Users of the Public Sanitary Sewer System
§51A.020 Public Sanitary Sewer System Development Surcharge Fee
§51A.021 Illegal Connection
§51A.022 Non-Compliance Correction
§51A.023 Enforcement
§51A.024 Penalty
§51A.025 Payment Prerequisite to Service
§51A.026 Sewer Service Charges
§51A.027 Accounts and Records
§51A.028 Transfer Property Inclusion Fee
§51A.001 PURPOSE
This Chapter is enacted for the purposes of (1) setting forth the terms and conditions for the provision of
public sanitary sewer service to certain portions of the Village pursuant to an Intergovernmental
Agreement entered into between the Village and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago (“MWRD”) on November 5, 1998 and amended on June 3, 1999 and as may be further amended
from time to time; (2) establishing a sanitary sewer service charge sufficient to allow the Village to meet
its obligations to MWRD as well as providing appropriate funds for operation, maintenance and
depreciation of the system facilities; (3) providing a means of addressing the expenses of procuring the
agreements and constructing the facilities necessary to bring public sanitary sewer service to certain
portions of the Village; and (4) identifying standards for the mandatory discontinuance of private sanitary
sewer disposal systems (septic systems) and the mandatory connection to the public sanitary sewer
system.
§51A.002 SHORT TITLE
This Chapter may be known and cited as the Village of Deer Park Public Sanitary Sewer Service Code.
5-51A-2 Title V
(6/19)
§51A.003 DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Chapter shall be as
follows:
(A) Federal government:
(1) Federal Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S 1251 et seq.) as amended
by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Public Law 92-500) and
(Public Law 93-243)
(2) Administrator means the administrator of the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(3) Federal grant means the U. S. government participation in the financing of the construction
of treatment works as provided for by federal act and implementing regulations.
(B) State government:
(1) State Act means the Code of Illinois Antipollution Bond Act of 1970.
(2) Director means the director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(3) State grant means the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Antipollution Bond Act and for making such
grants as filed with the secretary of the State of Illinois.
(C) Local government:
(1) Village means the Village of Deer Park, Lake and Cook Counties, Illinois.
(2) Village Engineer means the person or persons or firm employed or retained by the Village to
perform engineering services or such other person or persons to whom the Village Board has
delegated a responsibility or authority set forth in this Chapter.
(3) Equalized Assessed Value (or Valuation) means the latest equalized property valuation as
shown on the real estate tax bill of a property or in the records of Lake County, Illinois,
without regard to subsequent protest, challenge or appeal.
(4) MWRD means the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago or any entity
succeeding to the rights and obligations thereof.
(5) MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement means the agreement for sewer services entered
into between the Village and MWRD on November 5, 1998, as amended on June 3, 1999,
and any amendments thereto from time to time.
(6) MWRD User Charge Ordinance means the ordinance adopted by the MWRD Board of
Commissioners on October 4, 1979 as amended to and including March 19, 1992, October 6,
1994 and November 3, 1994, and designated by MWRD as the “User Charge Ordinance,” as
it may be amended from time to time.
5-51A-3 Title V
(6/19)
(7) Owner means any or all of (a) the legal titleholder of a Subject Property, (b) a Person legally
authorized to act for the legal titleholder, or (c) a beneficial owner of a land trust, as
appropriate in the context of use.
(8) Occupant means a tenant of a Subject Property or a Person legally authorized to act for the
tenant.
(9) Public Sanitary Sewer Service means service available or provided to properties within the
Service Area pursuant to the MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement.
(10) Public Sanitary Sewer System means all Public Sanitary Sewers and all structures and
devices appurtenant thereto which collect and convey wastewater.
(11) Service Area means those lands within the Village eligible for sanitary sewer service
according to the terms of the MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement. The Service Area is
legally described as follows:
THOSE PARTS OF SECTIONS 34 AND 35, TOWNSHIP 43 NORTH, RANGE 10 EAST
OF THE THIRD PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN IN LAKE COUNTY, ILLINOIS DESCRIBED
AS FOLLOWS:
BEGINNING AT THE INTERSECTION OF THE CENTERLINES OF LAKE-COOK
ROAD AND QUENTIN ROADS; THENCE NORTH ALONG THE CENTERLINE OF
QUENTIN ROAD 4200 FEET, MORE OR LESS; THENCE EAST ALONG A SOUTH
LINE OF THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE VILLAGE OF KILDEER (AS THEY
EXISTED ON OCTOBER 27, 1998) A DISTANCE OF 208.73 FEET; THENCE
NORTHEAST ALONG AN EAST LINE OF SAID CORPORATE LIMITS 250 FEET,
MORE OR LESS, TO A POINT 313.5 FEET SOUTHEAST OF THE INTERSECTION OF
THE CENTERLINES OF QUENTIN AND RAND ROAD, AS MEASURED ALONG THE
CENTERLINE OF SAID RAND ROAD; THENCE SOUTHEAST ALONG THE
CENTERLINE OF RAND ROAD 3565 FEET, MORE OR LESS, TO A POINT 2325 FEET
NORTHWEST OF THE INTERSECTION OF SAID CENTERLINE WITH THE EAST
LINE OF SECTION 34 AFORESAID, AS MEASURED ALONG SAID CENTERLINE;
THENCE ALONG THE AFOREMENTIONED CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE VILLAGE
OF KILDEER THE FOLLOWING EIGHT COURSES; THENCE SOUTHWEST 470.57
FEET TO A LINE 452.1 FEET EAST OF AND PARALLEL WITH THE NORTH-SOUTH
QUARTER LINE OF SECTION 34 AFORESAID; THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID
PARALLEL LINE 623.58 FEET TO A LINE 1619.96 FEET NORTH OF AND PARALLEL
WITH THE SOUTH LINE OF SECTION 34 AFORESAID; THENCE EAST ALONG SAID
PARALLEL LINE 866.24 FEET TO THE WEST LINE OF THE EAST HALF OF THE
SOUTHEAST QUARTER OF SECTION 34 AFORESAID; THENCE SOUTH ALONG
SAID WEST LINE 785.31 FEET; THENCE SOUTHEAST 49.53 FEET; THENCE
NORTHEAST 1100.03 FEET TO THE SOUTHEAST RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF RAND
ROAD; THENCE SOUTHEAST ALONG SAID RIGHT OF WAY LINE 20 FEET, MORE
OR LESS, TO AN EASTERLY LINE OF THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE VILLAGE
OF KILDEER; THENCE NORTHEASTERLY ALONG SAID EAST LINE 50 FEET TO
THE CENTERLINE OF RAND ROAD; THENCE SOUTHEAST ALONG THE
CENTERLINE OF RAND ROAD 2609 FEET, MORE OR LESS TO THE CENTERLINE
OF LAKE-COOK ROAD, THENCE WEST ALONG SAID CENTERLINE 6550 FEET,
MORE OR LESS, TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING, CONTAINING 359 ACRES.
5-51A-4 Title V
(6/19)
Upon inclusion of all or a portion of the Transfer Property within the Service Area, and from
time to time thereafter if additional territory is added to the Service Area, the legal
description of the Service Area shall be amended to reflect such additions.
(12) Sewer Improvements Costs means all costs incurred by the Village relating to the financing
and construction of the Public Sanitary Sewer System owned by the Village, including
interest accrued as of the date of permitted connection to the MWRD interceptor, which are
to be collected and paid over to the bond trustee(s) for Village of Deer Park Special Service
Area No Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven, Eight, Nine and Ten in accordance with the
ordinances of the Village authorizing the sale of Special Service Area Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9 and 10 bonds. Sewer Improvements Costs do not include, however, any amounts paid or
required to be paid to MWRD as a Connection Charge/Extraterritorial Impact Fee, or any part
thereof, as provided in the MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement.
(13) Subject Property means a specific property or parcel within the Service Area identified by a
tax parcel number or numbers.
(14) Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm,
company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency, limited liability company or other entity.
(15) Transfer Property means the area consisting of approximately 27 acres which is to be
disconnected from the Village of Kildeer and annexed to the Village of Deer Park pursuant to
the Jurisdictional Boundary and Land Use Agreement between the Village of Deer Park and
the Village of Kildeer dated January 15, 2003.
(16) Private Sector Program is a program that is intended to prohibit new illegal clear water
connections to the sanitary sewer system, compel property owners with illegal clear water
connections or sources of excessive infiltration to eliminate them, establish a public
information program to enhance awareness of the risks posed by illegal clear water
connections, and establish a long term program under which illegal connections that are
costly to correct may be removed over time.
(D) NPDES permit means any permit or equivalent document issued by the administrator, or, where
appropriate, by the director, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of
1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act.
(E) Wastewater and its characteristics:
(1) Wastewater means the spent water of a community, including but not limited to, a
combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and
stormwater that may be present.
(2) Sewage is used interchangeably with wastewater.
(3) Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the applicable effluent criteria.
(4) ppm means parts per million by weight.
5-51A-5 Title V
(6/19)
(5) Milligrams per liter means a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It
is 0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water.
(6) Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in
water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device.
Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures
set forth in Standards Methods.
(7) BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days
at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
(8) pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
(9) Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most
recent edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(10) Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
(11) Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing
of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under
the flow of conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than onehalf
(1/2) inch in any dimension.
(12) Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be
considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection system.
(13) Population equivalent is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a
treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage
per day, containing 0.17 pounds (200 mg/I) of BOD, amid 0.20 pounds (240 mg/I) of
suspended solids.
(14) Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen
(15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or
flows during normal operation.
(15) Commercial waste shall mean any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any commercial or business establishment or process or from the
development, recovery, or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
(F) Sewer types and appurtenances:
5-51A-6 Title V
(6/19)
(1) Sewer means a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including
storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
(2) Public Sanitary Sewer means a sewer owned by the Village or any other governmental
entity when connected, directly or indirectly, to a sewer owned by the Village.
(3) Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys sewage or commercial wastes or a combination
of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or unpolluted commercial wastes
are not intentionally admitted.
(4) Storm sewer means a sewer that carries storm, surface, and ground water drainage but
excludes sewage and commercial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
(5) Combined sewer means a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
(6) Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other
place of disposal.
(7) Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five (5) feet
outside the inner face of the building wall.
(8) Storm water runoff means that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
(9) Sewerage means the system of sewers and appurtenances, for the collection, transportation,
and pumping of sewage.
(10) Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
(G) Treatment:
(1) Pretreatment means the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the
wastewater treatment works.
(2) Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating
wastewater, commercial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with “waste
treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant” or “pollution control plant.”
(H) Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry
away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
(I) Watercourse and connections:
(1) Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(2) Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or ground water.
5-51A-7 Title V
(6/19)
(J) Inspection manhole means a structure located on a site where required by the MWRD. The
purpose of an inspection manhole is to provide access for the MWRD to sample and/or measure
discharges. The manhole shall be designed in accordance with MWRD criteria.
(K) Sewer charges:
(1) Sewer service charge shall be the total annualized charge or a portion thereof levied on all
owners of property within the Service Area required to connect to the Public Sanitary Sewer
System pursuant to Section 51A.005(D) of this Chapter. The sewer service charge shall be
computed as outlined in Section 51A.026 of this Chapter and shall be the total of the MWRD
Charge, the Per Acre Operations Charge and, if applicable, the User Charge.
(2) MWRD Charge means that portion of the sewer service charge which corresponds to the
amount for a Subject Property which the Village must remit to the MWRD pursuant to the
MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement.
(3) User Charge means the charges provided in the MWRD User Charge Ordinance which, if
applicable to a Subject Property, may be collected by either the MWRD or the Village, as
directed by the MWRD pursuant to the MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement.
(4) Per Acre Operations Charge means a charge assessed by and payable to the Village based
upon the Village’s costs of administering, operating and maintaining the Public Sanitary
Sewer Service, including a reasonable reserve for replacement.
(5) Sewer Improvements Reimbursement Charge means the Sewer Improvements Costs
portion of the Public Sanitary Sewer System Development Surcharge Fee (“DSF”) based on
the per acre proportional costs and benefits received, as determined by the Village Board, of
making the Public Sewer System available to lands within the Service Area.
(6) Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the Public Sanitary Sewer
System to maintain the capacity and performance for which such were designed and
constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.
(7) Useful life means the estimated period during which the collection system will be operated.
(8) Public Sanitary Sewer Fund of the Village of Deer Park is the principal accounting
designation for all revenues received in the operation of the Public Sanitary Sewer System
except for Sewer Improvements Reimbursement Fees.
(9) Public Sanitary Sewer System Development Surcharge (“DSF”) means the tap-on charges
assessed against a Subject Property at the time of application for a sewer permit, as set forth
in Section 51A.020 of this Chapter.
(L) Other:
(1) Redevelopment Area means those parcels of land along the south side of Rand Road between
Deer Park Boulevard and Lake-Cook Road which either have frontage on Rand Road or, if
there is no frontage, obtain access to Rand Road through a parcel with frontage on Rand
Road.
(Am. Ord. 04-36, passed 11-15-04)
5-51A-8 Title V
(6/19)
§ 51A.004 CONFORMANCE WITH MWRD REQUIREMENTS.
Any person who lawfully connects a property within the Service Area to the Public Sanitary Sewer
System shall comply with all requirements of the MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement and with all
permitting requirements and other applicable regulations of the MWRD, the Village and all other public
entities with regulatory authority.
§ 51A.005 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(B) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village, or in any area under
jurisdiction of the Village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter or, where permitted, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 51 of the Village Code of Ordinances.
(C) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage for the servicing
of any property required to be connected to the Public Sanitary Sewer System.
(D) The Owner of all properties improved with houses, buildings, or other structures used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the Service Area and abutting
on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way in which there is located any Public Sanitary Sewer
of the Village, is hereby required at the Owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper Public Sanitary Sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that said Public Sanitary Sewer is within two hundred fifty (250) feet (76.2 meters) of the property
line. In the event that the Village’s Public Sanitary Sewer System is not ready for a connection to
be made within the ninety (90) days from the official notice to do so, the Village will extend the
date for the required connection, and provide the Owner with the option to accrue Owner’s
obligations for sewer service charges in accordance with § 51A.026(A). When the Village’s Public
Sanitary Sewer System becomes ready for connection, the Village will notify Owner that said
accrual option is no longer in effect and all accrued charges will be due and owing at the regular
payment date. Weather permitting, the Owner shall make connection to the Public Sanitary Sewer
System within ninety (90) days of the date of the Village’s notice that the accrual option is no
longer in effect.
(Am. Ord. 04-36, passed 11-15-04)
(E) Where a Public Sanitary Sewer is not available in accordance with subparagraph (D) above, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system approved by the Village in
accordance with Chapter 51. When a Public Sanitary Sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to the Public Sanitary Sewer within ninety (90) days after the date of official
notice to do so.
(F) Notwithstanding Section 51A.005(D) and (E) to the contrary, an Owner whose property lies in the
Redevelopment Area shall not be obligated to connect its property to the Public Sanitary Sewer
5-51A-9 Title V
(6/19)
even though the Public Sanitary Sewer may be located within 250 feet of the property line of such
property. The ability of such Owner to elect non-connection even though the Public Sanitary Sewer
System lies within 250 feet of the Owner’s property line shall expire on December 31, 2006. If an
Owner in the Redevelopment Area desires to connect its property to the Public Sanitary Sewer
System prior to December 31, 2006, the Village shall have the right to delay such connection for up
to six (6) months if, in the reasonable judgment of the Village Engineer, to delay such connection
shall further the Village’s efforts in infrastructure planning for the Redevelopment Area and/or
adjacent areas in the Triangle.
(Am. Ord. 04-36, passed 11-15-04)
§ 51A.006 CONNECTION REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES.
It shall be unlawful to connect any sewer line serving any premises to any Public Sanitary Sewer of the
Village without first securing a permit therefor and paying the fees herein required. The fees for review
and inspection of such connections shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
The applicant shall furnish all labor and materials required for installing sewer service from the main to
the premises to be served.
Applications for connection permits shall conform to the general ordinances relating to applications for
permits, and no such permit shall be issued until the permit fee and all other fees as provided in this
Chapter are paid.
§ 51A.007 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
(A) No Person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any
Public Sanitary Sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Village Engineer.
(B) All disposal by any Person into a Public Sanitary Sewer is unlawful except those discharges in
compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state
and local standards.
(C) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential service and (2) for
commercial service. In either case, the Owner or his agent shall make application on the MWRD
permit application form. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Village Engineer.
(D) A building sewer permit shall only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can
be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage system, including sewers, pump stations, and
wastewater treatment system, have sufficient reserve capacity to handle adequately and efficiently
the additional, anticipated waste load.
(E) All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the Owner. The Owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
5-51A-10 Title V
(6/19)
(F) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
(G) The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing regulations of the BOCA Code in the
form adopted by the Village or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village, as well as all
ordinances and regulations of MWRD. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriated specifications of the American
Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply. In case of
conflict, the provisions of the applicable Village code shall take priority.
(H) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at or below the elevation of
the building service connection. In any buildings in which any floor elevation is lower than the
finished street grade, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved in accordance with this Chapter and discharged to the building sewer.
(I) No Person shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains,
or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a Public Sanitary Sewer.
(J) The connection of the building sewer into the Public Sanitary Sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing regulations of the BOCA Code in the form adopted by
the Village, or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village as well as all ordinances and
regulations of MWRD or, in the absence of Village rules or regulations, the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be made gas tight and watertight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the authorized Village official
before installation.
(K) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Village Engineer when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the Public Sanitary Sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Village Engineer.
(L) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Village.
§51A.008 USE OF THE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
(A) No Person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process
waters to any Public Sanitary Sewer.
(B) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Village Engineer. Cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Village Engineer, to a storm
sewer, or natural outlet.
5-51A-11 Title V
(6/19)
(C) No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or
wastes to any Public Sanitary Sewer:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage
works;
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage and non-perishable garbage, either whole or ground.
(D) No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the Public Sanitary Sewer System the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if the Village Engineer determines that
such wastes are likely to harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Village Engineer will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the
sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in
the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
which may be prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (sixty five (65) degrees Centigrade);
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Centigrade);
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer;
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not;
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or
toxic substance, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any
such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the MWRD for such materials;
5-51A-12 Title V
(6/19)
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the MWRD as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the MWRD in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
(9) Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as
permitted by the MWRD in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
(10) Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the MWRD in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
(11) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers
earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited
to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions);
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as
to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined
herein;
(12) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters;
(13) Any waters or wastes having: (a) a five-day BOD greater than three hundred (300) parts per
million by weight, or (b) containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by
weight of suspended solids, or (c) having wastewater concentrations greater than normal as
determined by sampling and testing of a user’s wastewater discharge, shall be subject to the
review of the Village Engineer. Where necessary in the opinion of the Village Engineer, the
Owner shall provide, at the Owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: (1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per
million by weight, or (2) reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per
million by weight, or (3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment system shall be submitted for the approval of the Village Engineer and
no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
(E) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the Public Sanitary
Sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
subparagraph (D) of this section, or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment
provided in subparagraph (D) of this section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for
5-51A-13 Title V
(6/19)
pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto and which in the
judgment of the Village Engineer, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Village Engineer may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of paragraph (2) of this section. If the
Village Engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Village Engineer and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(F) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Village Engineer,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Village Engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(G) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the Owner at the Owner’s expense.
(H) Each commercial building, and other establishments as regulated, shall be required to install an
inspection manhole and, when required by the Village Engineer, the Owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying commercial wastes shall install a suitable inspection manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
MWRD. The manhole shall be installed by the Owner at the Owner’s expense, and shall be
maintained by the Owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(I) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference
is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the Public Sanitary Sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
§51A.009 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the Public Sanitary Sewer System. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct.
5-51A-14 Title V
(6/19)
§ 51A.010 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
(A) The Village Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the Village, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, MWRD and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties connected or required
by this Chapter to be connected to the Public Sanitary Sewer System for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
The Village Engineer or his or her representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterway or system for waste treatment.
(B) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subparagraph (A) of this
section, the Village Engineer or duly authorized employees of the Village, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, MWRD and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the Owner and Occupant and the
Owner and Occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Village employees and the
Village shall indemnify the Owner or Occupant against loss or damage to its property by Village
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the Owner and Occupant and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence, or failure of the Owner and Occupant to maintain safe
conditions as required in Section 51A.008(H).
(C) The Village Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties connected to the Public Sanitary Sewer
System through which the Village holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
Public Sanitary Sewer System lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the property involved.
§51A.011 PENALTIES.
(A) Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter, except persons found violating
Section 51A.009 who shall be subject to immediate arrest, shall be served by the Village with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations. The Village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result
of any violation of any provision of this Chapter.
(B) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subparagraph
(A) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the
amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day in which
any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(C) Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become liable to the Village for any
losses the Village incurs relating to such violation.
5-51A-15 Title V
(6/19)
§51A.012 TRAPS REQUIRED.
No use of or any connection with the Public Sanitary Sewer System shall be permitted or lawful unless
the flow from such connections passes through a catch basin, grease trap, or other interceptor in the
manner required by the general ordinances of the Village relating to plumbing and sewers.
§51A.013 INJURY TO SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to flow into the Public Sanitary Sewer System any substance of any
kind which interferes with or prevents the functioning of the Public Sanitary Sewer System or sewage
disposal plant of the MWRD.
§51A.014 BILLS.
Bills for Public Sanitary Sewer Service shall be sent out to the person or persons in whose name the
general taxes for the last preceding year were paid on the Subject Property as reflected in the records of
the applicable county treasurer. Both the owner of record of the Subject Property and the occupant(s) of
the Subject Property shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of any bills relative to Public
Sanitary Sewer Service for the Subject Property. These bills shall be dated and sent out for each Subject
Property no less than four times annually. All sewer bills must be paid within twenty (20) days after the
statements are postmarked. An additional ten percent (10%) late payment penalty shall be assessed on
any bills paid more than thirty (30) days after the deadline. All overdue payments payable to the Village
for MWRD Charges and/or for the Per Acre Charge (as defined in §51A.003 (K)) as well as penalties
thereon shall be subject to an interest charge of 2.25% per quarter on unpaid balances. The rate of interest
assessed against unpaid balances on the MWRD Charges and on the Per Acre Charges will be reviewed
annually, and changes in the rate of interest which are approved by the Corporate Authorities of the
Village, if any, shall be reflected in a further amendment to this Section.
Any property which becomes a Subject Property pursuant to an annexation by the Village or pursuant to a
plat of subdivision for which the Village gives final approval shall be billed for the sewer service charge,
the per acre operations charge and such other charges as may from time to time be allowed by this
ordinance or other applicable ordinances. The initial bill shall be issued to the new property owner once
the new Subject Property becomes part of the map exhibit submitted to MWRD with the October 1 semiannual
payment. Said bill shall be sent no less than four times annually according to the terms provided
for in the paragraph above.
(Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 01-20-14)
§51A.015 REVOCATION OF OCCUPANCY PERMIT FOR NONPAYMENT.
The Village may suspend occupancy permits for a Subject Property for which any bill or bills for sewer
service remain unpaid thirty-five (35) days after such bill or bills are rendered. Prior to the Village taking
such action, it shall give five (5) days’ notice to the Occupant or, if the Occupant cannot be notified, the
Owner of the Subject Property. Such bill or bills for sewer service shall include any and all services
rendered by the Village in performance of necessary repairs and maintenance of the service pipes, meters
or other equipment related to sewer servicing the Subject Property, together with all filing fees, court
costs and other charges incurred by the Village in the collection of said bill or bills. Occupancy of a
5-51A-16 Title V
(6/19)
building for which the occupancy permit has been suspended shall be a violation of this Chapter subject
to the penalties set forth in Section 51A.011.
§51A.016 NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
Whenever a bill for sewer service, which service shall include any and all services rendered by the
Village in the performance of necessary repair and maintenance of the service pipes, meters or other
equipment related to the sewer servicing a Subject Property, remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has
been rendered, the Village Clerk shall file with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain the following:
(A) A legal description of the Subject Property sufficient for identification thereof;
(B) The amount of money due for such services;
(C) The date when such amount became delinquent; and
(D) A notice that the Village claims a lien for said amount.
If the consumer of sewer services whose bill is unpaid is not the Owner of the Subject Property, and the
Village Clerk has notice of this, notice also shall be mailed to the Owner of the Subject Property, if
Owner’s address be known to the Clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days
after it has been rendered.
If a bill for sewer service to a Subject Property is unpaid at the time the Owner sells the Subject Property,
and no statement of lien claim has been filed by the Village prior thereto, the Purchaser shall then be
liable for the amount owed. Nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve an Owner who rents the Subject
Property to others from liability for unpaid sewer bills for service to such Subject Property.
§51A.017 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
The Village shall have the power to foreclose the lien for unpaid bill or bills for sewer charges, including
all filing fees, court costs and other charges incurred by the Village in the collection of said bill or bills,
by suit in chancery in the Circuit Court of Lake County. Said lien shall be effective and may be foreclosed
against the Subject Property whether or not the party or parties owning or occupying the Subject Property
are the same as those who owned or occupied the Subject Property at the time such service was rendered.
§51A.018 PAYMENT OF BILLS FOR SEWER SERVICE.
Payment of bills for sewer service shall be made either directly to the Village or to any businesses or
enterprises which have been appointed agents to receive such payments on the Village’s behalf.
§51A.019 APPLICABILITY TO ALL USERS OF THE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to residents and nonresidents of the Village.
5-51A-17 Title V
(6/19)
§51A.020 PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT SURCHARGE FEE.
(A) A Public Sanitary Sewer System Development Surcharge Fee (“DSF”) is hereby established to help
defray the Village’s costs of contracting and financing, construction, equipment, materials and
facilities for providing Public Sanitary Sewer Services. Payment of the DSF is hereby declared to
be a prerequisite to connecting any unit of property to the Public Sanitary Sewer System, which fee
shall be paid at the time of application for a sewer permit and shall be in addition to all other fees
and charges required under this Chapter. The DSF shall not apply, however, to properties within
Special Service Areas 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 or 10 of the Village. The DSF shall consist of the
following components:
(1) The sum of four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500) per acre, calculated to the nearest one
hundredth (1/100) of an acre of property to be serviced as set forth in the sewer permit
application. This sum corresponds to that portion of the Extraterritorial Impact Fee which the
Village must pay to the MWRD upon application for permits to service individual properties;
(2) A Sewer Improvements Reimbursement Fee which shall be calculated and assessed on a per
acre basis, calculated to the nearest one hundredth (1/100) of an acre. The Fee shall be
calculated by multiplying the Sewer Improvements Costs by a fraction, the numerator of
which shall be the acreage of the property for which application for a connection permit is
made and the denominator of which is three hundred fifty-nine (359). The acreage of the
property for which an application is made for a permit to connect shall be deemed to be all of
the contiguous acreage in single or unified ownership. The Sewer Improvements Costs shall
be the Village’s final costs of making MWRD sanitary sewer service available to the
premises, as calculated by the Village Engineer following the liquidation of all such costs.
The Sewer Improvements Reimbursement Fee shall include an interest component applied to
the Sewer Improvements Costs (except the interest portion thereof). Interest shall commence
to accrue as of the date the MWRD permits the Village to connect to its interceptor. Interest
shall be at a rate equal to the highest rate of interest applicable to any of the bonds which the
Village has issued for Special Service Area Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 improvements.
The amounts collected by the Village as Sewer Improvements Reimbursement Fees shall be
disbursed strictly in accordance with any and all ordinances passed and approved by the
Village authorizing the sale of bonds secured by a special tax imposed on the Village’s
Special Service Area Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10;
(3) For all improved or unimproved properties which, according to Section 51A.005(D) of this
Chapter, sanitary sewer service was available, but the Owner of such property has not paid all
of the service charges applicable to said property at the time of application for a sewer permit,
the outstanding services charges plus interest thereon at the rate set forth in subparagraph
(A)(2) of this section shall be due and payable as an additional component of the DSF;
(B) Up to eighty percent of the charges set forth in subparagraphs (A)(l) and (A)(2) of this section may
be paid in equal installments over a period not to exceed five (5) years provided that interest shall
accrue on each such installment at the rate set forth in subparagraph (A)(2) of this section and the
applicant enters into a payment contract in a form approved by the Village Attorney.
(C) In the event the Sewer Improvements Costs have not been fully determined and liquidated as of the
date of an application for a sewer permit, then the Village Administrator shall assess and collect a
deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated Sewer Improvements Reimbursement Fee. If
the final fee is in excess of the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall pay the difference within
5-51A-18 Title V
(6/19)
seven (7) days of request by the Village. If the final fee is less than the amount of deposit, the
Village shall refund the excess amount to the party which paid the fee, unless otherwise directed in
writing by said party. If the applicant has chosen to pay by installment, the installment contract
shall provide for the final determination and collection of the fee.
§51A.021 ILLEGAL CONNECTION.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to connect any unit of property or portion thereof to a Public Sanitary
Sewer without obtaining a permit and paying the applicable fees as required under this Chapter.
§51A.022 NON-COMPLIANCE CORRECTION.
When a property is found to be non-compliant, the inspectors will verbally inform the property owner,
and show them the non-compliant conditions. A letter will be sent to the property owner within two
weeks of the inspection describing the non-compliant conditions and requiring correction of the noncomplaint
conditions within 90 days. The Village will post on its website a list of licensed, bonded
contractors who are capable of performing the corrective work.
Property owners are required to notify the Village when the non-compliant conditions are corrected. The
Village will send inspectors to the private property within seven working days to inspect the correction.
When properties are found to be in partial compliance, the Village inspectors will show the property
owners the illegal connection. The Village will send a letter and report to the property owner
documenting the illegal condition. The letter will encourage the property owner to correct the condition
and will provide information about the Village’s cost-sharing programs for lateral rehabilitation, sump
repair and installation, rain garden construction, and storm sewer extension. The letter will also inform
the property owner that in the event of substantial improvement to the property, the illegal conditions
must be corrected. Similarly, in the event of a teardown, the lateral must be replaced or lined.
§51A.023 ENFORCEMENT.
If the non-compliant conditions are not addressed within 90 days, other than when a violation notice is
issued after September 1st, in which case the non-compliant condition must be addressed in 120 days, a
violation notice will be issued to the property owner which requires the condition to be corrected in 14
days and requires payment of a penalty. The violation notice will state that water service may be shut off
in the event of continued non-compliance. If the conditions are not addressed within 14 days, a second
violation notice will be issued and water service will be shut off. The Village may elect to initiate a suit
against non-compliant property owners.
When a non-compliant property submits a building permit application for substantial improvement, the
submitted drawings must include disconnection of all illegal I/I sources. A building permit will not be
issued unless the drawings include this work. If/when the Village begins a program of directly funding
some private property improvements, enforcement measures for non-compliance will be determined at
that time.
5-51A-19 Title V
(6/19)
§51A.024 PENALTY.
Any person who connects a unit of property or portion thereof to a Public Sanitary Sewer without having
been issued a permit by the Village and paying all required fees, shall be fined not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation, and in addition shall pay to the Village its costs of
enforcement. Each day of an unpermitted connection shall constitute a separate violation.
§51A.025 PAYMENT PREREQUISITE TO SERVICE.
No premises shall be served by or be or remain connected with a Public Sanitary Sewer unless the sewer
service charges hereinafter designated shall be paid. It shall be the duty of the Owner of all premises so
served to pay the charges herein prescribed. The Village will accept payment, however, from a Person
other than the Owner, which shall not constitute a waiver of the Village’s rights to collect all outstanding
charges from the Owner. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit private agreements respecting
private obligations to pay for sewer service, but such agreements shall not relieve the Owner from the
obligation to pay the Village.
§51A.026 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) The sewer service charges set forth in this section shall be paid (1) with respect to all improved
property required to be connected to the Village’s Public Sanitary Sewer System in accordance with
the provisions of Section 51A.005(D) of this Chapter and (2) all property for which the Village has
approved and provided Special Service Area financing for sanitary sewer construction to service
such property. Payment of service charges for all other properties within the Service Area for which
the Village is obligated to make payment to MWRD shall accrue, but, at the option of the owner,
may be deferred with interest at a rate of .75% per month due and owing in accordance with Section
51A.020(A)(3) of this Chapter until application is made to MWRD to connect said property to a
Public Sanitary Sewer. The Village will assume that Property Owners who are not currently
required to have their properties connected to the Village’s Public Sanitary Sewer System and who
do not pay have chosen to defer payment and accumulate interest unless and until they begin
making payments on a current basis. Provided, however, that no sewer service charges shall accrue
against any property owned by a governmental entity unless and until an application to connect
such property to a Public Sanitary Sewer is made.
(B) The components of the Village’s sanitary sewer service charge shall be as follows:
(1) MWRD Charge: For a Subject Property subject to the service charges, there shall be a charge
equal to one hundred forty (140%) percent of the most recent ad valorem tax rate levied by
the MWRD upon property within its corporate limits multiplied by the latest available
equalized assessed value of the Subject Property. The amount of the charge shall be an
annualized basis and the Village shall adjust the charges from time to time upon receipt of the
most recently available equalized assessed valuation so that the total charges within a
calendar year are equal to the above-stated sum. In the event that the Village’s Public
Sanitary Sewer is first connected to the MWRD interceptor at any time other than after
January 1 of the calendar year, the annualized charge shall be prorated as and from the date of
such connections. For any properties which first become subject to sewer service charges at
any time after January 1 of a calendar year, whether by annexation to the Village or
otherwise, this charge also shall be prorated as and from the date the property first became
subject to such charge. in the event a property Owner challenges the equalized assessed
valuation of the property subject to the sewer service charge in the manner allowed by law
5-51A-20 Title V
(6/19)
and obtains a reduction of the equalized assessed valuation, the Village shall allow a rebate or
credit against the amount of the charge only to the extent the Village receives a rebate or
credit from MWRD. In such cases, the Owner shall be responsible for pursuing the claim for
rebate or credit from the MWRD and the Village shall provide reasonable assistance and
cooperation in such efforts.
(2) User Charge: Where the provisions of the MWRD User Charge Ordinance are applicable to a
Subject Property in the Service Area, the Owner of the Subject Property shall be responsible
for cooperating with the MWRD and the Village in determining the applicable User Charge
and for making all User Charge payments to the MWRD. In the event that the MWRD
requires the Village on behalf of the MWRD or otherwise, to collect the User Charges and/or
any penalties owed under the MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement, any Person subject to
such charge and/or penalties shall pay such amount to the Village upon being billed therefor.
The Village shall remit all User Charge monies collected on behalf of the MWRD to the
MWRD in accordance with the MWRD Intergovernmental Agreement.
(3) Per Acre Operations Charge: A Per Acre Operations Charge shall be assessed and payable
based upon the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the Public Sanitary
Sewer System, including costs of billing and administration and a reserve for replacement.
The adequacy of this charge shall be reviewed annually by the Village following a review of
the annual year-end audit of the sewer accounts. This charge shall be revised periodically by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees to reflect changes in operation and maintenance
costs, including replacement costs as well as any local financing costs, as required. The Per
Acre Operations Charge for a Subject Property shall be based upon the total acreage of the
Service Area less right of way acreage, as illustrated on the most recent map exhibit
submitted to MWRD with the October 1 semi-annual payment; and the Per Acre Operations
Charge shall be calculated to the nearest one hundredth (1/100th) of an acre. Notice of the
current per-acre amount shall be continuously posted at the Village offices.
(4) Notice of Charges: A copy of this section 51A.026 and of Section 51A.020 properly certified
by the Village Clerk shall be filed in the office of Recorder of Deeds of Lake County and
shall be deemed notice to all Owners and Occupants of real estate within the Service Area of
the charges for Public Sanitary Sewer Service on their properties.
§51A.027 ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
(A) Revenue: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the Public Sanitary Sewer System,
other than the Sewer Improvement Reimbursement Fees, provided for in Section 51A.020(B), shall
be deposited in a separate account by the Village Treasurer and designated as the Public Sanitary
Sewer Fund of the Village of Deer Park.
(B) Accounts: The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper
records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all financial
transactions relative to the Public Sanitary Sewer System and, at regular annual intervals, shall
cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the Public Sanitary Sewer System. The Village Treasurer also shall provide all
information and remit all funds owed to the MWRD as required by the MWRD Intergovernmental
Agreement. With the approval of the Village Board, the Treasurer’s duties under this Subsection B
may be contracted to a third party service provider.
5-51A-21 Title V
(6/19)
(C) Access to Records: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or their authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers, and records of the Village which are applicable to the Village’s operations,
revenues and costs of the Public Sanitary Sewer System for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special
and general conditions to any state or federal grant.
§51A.028 TRANSFER PROPERTY INCLUSION FEE.
In conjunction with the expansion of the Service Area to include the Transfer Property the Village will
pay to MWRD a fee of $3,000 per acre (the “Transfer Property inclusion Fee”) for inclusion of the
Transfer Property in the Service Area. Upon annexation to the Village, the owner of a parcel of the
Transfer Property shall reimburse the Village for that parcel’s share of the Transfer Property Inclusion
Fee plus interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum for the period between the date which the
Village pays the Transfer Property Inclusion Fee to MWRD through the date that the property is annexed
to the Village. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village will not require annexing property owners to
pay interest charges for parcels of the Transfer Property annexed to the Village prior to June 1, 2004. The
amount of the Transfer Property Inclusion Fee for each property shall be calculated by multiplying the
acreage of the property to be annexed by $3,000.
(Ord. 00-10, passed 4-17-00)
(Ord. 00-34, passed 10-16-00)
(Ord. 00-41, passed 12-18-00)
(Am. Ord. 03-18, passed 12-18-03)
(Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 01-20-14)
(Ord. 2019-13, passed 6-20-19)
CHAPTER 52: POTABLE WATER DISTRIBUTION SERVICES
Section
§52.01 Purpose
§52.02 Short Title
§52.03 Definitions
§52.04 Conformance with Palatine Regulations
§52.05 Watering of Lawns
§52.06 Wells
§52.07 Allocations of Palatine Water
§52.08 Water System Development Surcharge/Allocation Fee
§52.01 PURPOSE.
This Chapter is enacted for the purposes of (1) regulating the use of potable water within those portions of
the Village of Deer Park (the “Village”) where water service is or can be made available pursuant to an
Intergovernmental Agreement entered into on August 9, 1999, by the Village and the Village of Palatine
(“Palatine”); (2) preserving and allocating the amount of water capacity available from Palatine in a
manner which best promotes the public health, safety and general welfare; and (3) providing a means of
allocating and recouping the expenses of obtaining water rights, constructing the system for water
delivery and distributing potable water within certain areas of the Village.
§52.02 SHORT TITLE.
This Chapter may be known and cited as the Village of Deer Park Potable Water Distribution Service
Code.
§52.03 DEFINITIONS
(A) For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(B) Whenever a word or term defined hereafter appears in the text of this Chapter in capitalized form,
its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof.
Allocation: That portion of the maximum gallons per day of potable water which Palatine has
agreed to supply to the Eligible Property which may be used by an Owner or Occupant of a Subject
Property upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees and certification by the Village
Administrator.
Allocation Fee. A fee calculated by the Village Administrator in accordance with the provisions of
Section 52.08 of this chapter which is based on the Allocation to a Subject Property, other than
property owned by the Village, not lying within any of Special Service Area No.’s 2, 3, or 4 of the
Village.
Eligible Property: All lands defined in the Palatine Agreement as the “Subject Property” as that
Agreement may be amended from time to time. Such lands are eligible for water service from
Palatine pursuant to the Palatine Agreement.
______________________________________________________________________________
5-52-1 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
Excess Rate: The Excess Use Rate set forth in the Palatine Agreement.
Excess Rate Allocation: An Allocation which shall be charged by Palatine at the Excess Use Rate
specified in the Palatine Agreement.
Occupant: A tenant of a Subject Property or Person legally authorized to act for the tenant.
Owner: The legal titleholder of a Subject Property or such Person legally authorized to act as the
legal titleholder.
Palatine: The Village of Palatine, Illinois.
Palatine Agreement: The Intergovernmental Agreement Between the Village of Palatine and the
Village of Deer Park Relative to Water Supplied to Certain Property Within the Village of Deer
Park, dated August 9, 1999, and recorded on October 18, 1999 by the Lake County, Illinois
Recorder as Document No. 4435743, and any amendments thereto. A complete and current copy of
the Palatine Agreement shall be kept on file by the Village Administrator at the Village’s offices
and shall be available for inspection or copying by any Village resident or Owner or Occupant of
property within the Village.
Palatine Water: Water supplied to the Eligible Property by Palatine pursuant to the Palatine
Agreement.
Palatine Water Customer: A Person owning or occupying a Subject Property and receiving water
service from the Village of Palatine pursuant to a Palatine Water Customer Service Agreement.
Palatine Water Customer Service Agreement: An agreement between the Village of Palatine
and a Person owning or occupying a Subject Property setting forth the terms and conditions of
water service to the Subject Property.
Palatine Water System: All water distribution facilities owned and operated by the Village of
Palatine wherever located, including but not limited to locations within the Village of Deer Park or
any unincorporated land.
Person: An individual or individuals or an entity or entities legally formed and existing, including
but not limited to corporations, partnerships and limited liability companies.
Standard Rate: The rate which Palatine has agreed to charge for all Standard Rate water delivered
to the Eligible Property in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Palatine Agreement.
Standard Rate Allocation: An Allocation which shall be charged by Palatine at the Standard Rate
specified in the Palatine Agreement.
Subject Property: A specific property or parcel within the Eligible Property.
Transfer: A Transfer of all or part of an Allocation from one Subject Property to another Subject
Property.
Village: The Village of Deer Park, Illinois.
______________________________________________________________________________
5-52-2 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
§52.04 CONFORMANCE WITH PALATINE REGULATIONS.
All persons lawfully receiving water service from Palatine as a Palatine Water Customer for Eligible
Property shall comply with all requirements of the Palatine Agreement, the Palatine Water Customer
Service Agreement, and the ordinance and regulations of Palatine regarding water services as set forth in
Chapter 19 of the Palatine Code of Ordinances or otherwise, including but not limited to regulations
regarding the watering of lawns and other water conservation measures imposed by Palatine.
§52.05 WATERING OF LAWNS.
Sprinklering or watering lawns with water from the Palatine Water System or any other source, including
wells or detention or retention ponds, shall be prohibited from noon until 6:00 p.m. from May 15 of each
year until 6:00 p.m. on September 15 of each year. For the purposes of this section, “Lawn” shall be that
portion of any land under cultivation with grass, trees, shrubs, bushes or types of vegetation not occupied
by the principal or accessory building, but shall not include vegetation constituting the inventory of a
business.
§52.06 WELLS.
(A) No Owner or Occupant of a Subject Property within the Eligible Property shall permit or cause any
interconnection between the Palatine Water System and any pipes, pumps, or other means of
connection with water drawn from a well servicing that Subject Property.
(B) A Subject Property within the Eligible Property being serviced by a lawfully permitted and existing
well as of August 9, 1999 may continue to utilize the existing well or a lawfully permitted
replacement thereof as the source of potable water for the Subject Property only under the
following circumstances:
(1) The Village has not, on or after August 9, 1999, given final approval to a Plat of Subdivision
or a Planned Development Special Use Ordinance for the Subject Property; and
(2) The use of the Subject Property, as defined in the Village Zoning Code, has not changed
subsequent to August 9, 1999.
(C) (1) All Owners or Occupants of a Subject Property within the Eligible Property which do not
qualify for well service as set forth in subsection (B) above and which require potable water
shall take all necessary steps required by the Village and by Palatine to obtain a permitted
connection to the Palatine Water System within thirty (30) days after service is available to
the Subject Property and, if applicable, prior to applying for any certificate of occupancy or
business license from the Village. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Section 52.06
for any person to occupy or use a Subject Property within the Eligible Property without a
validly permitted connection to the Palatine Water System unless such property qualifies for
well use as set forth in subsection (B) above.
(2) Nothing in this Section 52.06 is intended to:
(a) prohibit the construction, maintenance or use of wells for irrigation purposes only,
provided such wells are not connected or interconnected in any way with the Palatine
Water System and which, for wells constructed after August 9, 1999, have been
approved by Palatine as required by the Palatine Agreement and are in accordance with
all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations; or
______________________________________________________________________________
5-52-3 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
(b) require connection to the Palatine Water System when the unallocated daily water
capacity reserved and retained by the Village under the Palatine Agreement is
insufficient to meet the reasonable requirements of the Subject Property for a use or
proposed use which is allowed or specially permitted for the Subject Property in
accordance with the Village Zoning Code, and Palatine has failed or refused to provide
sufficient additional water capacity for such use in accordance with the terms and
provisions of the Palatine Agreement.
§52.07 ALLOCATIONS OF PALATINE WATER.
(A) All potable water which Palatine has agreed to provide to the Eligible Property by or pursuant to the
Palatine Agreement shall be allocated to lands within the Eligible Property by the Village’s Board
of Trustees, except as may be reserved or retained by the Village for future allocations. Allocations
shall be for Standard Rate water, Excess Rate water, or a combination of both.
(B) Records of all Allocations and any changes thereto approved by the Village Board of Trustees shall
be kept on file by the Village Administrator and, upon request, the Village Administrator shall
certify to Palatine the amount of the Allocation for a Subject Property. All Allocations shall run
with the land and shall not be a personal right or property interest of the Owner or Occupant of a
Subject Property severable from the land except as may otherwise be provided in this Section
52.07.
(C) All Allocations set forth in Exhibit 9 of the Palatine Agreement are hereby deemed to have been
allocated by the Village as of August 9, 1999 for purposes of this Section 52.07. No proposed
change or division of the Allocation for a Subject Property shall be valid or enforceable unless
approved by the Village Board of Trustees and a memorandum of such change or division, certified
by the Village Administrator, is recorded with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds against all
properties affected by the change or division.
(D) Unless otherwise restricted by private agreement, the owner of a Subject Property may transfer all
or part of an Allocation from the Subject Property to other lands within the Eligible Property. Any
purported transfer shall not become valid or effective, however, except in accordance with the
following procedures and conditions:
(1) Application shall be made to the Village Board of Trustees for approval of a transfer of
Allocation. Such application shall identify the legal description and tax parcel number for
each of the transferor and transferee properties. Such application also shall provide such
supporting information as may be requested by the Village Engineer to demonstrate that the
resulting Allocations shall be sufficient to meet the potable water needs of the proposed uses
for both the transferor property and the transferee property. Such information may include but
is not limited to floor plans, equipment lists and data, historical water usage records for the
same or comparable properties or uses, irrigation plans, and occupancy projections;
(2) The applicant shall make a deposit in the amount of $2,500 which shall be used by the
Village to reimburse it for all of the Village’s expenses of reviewing and documenting the
proposed transfer allocation, including but not limited to recording fees and expenses,
engineering fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses. Upon exhaustion of the deposit,
the Village shall require additional $2,500 deposits as needed;
______________________________________________________________________________
5-52-4 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
(3) If the Village Board of Trustees approves the application to transfer all or part of an
Allocation, the Village Administrator shall re-certify the Allocations for the transferor and
transferee properties;
(4) The Owners of the transferor and transferee properties shall provide the Village with a
written statement in a form which is acceptable to the Village’s Attorney agreeing to limit the
use of Palatine Water to the new Allocations for the respective properties;
(5) A memorandum of the new Allocations shall be recorded against the transferor or transferee
properties in the offices of the Lake County, Illinois Recorder of Deeds; and
(6) The change in the Allocations shall be memorialized as an amendment to Exhibit 9 of the
Palatine Agreement and such amendment shall be provided to Palatine in writing in
accordance with the terms of the Palatine Agreement.
(E) (1) Owners of lands within the Eligible Property, or any Occupant of such lands who has the
written authorization of the Owner, may apply to the Village Board of Trustees for an
Allocation from the water capacity which has been reserved and retained by the Village as set
forth in the Palatine Agreement. All such applications and transfers shall be administered in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Subsection (D) above, but shall not be certified by
the Village Administrator until the Allocation Fee, as provided for in Section 52.08 of this
chapter, has been paid in full.
(2) All applications for an Allocation from the water capacity reserved and retained by the
Village shall be approved, modified or denied by the Village Board of Trustees in
consideration of the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare, including but
not limited to the following factors:
(a) Whether the use or proposed use of the Subject Property complies with the Village’s
Zoning Code and Comprehensive Land Use Plan;
(b) Whether the proposed Allocation would unduly restrict the amount of allocable water
capacity remaining and available for other lands within the Eligible Property which
have development or redevelopment potential;
(c) Whether the proposed Allocation is reasonable for the proposed use of the Subject
Property and whether the use will incorporate reasonable water conservation
techniques;
(d) Whether sufficient allocable water capacity exists to accommodate sufficiently the
proposed use of the Subject Property;
(e) Whether there are practical or engineering difficulties with extending the water
distribution system to the Subject Property;
(f) Whether the applicant is financially capable of complying with the requirements of
Section 52.08 of this chapter for payment of the fair share of the expense of bringing
water from Palatine to the Eligible Property;
(g) Whether the applicant is willing to accept an Allocation that includes an Excess Rate
Allocation;
______________________________________________________________________________
5-52-5 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
(h) Whether the proposed use would be lawful and in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, laws and regulations;
(i) Whether the proposed use is economically feasible;
(j) The likely date of commencement of occupancy of the Subject Property in comparison
with other uses or developments proposed for other lands within the Eligible Property;
(k) The priority in time of the application as compared to applications for other lands
within the Eligible Property;
(1) Whether the Village already has made an Allocation to the Subject Property and, if so,
the applicant’s record of conservation of water and of limiting water usage to the
amount of said Allocation;
(m) The benefits to the Village which will result from the proposed use of the Subject
Property; and
(n) Whether, if applicable, Palatine has approved or will approve additional capacity to
meet the needs of the proposed use of the Subject Property.
(F) The Village may condition building permits, occupancy permits, or business licenses upon the
compliance with the water usage limits of the Allocation applicable to a Subject Property.
Whenever the consumption of Palatine Water exceeds the Allocation for a Subject Property in a
billing cycle, upon request by the Village, the Occupant shall meet with the Village Engineer and
such other persons as the Village may designate, at such time and place specified by the Village, to
investigate the cause for the overage and to devise and implement such water conservation
measures as deemed reasonably necessary by the Village Engineer to eliminate the overage. If the
Occupant or any successor Occupant continues to consume more water than allocated to the Subject
Property for any billing cycle commencing after the aforesaid meeting, such Occupant shall be in
violation of this Section and shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per
day for each violation. Each day in a billing cycle shall be a separate violation during any billing
cycle in which the Allocation is exceeded by more than five percent (5%). In addition, the Village
may (1) seek injunctive relief mandating the Occupant’s compliance with the Allocation and (2)
conduct a hearing by the Village Board of Trustees and, if supported by evidence, revoke the
certificate of occupancy for all or part of the Subject Property or take other remedial measures,
upon a determination that the Occupant is unwilling or incapable of complying with the Allocation.
Nothing in this Subsection (F) is intended to apply to the use of Excess Rate water within the limits
of a Subject Property’s Excess Rate Allocation.
§52.08 WATER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT SURCHARGE/ALLOCATION FEE.
(A) A water system development surcharge (“Allocation Fee”) is hereby established to help
defray the costs of necessary construction and agreements to convey water from Palatine to the
Eligible Property. The Allocation Fee shall be in addition to all other fees and charges required
under this chapter or required by Palatine. Except for lands owned by governmental entities,
including but not limited to the Village, all lands within the Eligible Property which are not, as of
the date of application for an Allocation, contributing to said costs through inclusion in any of
Special Service Areas No.’s 2, 3 or 4 established by the Village, shall pay an Allocation Fee as a
condition of the Village’s approval of an Allocation. A Subject Property contributing to said costs
through inclusion in any of said Special Service Areas also shall be subject to such fee only to the
______________________________________________________________________________
5-52-6 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
extent of its receipt of an Allocation in excess of the Allocation amounts applicable to the Subject
Property as set forth in the Palatine Agreement as of August 9, 1999. Payment of the Allocation Fee
shall be a prerequisite to the effectiveness of any Allocation. The Village Administrator shall not
certify the amount of any Allocation for the Subject Property or any amendment thereof prior to
payment of the Allocation Fee.
(B) The Allocation Fee shall be calculated by the Village Administrator and shall be based on the
gallons per day allocated to a Subject Property expressed as a percentage of the maximum gallons
per day which Palatine has agreed to make available to the Eligible Property pursuant to the
Palatine Agreement, without regard to whether such gallons are Standard Rate gallons or Excess
Rate gallons. The initial maximum gallons per day which Palatine has agreed to provide is 320,000,
subject to any amendment or further agreement. The percentage shall be applied to the total
expenses incurred by the Village in securing the improvements and agreements necessary to convey
water from Palatine to and through the Eligible Property (“Village’s Water Expenses”) as well as to
all interest charges applicable to such costs as of the date of payment of the Allocation Fee. The
interest costs shall be determined in accordance with the actual interest costs applicable to the
bonds issued for Special Service Areas No.’s 2, 3 and 4, prorated as to the amount of the Village’s
Water Expenses as a fraction of the total principal amounts of the bonds.
(C) An applicant for an Allocation shall make a written request to the Village Administrator for the
calculation of the Allocation Fee as of a date certain, but not later than ten (10) working days prior
to said date certain. The Allocation Fee calculated by the Village Administrator shall be valid only
with respect to the date specified in the request by the applicant. Any Allocation Fee not timely
paid will be subject to recalculation.
(D) In the event the costs for determining the Allocation Fee have not been fully determined and
liquidated as of the date of application for an Allocation or a request for an Allocation Fee
calculation. then the Village Administrator shall assess and collect a fee deposit from the applicant
in an amount sufficient to cover an estimated Allocation Fee. If the final Allocation Fee is in excess
of the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall pay the difference within seven (7) days of request
by the Village. If the final Allocation Fee is less than the amount of the deposit, the Village shall
refund the excess amount to the party which paid the fee, unless otherwise directed in writing by
said party.
(E) Upon receipt of the full amount of the Allocation Fee or fee deposit from the applicant, providing
all other requirements for an Allocation have been met and satisfied as set forth in Section 52.07 of
this chapter, the Village Administrator shall make a certification in writing to the Village of
Palatine specifying the Allocation made by the Village for the Subject Property.
(F) All Allocation Fees collected by the Village Administrator shall be used and disbursed solely in the
manner set forth and required in Village Ordinance No.’s 99-31, 99-32 and 99-33 authorizing the
issuance and sale of bonds for Special Service Areas No.’s 2, 3 and 4 respectively, as well as any
subsequent ordinances authorizing the issuance of additional bonds for said Special Service Areas.
(G) Prior to certifying an Allocation, the Village Administrator shall collect from the applicant, or shall
obtain a deposit from the applicant, an amount sufficient to reimburse the Village for all costs
actually incurred by the Village for reviewing and processing the Allocation application, including
engineering expense, legal expense and recording fees.
(Ord. 00-3, passed 2-21-00)
______________________________________________________________________________
5-52-7 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 53: RECYCLING
Section
§53.01 Purpose and Intent
§53.02 Definitions
§53.03 Regulated Development
§53.04 Building Plan, Site Plan and Recycling System Plan Review
§53.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable design standards and procedures for storage of
recyclables within: (i) all new developments; (ii) all subdivision applications; (iii) application for all
building permits for new buildings and alteration to buildings related to a change in use within the
corporate limits and external jurisdiction of Deer Park and further, to promote the public health, safety,
and welfare of the community. These regulations are further intended to:
A. Facilitate the mandate of the State of Illinois which requires Lake County to implement strategies
for the reduction, of at least 25% of the municipal Waste stream.
B. Protect the character and maintain the stability of the community and surrounding unincorporated
areas by requiring adequate space and means to collect and store recycled materials.
C. Facilitate the collection and storage of recyclables by providing private, on-site areas, facilities, and
programs which will encourage recycling within the residential, commercial, institutional and
industrial sectors that generate waste within the municipal jurisdiction.
D. Protect the public health and safety by requiring the submission of a recycling plan or site plan as
part of the building permit/plan review process thereby ensuring conformance and integration with
all other applicable codes and ordinances.
§53.02 DEFINITIONS.
Commercial Recycling Program: A recycling program which collects wastes which originate
from non-residential sources.
Cubic Yard: Unit of measure equivalent to 200 gallons.
Curbside Collection: A method of collecting source-separated recyclable materials from the curb
or alleyway.
Exterior Recyclable Storage Area: Final collection area for all recyclable materials. Exterior
Recyclable Storage Areas must be external to the occupied area of a building unit(s) but may exist
within the structural shell (i.e., loading docks, refuse rooms, etc.)
Internal Recovery System: The procedures and containers utilized to isolate and remove
recyclables from the occupied areas of a building.
Municipally Sponsored Recycling Programs: A recyclable collection program which is regulated
by contract or franchise and which defines levels and frequency of recyclable collection service to
be provided to the resident.
______________________________________________________________________________
5-53-1 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
Municipal Waste: Garbage, general household, institutional and commercial waste, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, landscape waste and construction demolition debris (as defined by the
IL Environmental Protection Act 415 ILCS 5/3.21).
Recyclable Materials (Recyclables): Waste materials that are collected, separated or processed,
and used as raw materials or products.
Recycling: The series of activities by which materials, that would otherwise remain wastes, are
collected, separated, or processed and used in the form of raw materials.
Recycling Program: Any program focused on the recovery of materials for use as raw material.
Includes materials captured prior to entering the waste-stream or recovered from the waste-stream.
Recycling System: A system which addresses the needs created by the act of Recycling. System
components include, but may not be limited to, Recyclable Materials storage containers at the point
of generation; equipment and labor for preparing Recyclable , Materials for collection; and,
equipment and labor for transport of Recyclable Materials to Exterior Recyclable Storage Area(s).
Space Allocation: The area required to store or hold recyclable materials prior to final collection.
Space Planning: The act of identifying components of a Recycling System and the specific
requirements of each system element.
System Plan: Detailed abstract of the individual components of a Recycling System.
§53.03 REGULATED DEVELOPMENT.
All applications for building permits and development permits of any kind for all new construction and
construction related to a change in use of a structure must be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any documents or plans required under the provisions of this chapter must be submitted at the
time of building permit application or application for subdivision approval whichever would occur first.
A. Residential Development Serviced by Municipally Sponsored Recycling Program
1. Single Family Detached Dwelling. A minimum of three (3) cubic feet shall be allocated
(reserved) for an Internal Recovery System. This area must be located so as to facilitate
storage of Recyclable Materials within the structure and facilitate ease of removal to an
external collection point.
2. Multi-family Buildings. A minimum of three (3) cubic feet shall be allocated (reserved), per
dwelling unit for an Internal Recovery System. This area must be located so as to facilitate
storage of Recyclable Materials within the structure and facilitate ease of removal to external
collection point.
B. Development with no Municipally Sponsored Recycling Program
1. Single Family Detached Dwellings-Subdivisions. A minimum of three (3) cubic feet shall be
allocated (reserved) for an Internal Recovery System. This area must be located so as to
facilitate storage of Recyclable Materials within the structure and facilitate ease of removal to
external collection point.
______________________________________________________________________________
5-53-2 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
2. Developments Comprised of Single Family Attached Dwelling Units. A minimum of three
(3) cubic feet shall be allocated (reserved), per dwelling unit, for an Internal Recovery
System. This area must be located so as to facilitate storage of Recyclable Materials within
the structure and facilitate ease of removal to external collection point.
3. Multi-family Buildings
(a) Interior Space Allocation. A minimum of three (3) cubic feet shall be allocated
(reserved), per dwelling unit, for an Internal Recovery System. This area must be
located so as to facilitate storage of Recyclable Materials within the structure and
facilitate ease of removal to the Exterior Recyclable Storage Area.
(b) Exterior Recyclable Storage Area Allocation. The amount of Exterior Recyclable
Storage Area allocated per dwelling shall be determined as follows and shall not be less
than the sum of the individual computations.
Number of studio and one bedroom units x 7 gallons +
Number of two bedroom units x 8 gallons +
Number of three and four bedroom units x 9 gallons =
Total Exterior Recyclable Storage Area allocation required.
(c) Recycling System Plan. A comprehensive Recycling System plan shall be required
which includes provisions for an Exterior Recyclable Storage Area and a collection
system for Recyclable Materials generated by the building(s) occupants.
4. Developments Comprised of a Mix of Residential Building Types
(a) Interior Space Allocation. Interior space allocation shall be provided for each building
and unit in accordance with requirements set out in Sections 53.03(B)(1), 53.03(B)(2),
and 53.03(B)(3)(a).
(b) Exterior Recyclable Storage Area Allocation. Exterior Recyclable Storage Area shall
be provided for any multi-family buildings in accordance with the requirements in
Section 53.03(B)(3)(a).
(c) Recycling System Plan. A comprehensive Recycling System plan shall be required
which includes provisions for an Exterior Recyclable Storage Area which will service
the entire development
5. Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional Uses
(a) Interior Space Allocation. The amount of interior space necessary to comply with the
requirements of this chapter is dependent on the generation of Recyclable Materials
resultant from activities associated with Commercial Recycling Programs.
Management options shall be addressed in a System Plan per Section 53.04(C).
______________________________________________________________________________
5-53-3 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
(b) Exterior Recyclable Storage Area Allocation. The amount of Exterior Recyclable
Storage Area necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter is dependant on
the volume generation of Recyclable Materials derived from Commercial Recycling
Programs. Exterior Recyclable Storage Area options in shall be addressed in a
Recyclable System plan per Section 54.03(B) and (C).
§53.04 BUILDING PLAN, SITE PLAN AND RECYCLING SYSTEM PLAN REVIEW
A. Building Permit Review
1. Single Family Detached and Attached Dwelling Units
All building plans for new single family dwelling units must identify the recycling storage
area provided inside the building per Section 53.03.
2. Multi-family Buildings
All building plans for new multi-family buildings must identify the recycling storage areas
provided inside of the individual units and the building recyclable material collection and
storage areas per Section 53.03.
3. Developments Comprised of a Mix of Residential Building Types
All building plans for buildings containing the above uses shall, identify the Recyclable
Materials storage areas being provided as required for the specific building type per Section
53.03.
4. Commercial, Industrial and Institutional Uses.
All building plans for buildings containing the above uses shall identify all areas associated
with recycling storage, sorting operations, individual work stations, and any other phases of
the recycling activities planned for the building.
B. Site Plan Review. A site plan shall be required for those uses listed in Section 53 .03 for which
Exterior Storage Areas are required. The site plan must indicate the location and dimensions of the
storage area being provided. The site plan must also indicate how the storage area(s) will be
accessed.
C. Recycling System Plan. When a Recycling System Plan is required, said plan shall contain the
following elements unless specific items are inappropriate or otherwise not applicable to the use
proposed. A statement to that effect should be included in the plan.
1. System Plan Description
(a) Identification of materials to be recycled.
(b) Method of transport from work station to final collection area.
(c) Collection frequency of recycling service provider.
(d) Information policy for occupants.
______________________________________________________________________________
5-53-4 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
(e) Point of contact/project coordinator.
(f) Location and design of collection areas.
2. Space Allocation Description
(a) Provide an estimate of the amounts of materials that will be generated.
(b) Calculate the necessary storage area to be allocated for each designated material.
3. Space Planning
(a) Scaled drawings of the interior plan of the building identifying:
(1) Space requirements at work stations.
(2) Temporary internal Recyclable Material storage area(s) as applicable.
(b) Scaled drawings of the Exterior Site Plan identifying:
(1) Location and size of Exterior Recyclable Storage Area.
(2) Screening of the Exterior Recyclable Storage Area.
(3) Access path to service the Exterior Recyclable Storage Area.
(Ord. 04-33, passed 10-21-04)
______________________________________________________________________________
5-53-5 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 54: VILLAGE ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
Section:
§54.01 Definitions
§54.02 Aggregation of Electrical Load
§54.03 Opt-Out Program
§54.04 Adoption of Plan of Operation and Governance for the Electricity
Aggregation Program
§54.05 Solicitation of Bids
§54.01: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
“Act” shall mean the Illinois Power Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3855/1-92, as may be amended from
time to time.
“Customer” shall mean recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads as
provided in the Act.
“Electricity Aggregation Program” shall mean a program pursuant to the Act for the
aggregation of residential and small commercial retail electric loads located within the
corporate limits of the Village that provides customers with the opportunity to opt out of
participating in that program as provided in the Act.
§54.02: AGGREGATION OF ELECTRICAL LOAD
(A) The Corporate Authorities of the Village are authorized to operate an Electricity Aggregation
Program pursuant to the Act and for that purpose may solicit bids and enter into service
agreements to facilitate the sale and purchase of electricity and related services and equipment
for those loads aggregated pursuant to the Electricity Aggregation Program as provided in the
Act.
(B) The Corporate Authorities of the Village may exercise the authority to operate the Electricity
Aggregation Program jointly with any other municipality or county and, in combination with
two or more municipalities or counties, may initiate a process to jointly authorize the Electricity
Aggregation Program by a majority vote of each particular municipality or county as required
by the Act.
§54.03: OPT-OUT PROGRAM
(A) The Electricity Aggregation Program shall operate as an opt-out program whereby Customers
who do not wish to participate in the Electricity Aggregation Program may opt out pursuant to
the Act.
(B) The Village President, or his designee, on behalf of the Village, shall fully inform residential
customers and small commercial retail customers of the Village in advance, as provided in the
Act, that Customers have the right to opt-out of the Village Electricity Aggregation Program.
The disclosure provided to the Customers shall comply with the requirements of the Act and
______________________________________________________________________________
5-54-1 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
shall prominently state all charges for electricity service to be made and shall include full
disclosure of the cost to obtain service pursuant to Section 16-103 of the Public Utilities Act (220
ILCS 5/1-101, et seq.), how to access service, and the fact that service under Section 16-103 of
the Public Utilities Act is available to Customers without penalty if they are currently receiving
service under Section 16-103 of the Public Utilities Act.
(C) Upon notification from any Customer that the Customer wishes to opt out of the Electricity
Aggregation Program, that Customer shall be excluded from the Electricity Aggregation
Program.
(D) Except for those Customers who opt out of the Electricity Aggregation Program pursuant to this
Section 5-54-3 and the Act, the Electricity Aggregation Program shall automatically apply for
each person owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to be
aggregated in the corporate limits of the Village.
§54.04: ADOPTION OF PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE FOR THE
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
(A) The Corporate Authorities of the Village, with the assistance from the Illinois Power Agency as
required pursuant to the Act, shall develop and approve a Plan of Operation and Governance for the
Electricity Aggregation Program.
(B) Before adopting the Plan of Operation and Governance required under this Section and the Act, the
Corporate Authorities shall hold at least two public hearings on the proposed Plan. Before the first
public hearing, the Corporate Authorities shall publish notice of the hearings once a week for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. The notice shall summarize
the Plan of Operation and Governance and state the date, time, and location of each hearing.
(C) The plan of operation and governance for the Village’s Electricity Aggregation Program shall:
(1) Provide for universal access to all applicable residential Customers and equitable treatment of
applicable residential Customers,
(2) Describe demand management and energy efficiency services to be provided to each class of
Customers, and
(3) Meet any requirements established by law concerning aggregated service offered pursuant to
the Act.
§54.05: SOLICITATION OF BIDS
The process for soliciting bids for electricity and other related services and awarding proposed
agreements for the purchase of electricity and other related services for the Electricity Aggregation
Program shall be conducted pursuant to the Act.”
(Ord. 2012-10, Passed 04/16/12)
______________________________________________________________________________
5-54-2 Title V
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 70: ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE
Section
§70.01 Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code
§70.01 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
Pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-204, the Village hereby adopts in entirety the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as amended, (“Illinois Vehicle Code”) and
the same is hereby adopted as ordinance provisions of the Village. Any violation of said provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code shall hereinafter be considered a violation of this Chapter, and each such violation
shall subject the violator, upon conviction, to the same penalty as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. passed 8-24-98)
______________________________________________________________________________
7-70-1 Title VII
(Rev. 05/12)
7-71-1 Title VII
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
§71.01 Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
§71.02 Stopping, Standing, or Parking Outside Business or Residence District
§71.03 Unauthorized Use of Parking Spaces Reserved for Handicapped
§71.80 Officers Authorized to Remove Vehicles
§71.90 Duty of Lessor of Vehicle
§71.99 Penalty
RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§71.01 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
(A) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or
the directions of a police officer, or an official traffic-control device, no person shall:
(1) Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
(a) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
(b) On a sidewalk;
(c) Within an intersection;
(d) On a crosswalk;
(e) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated
by signs or markings;
(f) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing,
or parking would obstruct traffic;
(g) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway, or within a highway
tunnel;
(h) On any railroad tracks;
(i) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(j) On any controlled-access highway;
(k) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers.
(2) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge
passengers:
(a) In front of a public or private driveway;
(b) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(c) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(d) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-
control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(e) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance (when properly
sign-posted);
(f) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(3) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and
7-71-2 Title VII
(Rev. 3/15)
while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers:
(a) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(b) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(B) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area or
away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-1303) Penalty, see §71.99
§71.02 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
(A) Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle,
whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park, or so
leave the vehicle off the roadway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway
opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view
of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the
highway.
(B) The Village, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the maintenance of which
it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles on any highway where in its opinion stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to
those using the highway, or where stopping, standing, or parking vehicles would unduly interfere
with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any regulations adopted by the Village regarding
the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles upon any specific street, streets, or highways become
effective at the time of the erection of appropriate signs indicating the regulations.
(C) This Section, and §71.01 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-1304 shall not apply to the driver of
any vehicle which is disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such position.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-1301) Penalty, see §71.99
§71.03 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED.
(A) It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates or decals
issued to a handicapped person, as defined pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§3-616 or 11-
1301.2, or to a disabled veteran, as defined pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §3-609, as evidence
that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, in
any parking place, including any private or public off-street parking facility, specifically reserved,
by the posting of an official sign as designated under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-301, for
motor vehicles bearing such registration plates.
(B) Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private off-street parking facility
may, after notifying the Lake County Sheriff’s Office, remove or cause to be removed to the
nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for
use by the handicapped which does not display handicapped registration plates or a special decal
or device as required under this Section.
(C) Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, any person found guilty of violating
7-71-3 Title VII
(Rev. 3/15)
the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $250.00, and settlement by prepayment
of this same amount shall be permitted. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-1301.3)
§71.80 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter of the
Municipal Code, or any other applicable section of the Illinois Vehicle Code or ordinance of the Village,
the officer is authorized to move the vehicle, relocate the vehicle to a place of safety, or require the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position of safety.
§71.90 DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE.
Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who leases such vehicle to others,
after receiving written notice of a violation of this chapter involving such vehicle, shall upon request
provide such police officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having jurisdiction thereof,
with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of such offense and the
identifying number upon the registration plates and registration sticker or stickers of such vehicle. (ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-1305)
§71.99 PENALTY.
Any person accused of a violation of any provision of this traffic code prohibiting parking a vehicle in a
designated area may settle and compromise the Village’s cause of action (i.e., claim) against him or her
for such illegal parking by paying to the Village $30.00 per offense if paid within 15 days after the date
the citation is issued by the Lake County Sheriff’s Office and shall be responsible for the costs of prosecution,
including but not limited to the Village’s and County’s attorney fees, court costs and other costs
and expenses incurred related thereto, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. Upon receipt by the
Village of the payment, members of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office are hereby authorized to refrain
from instituting prosecution of the alleged offense(s) involved. An offense not so settled by prepayment
within the time specified shall be subject to the minimum fines as set forth in Section 10.99 of this Code.
(Ord. 00-37 passed 10/16/00; Am. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15, 12-06 passed 3/19/12)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL VII-Chapt 71-Parking Regs-3-15.docx
CHAPTER 72: PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCIES
Section
§72.01 Snow Emergency Route
§72.02 Parking Prohibited
§72.03 Removal of Vehicles Authorized
§72.01 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE.
The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any rural, arterial or collector street during a
snowfall of two (2) inches or more of accumulation.
§72.02 PARKING PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on a Snow Emergency Route in the Village
within 24 hours of a snowfall of two (2) inches or more of accumulation.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in such a manner as to impede snow or ice
clearing efforts by the Village of Deer Park or its authorized agents.
§72.03 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.
Any vehicle parked on a Snow Emergency Route when parking is prohibited by Section 72.02 above
may, at the order of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office, be removed to a storage facility previously
designated by the Lake County Sheriff’s Office. Said removal shall be at the sole cost and expense of the
owner of the vehicle.
(Ord. 00-45, passed 12-18-00)
(Amd. Ord. 2012-06, passed 03/19/12)
______________________________________________________________________________
7-72-1 Title VII
(Rev. 5/12)
CHAPTER 73: PERMITTED STREET TRAFFIC
Section
73.01 Prohibition of Unlicensed Vehicles
73.99 Penalty
§ 73.01 PROHIBITION OF UNLICENSED VEHICLES.
There shall be no unlicensed motorcycles, mini-bikes, all-terrain vehicles (“ATV’S”), motor driven
scooters, go-karts, snowmobiles or similar off-road motorized vehicles on public streets and rights of way
in the Village.
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
Penalty, see §10.99
(Ord. 01-41, passed 10-15-01)
______________________________________________________________________________
7-73-1 Title VII
(Rev. 05/12)
9-90-1 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
Section:
§90.01 Abandonment of Vehicles Prohibited
§90.02 Authority to Impound; Procedure
§90.03 Notice to be Given to Registered Owner, State Police
§90.04 Reclaiming of Vehicle by Owner
§90.05 Disposal of Unclaimed Vehicle
§90.06 Police Department to Keep Records of Reclamation or Disposal of Vehicle
§90.07 Disposition of Proceeds of Sale
§90.08 Liability
§90.09 Vehicle Abandoned in Public Garage or Parking Area; Operator to Notify Police
§90.10 Inoperable Vehicles
§90.11 Removal, Hearing, Disposition of Vehicle
§90.99 Penalty
§90.01 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
(A) The abandonment of a vehicle as described in division (B) of this section or in §90.03, or any
part thereof, on any highway in this village is unlawful.
(B) The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, other than
a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in this village is unlawful except on property
of the owner or bailee of the abandoned vehicle. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on
private property shall be authorized for removal by the Police Department, Building Inspector,
or other Village Official after a waiting period of seven days or more.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-201) Penalty, see §90.99
§90.02 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND; PROCEDURE.
(A) When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on that part of a toll highway, interstate highway,
or expressway within the village for two hours or more, its removal by a towing service
may be authorized by the Police department, Building Inspector, or other Village Official.
(B) When a vehicle is abandoned on a highway in an urban district for ten hours or more, its removal
by a towing service may be authorized by the Police Department, Building Inspector,
or other Village Official.
(C) When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway other than a toll highway, interstate
highway, or expressway, outside of an urban district for 24 hours or more, its removal by a
towing service may be authorized by the Police Department, Building Inspector, or other Village
Official.
(D) When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially dismantled vehicle is creating
a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is
causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent
to the highway by a towing service may be authorized by the Police Department, Building
Inspector, or other Village Official.
(E) Except as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§18a-100 et seq., the owner or lessor of privately
owned real property within this village, or any person authorized by such owner or lessor,
9-90-2 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
or the police department in the case of publicly owned real property may cause any motor vehicle
abandoned or left unattended upon such property without permission to be removed by a towing
service without liability for the costs of removal, transportation, or storage or damage
caused by such removal, transportation, or storage. The towing or removal of any vehicle from
private property without the consent of the registered owner or other legally authorized person in
control of the vehicle is subject to compliance with the following conditions and restrictions:
(1) Any towed or removed vehicle must be stored at the site of the towing service’s
place of business. The site must be open during business hours, and for the purpose of
redemption of vehicles, during the time that the person or firm towing such vehicle
is open for towing purposes.
(2) The towing service shall within 30 minutes of completion of such towing or removal,
notify the police department of such towing or removal, and the make, model, color,
and license plate number of the vehicle, and shall obtain and record the name of the person
at the police department.
(3) If the registered owner or legally authorized person entitled to possession of the vehicle
shall arrive at the scene prior to actual removal or towing of the vehicle, the vehicle
shall be disconnected from the tow truck and that person shall be allowed to remove
the vehicle without interference, upon the payment of a reasonable service fee of not
more than one-half the posted rate of the towing service as provided in division (6) below,
for which a receipt shall be given.
(4) The rebate or payment of money or any other valuable consideration from the towing
service or its owners, managers, or employees to the owners or operators of the premises
from which the vehicles are towed or removed, for the privilege of removing or towing
those vehicles, is prohibited.
(5) Except for property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a single-family residence,
and except for instances where notice is personally given to the owner or other legally
authorized person in control of the vehicle that the area in which that vehicle is parked
is reserved or otherwise unavailable to unauthorized vehicles and they are subject to being
removed at the owner or operator’s expense, any property owner or lessor, prior to
towing or removing any vehicle from private property without the consent of the owner
or other legally authorized person in control of that vehicle, must post a notice meeting
the following requirements:
(a) The notice must be prominently placed at each driveway access or curb cut allowing
vehicular access to the property within five feet from the public rightof-
way line. If there are no curbs or access barriers, the sign must be posted not
less than one sign each 100 feet of lot frontage.
(b) The notice must indicate clearly, in not less than two-inch high light-reflective
letters on a contrasting background, that unauthorized vehicles will be towed
away at the owner’s expense.
(c) The notice must also provide the name and current telephone number of the
towing service towing or removing the vehicle.
(d) The sign structure containing the required notices must be permanently installed
with the bottom of the sign not less than four feet above ground level,
9-90-3 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
and must be continuously maintained on the property for not less than 24 hours
prior to the towing or removing of any vehicle.
(6) Any towing service that tows or removes vehicles and proposes to require the owner, operator,
or person in control of the vehicle to pay the costs of towing and storage prior
to redemption of the vehicle must file and keep on record with the police department a
complete copy of the current rates to be charged for such services, and post at the
storage site an identical rate schedule and any written contracts with property owners,
lessors, or persons in control of property which authorize them to remove vehicles as provided
in this section.
(7) No person shall engage in the removal of vehicles from private property as described in
this section without filing a notice of intent in the village, and such notice shall be filed
at least seven days before commencing such towing.
(8) No removal of a vehicle from private property shall be done except upon express
written instructions of the owners or persons in charge of the private property upon which
the vehicle is said to be trespassing.
(9) Vehicle entry for the purpose of removal shall be allowed with reasonable care on the
part of the person or firm towing the vehicle. Such person or firm shall be liable for
any damages occasioned to the vehicle if such entry is not in accordance with the standards
of reasonable care.
(10) When a vehicle has been towed or removed pursuant to this section, it must be released
to its owner or custodian within one-half hour after requested, if such request is
made during business hours. Any vehicle owner or custodian or agent shall have the
right to inspect the vehicle before accepting its return, and no release or waiver of any
kind which would release the towing service from liability for damages incurred during
the towing and storage may be required from any vehicle owner or other legally authorized
person as a condition of release of the vehicle. A detailed, signed receipt showing
the legal name of the towing service must be given to the person paying towing or
storage charges at the time of payment, whether requested or not.
(a) This section shall not apply to law enforcement, firefighting, rescue, ambulance,
or other emergency vehicles which are marked as such or to property
owned by any governmental entity.
(b) When an authorized person improperly c a u s e s a vehicle to be removed, the
person shall be liable to the owner or lessee of the vehicle for the cost of removal,
transportation, and storage, damages resulting from the removal, transportation,
storage fees, attorney’s fee, and court costs.
(c) Any towing or storage charges accrued shall be payable by the use of any major
credit card, in addition to being payable in cash.
(11) Towing companies shall also provide insurance coverage for areas where vehicles
towed under the provisions of this chapter will be impounded or otherwise stored, and
shall adequately cover loss by fire, theft, or other risks. Any person or company who violates
this requirement shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(F) When a vehicle is determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle pursuant to ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, §11-40-3.1, its removal and impoundment by a towing service may be authorized
9-90-4 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
by the police department.
(G) When a vehicle is removed as set forth herein, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for
all towing and storage charges. Vehicles may become subject to a lien as set forth in ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, §4-203(g) for unpaid charges. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-203)
(H) When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle comes into the temporary possession
or custody of a person in this village not the owner of the vehicle, that person shall immediately
notify the police department. Upon receipt of such notification, the police will authorize a towing
service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle.
The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, and maintain a record
of the tow as set forth in division (I) below until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or other
person legally entitled to possession thereof or until it is disposed of as provided in this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-202)
(I) When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain
a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade
name, manufacturer’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year
and number, and registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record
shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for
towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-204)
Statutory reference: Impoundment of vehicle driven by person arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs or the
like, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-203(e).
§90.03 NOTICE TO BE GIVEN TO REGISTERED OWNER, STATE POLICE.
(A) When the police department authorizing the impounding of a vehicle does not know the identity
of the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally-entitled person, it will cause the vehicle
registration records of the state to be searched by the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining
the required ownership information.
(1) The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the state police
to be searched by a directed communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information
on the vehicle. When the state police files are searched with negative results,
the information contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files
will be searched by the state police. The information determined from these record
searches will be returned to the police department for use in sending notice by certified
mail to the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally-entitled person advising where
the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made, and setting forth public sale information.
(2) Notification shall be sent no later than ten days after the date the police department impounds
or authorizes the impounding of a vehicle, provided that if the police department
is unable to determine the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other person
legally-entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle within a ten-day period after impoundment,
then notification shall be sent no later than two days after the date the identity
of the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to ownership of
the impounded vehicle is determined. Exceptions to a notification by certified mail to
the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally-entitled persons are as set forth in
§90.05(B). (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-205)
(B) When the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to the possession of a vehi9-
90-5 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
cle cannot be identified from the registration files of this state or other state, if applicable, the
police department shall notify the state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the
state police will be immediately forwarded to the police department for notification purposes
as set forth in division (A) above. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-206)
§90.04 RECLAIMING OF VEHICLE BY OWNER.
Any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided in §90.05(A), the owner,
lienholder, or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the
police department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall
be released to the owner, lienholder, or other person under this section until all towing and storage
charges have been paid. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-207)
§90.05 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
(A) Disposal of unclaimed vehicles with notice.
(1) When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle seven years of age or newer remains
unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to
its possession for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as required by
§90.03, the police department or towing service having possession of the vehicle shall
cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an automotive parts recycler,
rebuilder, or scrap processor under state law. Notice of the time and place of
the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale on
the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten days prior to the sale,
the police department where the vehicle is impounded, or the towing service where the
vehicle is impounded, shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder, and other persons known by the police
department or towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such
notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must
be taken by any legally-entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
(2) In those instances where the certified notification specified in §90.03 has been returned
by the postal authorities to the police department or towing service due to the addressee
having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records
of this state, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, §4-208)
(B) Disposal of unclaimed vehicles without notice.
(1) When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to
the possession of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven years of age or newer
cannot be determined by any means provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold
as provided in §90.05(A) without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.
(2) When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is impounded as specified
by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten days for the purpose
of determining the identity of the registered owner and lienholder; contacting the
registered owner and lienholder by the U.S. Mail, public service, or in person for a
determination of disposition; and for an examination of the state police stolen vehicle
9-90-6 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten-day period, without the
benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner or the
lienholder, the Police Department, Building Inspector, or other Village Official will
authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk.
(3) An exception to the above is provided for if in the opinion of the police officer processing
the vehicle, it has value of $200 or more and can be restored to safe operating condition.
In this event, the police department may authorize its purchase as salvage and the Secretary
of State may issue a salvage certificate.
(4) A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be sold to a person desiring
to restore it. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-209)
(C) Titling vehicles after public sale; removal of liens. When an applicant for a certificate of title under
this chapter presents to the Secretary of State proof that he has purchased or acquired a vehicle
at a public sale as authorized by this chapter and such fact is certified to by the police department
of this village, the Secretary of State shall issue a certificate of title for the vehicle upon
receipt of the statutory fee and a properly executed application for a certificate of title. The title
issued by the Secretary of State under this division shall be free of any lien that existed
against the vehicle prior to the time the vehicle was acquired by the applicant under this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4- 212)
§90.06 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO KEEP RECORDS OF RECLAMATION OR DISPOSAL OF
VEHICLE.
When a vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder,
or other legally-entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police department for a
period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-210)
§90.07 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
When a vehicle located within the Village is authorized to be towed away by the police department and
disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of
towing, storage, and processing charges shall be deposited in the Treasury of the Village. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, §4-211)
§90.08 LIABILITY.
A police officer or the police department, or the towing service owner, operator, or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former registered
owner, or his legal representative; lienholder; or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a
vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter. (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, §4-213)
§90.09 VEHICLE ABANDONED IN PUBLIC GARAGE OR PARKING AREA; OPERATOR TO
NOTIFY POLICE.
An operator of a place of business for garaging, repairing, parking, or storing vehicles for the public in
which a vehicle remains unclaimed after being left for the purpose of garaging, repairing, parking, or storage
for a period of 15 days shall, within five days after the expiration of that period, report the vehicle as
unclaimed to the village police department. This section does not apply to any vehicle removed to a
9-90-7 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
place of storage by the village police department in accordance with §§90.01 and 90.02. Failure to
comply with this section will result in the forfeiture of storage fees for that vehicle involved. (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, §4-107(c))
§90.10 INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
(A) Nuisance Declared: The storage or parking of inoperable motor vehicles on public or private
property is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. The location or presence
of any inoperable motor vehicle(s) on any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied
or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the Village shall be deemed a public nuisance;
and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such public nuisance by wrecking,
dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding his vehicle or vehicles on the property
of another or to suffer, permit or allow the same to be placed, located, maintained or to exist
upon his own real property or any premises leased or occupied by him; provided, that this
Chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner, where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property.
(B) Whenever the following terms are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this Section:
“Inoperable Motor Vehicle”: Any motor vehicle which is unlicensed for a period of at least seven
(7) days and/or from which, for a period of at least seven (7) consecutive days, the engine, wheels
or other parts have been removed; or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered,
damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. “Inoperable motor vehicle” shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily (i.e., for a period of less than seven (7) consecutive days) incapable of being driven
under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
§90.11 REMOVAL, HEARING, DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE.
(A) Notice to Remove:
1. Vehicle On Private Property: Whenever such public nuisance exists in the Village in violation
hereof, the Village and/or its agents shall give not less than ten (10) days’ notice to
the owner of the real property, the occupant or lessee, if any, of the premises whereon
such public nuisance exists to abate or remove the same, stating the nature of the
public nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated within ten (10)
days and, further, that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of
said ten (10) day period by the aggrieved person, such notice to be personally served or
to be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five (5) day return receipt requested
and by regular mail, to the owner, the occupant or the lessee of the private premises
whereupon such public nuisance exists. If notice by mail is returned undelivered by the
United States post office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be delayed for not
less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.
2. Vehicle On Public Property: Whenever such public nuisance exists in the Village in violation
hereof, the Village and/or its agents shall give not less than a ten (10) day notice,
stating the nature of the public nuisance on the public property or on a public right of
way, that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days and, further, that a request
for a hearing must be made before the expiration of said ten (10) day period, such notice
personally served or to be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five (5) day
return receipt requested, to the owner, the occupant or the lessee of the public premises
9-90-8 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
or to the owner, the occupant or the lessee of the premises adjacent to the public right
of way whereupon such public nuisance exists. If notice by mail is returned undelivered
by the United States post office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be delayed
for not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return, but no further notice
shall be required.
(B) Hearing Prior to Removal: A public hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as
a public nuisance will be held before a person designated by the Village President. When such
a hearing is requested by the owner, the occupant or the lessee of the public or private premises or
by the owner, the occupant or the lessee of the premises adjacent to the public right of way on
which said vehicle is located, within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance,
any resolution or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a
description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle,
if available at the site.
(C) If within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the Village and/or its agents to abate
the nuisance, as herein provided, the owner, the occupant or lessee of the premises shall
give his written permission to the Village for removal of the inoperable motor vehicle from the
premises, the removal shall be at the expense of said owner. The giving of such permission shall
be considered compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(D) Disposal of Inoperable Vehicles: If such public nuisance is not abated by the owner, occupant or
lessee after notice is given in accordance with this Chapter, official action shall be taken by
the Village to abate such nuisance at the expense of the owner, occupant and/or lessee. Inoperable
vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or demolishers
for processing as scrap or salvage.
(E) Authority to Enforce; Entry Powers: Any police officer serving the Village may enter upon private
property for the purposes specified in this Chapter to examine vehicles or parts thereof,
obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle
or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter, but this provision shall be interpreted
in a manner which is consistent with the requirements of the United States Constitution
and the Constitution of the State of Illinois.
(F) Effect of Provisions on Traffic Obstructions: Nothing in this Chapter shall affect statutes or
ordinances that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes
an obstruction to traffic.
§90.99 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter, or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00 per day
and not more than $750.00 per day and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including
but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 11-11 passed 6/20/11; Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL IX-Chapt 90-Abandoned Inoperable Veh-3-15.docx
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
§91.01 Definitions
§91.02 Keeping of Bees
§91.03 Cruelty to Animals Prohibited
§91.04 Livestock and Other Prohibited Animals
§91.05 Keeping Vicious, Dangerous and/or Prohibited Animals
§91.06 Exhibition of Dangerous Animals
§91.07 Killing of Dangerous Animals
§91.08 Reserved
§91.09 Indecent Exhibition of Animals
§91.10 Diseased Animals
§91.11 Dead Animals
§91.12 Number of Adult Animals Limited
Dogs, Cats, and Other Domestic Animals
§91.20 License Required; Fee
§91.21 Inoculation Against Rabies
§91.22 Animals in Park or Beach Areas
§91.23 Running-at-Large Prohibited
§91.24 Animal Wastes to be Disposed of by Owner
§91.25 Vicious Dogs, Cats, or Domestic Animals
§91.26 Procedure When Person is Bitten; Confinement and Observation Required
§91.27 Noisy Animals; Disturbing the Peace Prohibited
§91.28 Reserved
Administration and Enforcement
§91.40 Impoundment at County Health Department
§91.41 Enforcement Officials Exempt from Liability
§91.42 Protection of Public Health and Safety
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§91.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ADULT ANIMAL. An animal which is older than six (6) months of age.
ANIMAL. Any creature or species other than a human being.
AT LARGE. Any dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal off the premises of the owner and not under
the control by leash or other means of the owner or his authorized agent.
CAT. Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age, and description of the feline species.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-91-1 Title IX
(Rev. 04/13)
DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which, by its behavior, is likely to cause injury.
DOG. Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age, and description of the canine species.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age, and description which is
normally kept as a household pet.
LEASH. A strong cord, thong or chain, not more than sixteen feet (16’) in length.
LIVESTOCK. Any horse or other equine; any cattle or other bovine; any swine or other porcine; any
sheep, goats or other caprine; any alpacas, llamas, and other animals of the Camelidae family; any deer,
elk and other animals of the Cervidae family; and/or any chickens, roosters, turkeys, ducks, geese or other
poultry or fowl.
OWNER. Any person having a right of possession of an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or
who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied by him.
PERSON. Shall include OWNER as defined above and shall include any natural person, partnership,
trust, corporation or association. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the term PERSON as applied
to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to trusts or
corporations, shall mean the trustees or officers thereof.
PROHIBITED ANIMALS. Any animal other than those domestic animal(s) customarily kept as a
household pet.
§91.02 KEEPING OF BEES.
The keeping of hives or swarms of bees is prohibited on lots of less than five acres. However, if any bees
appear to be or are reported to be a nuisance, such case shall be investigated by the Village’s Building
Inspector, and if the Village’s Building Inspector determines that such a nuisance exists or is being
created, the Village shall give written notice to the owner or keeper of such swarms or hives of bees to
remove the swarms or hives of bees within ten (10) days from receipt of said notice or sooner if required.
§91.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall be cruel to any animal in any of the following ways:
(1) By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating, or
cruelly killing any animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done;
(2) By cruelly working any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or causing, or knowingly
allowing the same to be done;
(3) By unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge or custody, as owner or otherwise,
with proper food, drink and shelter;
(4) By abandoning any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal or by abandoning any animal
on any highway or public way or in any other place where it may suffer injury, hunger or
exposure or become a public charge; or
(5) By carrying or driving, causing to be carried or driven or kept, any animal in an unnecessary
manner.
(B) No animal may be slaughtered out of doors on any residential lot.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-91-2 Title IX
(Rev. 04/13)
§91.04 LIVESTOCK AND OTHER PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
(A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter to the contrary, no person, family, or owner or
occupant of property in the Village shall keep, harbor, maintain, or allow: (1) any animal defined
as a prohibited animal in § 91.01; or (2) any livestock as defined in §91.01.
(B) The provisions of this Section shall be effective and enforceable immediately, except that any
person, family, or owner or occupant of property located within the Village who is or was keeping,
harboring, maintaining, or allowing any livestock on property within the Village as of March 25,
2013, may continue to keep, harbor, maintain, or allow those specific livestock maintained on such
property as of March 25, 2013, but only subject to the following conditions:
(1) No such person, family, or owner or occupant of property within the Village shall keep,
harbor, maintain, or allow any rooster(s);
(2) No such person, family, or owner or occupant of property within the Village shall keep,
harbor, maintain, or allow more than the specific number and type of animals of livestock that
existed on the property as of the aforesaid date (i.e., March 25, 2013);
(3) No livestock shall, in any event, be permitted to run at large in the Village; and
(4) Any shelter(s), enclosure(s), or other structure(s) related to the housing and/or containing of
such livestock shall be constructed and maintained so as to fully comply with all applicable
provisions of this Municipal Code.
§91.05 KEEPING VICIOUS, DANGEROUS AND/OR PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
No person shall keep or suffer to be kept any dangerous animal or prohibited animal in the Village.
§91.06 EXHIBITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or parade any dangerous animal within the Village without
first obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk. Such permit shall be issued upon proper showing that the
demonstration will be entirely safe to the public and upon payment of a fee of $25 for each day or part of
a day such exhibition of animals shall continue.
§91.07 KILLING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
The members of the Police Department serving the Village or any other person may kill a dangerous
animal or any other animal when it is necessary for the protection of the public and/or property.
§91.08 RESERVED.
§91.09 INDECENT EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any animal in an indecent manner.
§91.10 DISEASED ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a diseased animal to allow such animal to be exposed in any manner
in any public place; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner
thereof, except under the supervision of the applicable county health department or under the supervision
of the Illinois Department of Agriculture.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-91-3 Title IX
(Rev. 04/13)
§91.11 DEAD ANIMALS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dead animal which he or she owned or had possession of
to remain within the Village more than 24 hours. No such animal shall be buried within the Village limits
unless it is a pet which is under 15 pounds in weight and is buried at least 24 inches deep.
§91.12 NUMBER OF ADULT ANIMALS LIMITED.
Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, no more than four (4) adult animals may be kept,
sheltered, boarded, trained, or bred on any lot or parcel in the Village unless approved by the Village
Board by a special use ordinance approved by the Board of Trustees, or except as otherwise provided by
this Code.
DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER DOMESTIC ANIMALS
§91.20 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
Every owner of a dog or cat shall comply with the licensing requirements of the County Health
Department.
§91.21 INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.
Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older, shall each year cause said dog or cat to be
inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and provide the dog or cat with a collar or harness
and attach thereto an official rabies vaccination tag which shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times.
However, if the vaccine used is one recognized by the Illinois Department of Agriculture, for a three-year
period of immunity and the dog or cat is over 12 months of age at the time of inoculation, the interval
between inoculation may be extended to three years.
§91.22 ANIMALS IN PARK OR BEACH AREAS.
No person shall bring or lead any dog in any park or bathing beach unless such dog is held and restrained
by a suitable cord, chain, or harness not more than sixteen feet (16’) long. No person shall bring or lead
any dog or other animal onto the premises of any bathing beach during the period beginning June 1 and
ending September 15, in each year.
§91.23 RUNNING-AT-LARGE PROHIBITED.
No person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog, cat, domestic animal, or other animal shall cause or permit
such dog, cat, or other domestic animal to run-at-large at any time during the year in any area in the
Village other than the private premises of the owner or keeper of such dog, cat, or other domestic animal.
All dogs, cats, domestic animals, or other animals kept within any area of the Village shall be confined by
means of a secure leash or chain, or confined within a fenced area in such a manner as to prevent the dog,
cat, domestic animal, or other animal from running-at-large. Any dog, cat, domestic animal, or other
animal found running-at-large in violation hereof, or that shall menace the public welfare is declared to be
a public nuisance and shall be apprehended and impounded in the manner provided in this Chapter.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-91-4 Title IX
(Rev. 04/13)
§91.24 ANIMAL WASTES TO BE DISPOSED OF BY OWNER.
All persons walking their dogs or other domestic animals on the public property of the Village or on any
private property not owned by the person walking the animal shall carry a receptacle necessary for the
placing of any droppings, to-wit: feces, while the animal is on the public or private property other than his
own. The owner of the animal shall place the droppings in the receptacle to be disposed of in a proper
garbage container or lavatory. Should any person walking a dog or other domestic animal be found
without the receptacle, it shall be the duty of the law enforcement officials of the Village to impound the
animal pursuant to §91.28, and a non-traffic ticket alleging the violation shall be issued to the person
walking the animal.
§91.25 VICIOUS DOGS, CATS, OR DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
No person shall own, keep or harbor a vicious or dangerous dog, cat or other domestic animal within the
Village, unless such person shall keep such dog, cat or other domestic animal safely and securely
confined so as to protect from injury any person who shall come upon the premises where such dog, cat or
other domestic animal is located. All persons maintaining premises upon which a vicious or dangerous
dog, cat or other domestic animal is confined, shall provide suitable and adequate warning of the presence
of such dog, cat or other domestic animal by appropriate signs of other means so as to advise all persons
lawfully entering upon such premises that a vicious or dangerous dog, cat or other domestic animal is
confined thereon.
§91.26 PROCEDURE WHEN PERSON IS BITTEN; CONFINEMENT AND OBSERVATION
REQUIRED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, cat, domestic animal, or other animal, when
notified by the Village, or its authorized agent, that such dog, cat, domestic animal, or other animal
has bitten any person, to sell or give away such dog, cat, domestic animal, or other animal or allow
such dog, cat, domestic animal, or other animal to be taken beyond the limits of the Village, except
for confinement with a licensed veterinarian. It shall be the duty of such owner or keeper, upon
receiving notice from the Village, or its authorized agent, of the circumstance aforesaid, to deliver
such dog, cat, domestic or other animal within 24 hours to a licensed veterinarian for examination,
confinement, and observation, at the expense of the owner. Where there is a failure to comply
within 24 hours with the order from the Village, or its authorized agent to have such dog, cat,
domestic or other animal examined, confined and observed as provided herein, the Village, or its
authorized agent, upon a showing of reasonable evidence that such dog, cat, domestic or other
animal has bitten a person, may seek a court order to have such dog, cat, domestic or other animal
confined and observed. Within 24 hours after the dog, cat, domestic or other animal is examined
and confined, the veterinarian shall report (as required by Section 12 of the Illinois Rabies Control
Act) to the Village, the owner’s name, address and the date of confinement, the breed, description,
age, and sex of the dog, cat, domestic or other animal. Such dog, cat, domestic or other animal shall
be confined for a period of ten days. At the termination of the period of confinement, the
veterinarian shall notify the Village in writing of the final disposition of the animal.
(B) If, however, the dog, cat, domestic or other animal is examined by a licensed veterinarian within 24
hours after notification by the Village and found to be free of signs of rabies and the Animal
Warden or the licensed veterinarian is presented evidence that such dog, cat, domestic or other
animal has been inoculated against rabies more than 30 days prior to the biting and less than one
year if a one-year immunity vaccine is used or less than three years if a three-year vaccine is used,
such dog, cat, domestic or other animal shall be confined in the house of its owner or in a manner
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-91-5 Title IX
(Rev. 04/13)
that will prohibit such dog, cat, domestic or other animal from escaping and from biting any person
or animal for the ten-day period, unless in the judgment of the Village or the licensed veterinarian,
circumstances are such that the dog, cat, domestic or other animal should be confined elsewhere. At
the end of the ten-day period, it shall be the duty of the owner to present the dog, cat, domestic or
other animal to a licensed veterinarian for examination. The licensed veterinarian shall then notify
the Village and the applicable health department, in writing, within 24 hours of the results of the
examination.
(C) If the dog, cat, domestic or other animal escapes from the house of its owner, or from such other
place of confinement provided by its owner, during the ten-day confinement period, or if the owner
fails to deliver the dog, cat, domestic or other animal to a licensed veterinarian for re-examination
within 24 hours of the completion of the ten-day confinement period, the owner is declared to be in
violation of this Section of this Chapter and is subject to the penalties provided in this Chapter. In
addition, the owner of an escaped dog, cat, domestic or other animal shall immediately apprehend it
and deliver it to a licensed veterinarian for confinement, at the owner’s expense, for the remainder
of the ten-day period.
(D) The owner of a dog, cat, domestic or other animal, four months of age or older, not currently
inoculated against rabies, as provided elsewhere in this Chapter, must have the dog inoculated
against rabies at the time of release from confinement.
§91.27 NOISY ANIMALS; DISTURBING THE PEACE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in his possession or harbor any dog, cat, domestic
animal or other animal which, by frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping or by other loud noise,
shall cause annoyance of any family or person, or shall disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or
place within the Village. Such annoyance of any family or person or the disturbance of the peace or quiet
of any neighborhood or place within the Village by any dog, cat, domestic or other animal is declared to
be a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit such a nuisance to exist.
§91.28 RESERVED.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§91.40 IMPOUNDMENT AT COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
(A) All dogs, cats, domestic animals, or other animals apprehended by persons charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this Chapter shall be impounded at the County Health Department
public pound facility or as otherwise determined by the Village Board.
(B) All charges by the County Health Department for animal services (or by such other facility
designated by the Village Board in its discretion) which can be identified with a specific Deer Park
resident shall be passed on and charged directly to such resident, who shall pay such charges to the
Village within 15 days of receiving an invoice therefor.
(C) Any resident who is charged for services shall have the right to contest such charge by appealing
the same to the Board of Trustees within 15 days of receipt of an invoice therefrom. In the event
the Board of Trustees determines the resident is personally responsible for the charges passed
through to the resident, the resident shall pay such charges promptly upon such determination by
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-91-6 Title IX
(Rev. 04/13)
the Board of Trustees. The decision by the Board of Trustees shall be final and binding upon the
resident.
§91.41 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS EXEMPT FROM LIABILITY.
Village officials and/or employees, law enforcement officers, and/or other person(s) authorized to enforce
the provisions of this Chapter shall not be held liable for the injury, death or disease which may occur to
any dog, cat or other domestic animal as a consequence of the enforcement of the provisions of the
Chapter.
§91.42 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to protect the public health and safety and, therefore, shall be
effective and enforceable immediately.
(Ord. 91-16, passed 6-25-91)
(Amd. Ord. 2012-06, passed 3-19-12)
(Amd. Ord. 2013-15, passed 3-25-13)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-91-7 Title IX
(Rev. 04/13)
9-92-1 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
§92.01 Explosives and Fireworks; Permit Requirements
§92.02 Starting or Maintaining Fires in Streets, Sidewalks or other Public Places Prohibited
Fire Prevention Code
§92.15 Adoption of Code by Reference
§92.16 Definition
§92.29 Purpose
§92.30 Definitions
§92.31 Permit Required
Alarm System Regulations
§92.32 False Alarms; Service Charge
§92.33 Existing Connections
§92.34 Exemption
§92.35 Service Charges for False Alarms
§92.36 Maintenance of Records
§92.37 Disconnection
§92.38 Disconnection Notice
§92.39 Reconnection Procedure
§92.40 Testing of Equipment
§92.41 Reservation of Rights
§92.42 Nondirect Alarm Provisions
§92.43 Avoidance of Prosecution
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§92.01 EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep, expose for sale, loan or give away any toy pistol,
toy gun, toy cannon, blank cartridge, or any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, bombs,
squibs, rockets, spin-wheels, fire balloons, Roman candles, detonating canes, or ammunition
therefor, or any substance or articles of any explosive nature designed or intended to be used
as fireworks, anywhere in the Village.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to be possessed of or to discharge anywhere in the Village any
of the articles enumerated in this section. However, the applicable Fire Protection District
and the President and Board of Trustees may issue a permit for the discharge of fireworks and
for pyrotechnical displays as hereinafter provided.
(C)
1. Application for permits for the discharge of fireworks or pyrotechnical displays shall
be in writing and shall state the name of the person, place of residence and age, the
place where it is proposed to give such public display of fireworks, what experience the
9-92-2 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
applicant has had, if any, in the discharge of fireworks, such application being sworn to
before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths.
2. The President shall, upon receipt of such applicant’s statement, refer the same to the applicable
Fire Protection District who shall have an inspection made of the premises at
the location given in the application where it is proposed to give such public display of
fireworks, and if, in the judgment of the applicable Fire Protection District, it would not
be hazardous to surrounding property or dangerous to any person or persons to permit
such public display of fireworks at such location, they shall approve such application
and return the same to the President and Board of Trustees, whereupon the President
and the Board of Trustees shall have the option in their sole discretion to issue a permit
upon payment of a fee of $10, giving the applicant permission to conduct such public
display of fireworks. Such permits shall designate the kinds and quantities of fireworks
to be used at such public display, and no other kinds and no greater quantities of fireworks
than therein specified shall be used at such public display.
(D) It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as
T.N.T. in the Village in any quantities, excepting medicinal or laboratory purposes and for such
purposes no more than one quarter ounce shall be stored in any one building or premises.
(E) All explosives must be kept or stored in accordance with the rules of the State Fire Marshal, subject
to the provisions of this section.
Penalty, see §10.99
§92.02 STARTING OR MAINTAINING FIRES IN STREETS, SIDEWALKS OR OTHER PUBLIC
PLACES PROHIBITED.
No person shall start or maintain any fire in any street, sidewalk, park or public place, or any place within
30 feet of any building or structure. Penalty, see §10.99
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§92.15 ADOPTION OF CODE BY REFERENCE.
There is hereby adopted by the Village for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the 2000 International
Fire Code, which shall be referred to in this Village Code as the “Village of Deer Park Fire Code”, a copy
of which has been and is now on file in the Village Office and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
limits of the Village. (Ord. No. 11-05)
§92.16 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of the Village of Deer Park Fire Code, MUNICIPALITY shall be held to mean the Village
of Deer Park.
ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS
§92.29 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to encourage proper maintenance of alarm systems to eliminate false
alarms due to negligence on the part of the owners and to thereby provide better service in those instances
9-92-3 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
in which there exists legitimate needs for an emergency police response.
§92.30 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment device(s) designed to signal the presence of a hazard
requiring urgent attention and to which police or fire personnel are expected to respond; and, for the
purposes of this definition, includes internal premises systems in which an audible signal emits sounds or
flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises.
DIRECT ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system which utilizes a telephone line which has as its sole use
the transmission of an alarm signal to a central receiving facility operated and maintained by or on behalf
of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office.
FALSE ALARM: A false alarm shall be deemed to have occurred when the Lake County Sheriff’s
Office responds to a direct alarm or to a call for assistance based on an alarm activated to another third
party when the Lake County Sheriff’s Office determines that said alarm was caused by a mechanical
failure of the system, neglect of the owner to keep the system working properly, or careless use of the
system. It shall not be considered a false alarm in the event that the Lake County Sheriff’s Office is
unable to determine that the reason for activation of the alarm is attributed to the mechanical failure of the
system, neglect of the owner to keep the system working properly, or to the owner’s careless use of the
system.
NONDIRECT ALARM SYSTEM: Any alarm system, including but not limited to a direct dialing
system, which is not a direct alarm system.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
§92.31 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall connect or suffer or permit a direct alarm connection from any building, place, or
premises within the Village to a receiving station owned or operated by or on behalf of the Lake County
Sheriff’s Office without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Lake County Sheriff’s Office or the
Village.
§92.32 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
(A) No permit shall be issued except upon written application to the Lake County Sheriff’s Office
or the Village.
(B) Said application shall be in the form prescribed by the Lake County Sheriff’s Office or the Village.
Said application shall include language to the effect that the applicant shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Village of Deer Park, its trustees, officers, employees, and agents and the
Lake County Sheriff’s Office for any failure of service or any damages that might result from
the installation or operation of the alarm system.
(C) An applicant shall certify that alarm system maintenance will be provided and be available twenty-
four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
Penalty, see §10.99
9-92-4 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
§92.33 EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
Those individuals who presently have a direct alarm connection shall procure a permit as above described
within ninety (90) days of the adoption of this Chapter, as amended from time to time. In the event that
said individuals do not procure said permit within said time, then in that event, said individuals shall be
subject to termination of the connection privilege upon seven (7) days’ written notice from the Lake
County Sheriff’s Office or the Village.
§92.34 EXEMPTION.
The preceding sections of this Chapter shall not apply to the installation and operation of any nondirect
alarm system which is not connected directly to a receiving station owned, operated, and maintained by or
on behalf of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office. The Village recommends that any alarm system installed
by an owner conform to the most recent specifications of the American National Standards Institute,
Underwriter Laboratory, or equivalent specifications of an approved rating bureau.
§92.35 SERVICE CHARGES FOR FALSE ALARMS.
Any person who fails to maintain or secure proper maintenance for his alarm system shall pay a service
charge for false alarms resulting therefrom. An individual who has a direct alarm connection to a receiving
station owned, operated, and maintained by or on behalf of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office
shall pay a service charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) each for the fourth and fifth false alarm in any
calendar year; and the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm thereafter in the same calendar
year.
§92.36 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
The Lake County Sheriff’s Office shall maintain accurate records of all false alarms as well as all
activated alarms. The Lake County Sheriff’s Office or the Village shall give written notice to any owner
who experiences two (2) false alarms in a calendar year. Said notice shall notify the owner that the owner
shall be subject to service charges for each false alarm commencing with a fourth false alarm in any
calendar year.
§92.37 DISCONNECTION.
The Lake County Sheriff’s Office may revoke any permit heretofore issued and/or disconnect any direct
alarm system connection of any owner in any of the following events:
(A) The owner fails to pay any service charges assessed within thirty (30) days of invoice.
(B) The owner fails to obtain a permit for a direct alarm system connection as required by the terms
of this Chapter.
(C) The Lake County Sheriff’s Office determines that the owner’s alarm system is unreliable and/or
not properly maintained. For the purpose of this Section, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office may
make such a determination in the event that the Lake County Sheriff’s Office receives more than
ten (10) false alarms in any calendar year.
§92.38 DISCONNECTION NOTICE.
In the event that the Lake County Sheriff’s Office determines to disconnect any direct alarm connection
for any of the reasons set forth in the preceding Section, then in that event, the Lake County Sheriff’s
9-92-5 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
Office shall give written notice thereof to the property owner and provide said property owner with seven
(7) days to cure the defect, if possible. At the conclusion of the seven (7) day period, in the event that the
Lake County Sheriff’s Office determines that the property owner has not cured said defect, then in that
event, the Lake County Sheriff’s Office may cause said disconnection to occur.
§92.39 RECONNECTION PROCEDURE.
In the event that a property owner’s direct alarm system has been disconnected from the facilities of the
Lake County Sheriff’s Office facilities pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, the property owner can
reapply for a permit by paying a reapplication fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and by providing
sufficient documentation to the Village of Deer Park and to the Lake County Sheriff’s Office to establish
that the subject alarm system will fully comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
§92.40 TESTING OF EQUIPMENT.
No direct alarm system shall be tested or demonstrated without the property owner having first obtained
the written permission of the Lake County Sheriff’s Office.
§92.41 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
The Lake County Sheriff’s Office in conjunction with the Village of Deer Park reserves the right at any
time to discontinue the service of providing monitoring of any and all alarm systems after written notice
to the property owner to that effect. The Lake County Sheriff’s Office in conjunction with the Village of
Deer Park is under no obligation to provide this service to any person.
§92.42 NONDIRECT ALARM PROVISIONS.
It is hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any owner of a nondirect alarm system
to have more than three (3) false alarms from that system in any calendar year.
§92.43 AVOIDANCE OF PROSECUTION.
The owner of a non-direct alarm system, which has more than three false alarms in a calendar year, may
avoid prosecution for violating this Chapter by payment of alarm permit fee service surcharges as follows:
(A) If the property owner receives notice from the Village or the Lake County Sheriff’s Office is for
the fourth and/or fifth false alarm in any calendar year, then the owner of the alarm system shall
pay to the Village $25.00 for each violation provided that said amount is paid and received within
five days from the issuance of the notice of violation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays;
and $50.00 for each violation provided that said amount is paid and received within 30 days
from the issuance of the notice of violation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The
payment shall be made to the Village in care of the Village Treasurer.
(B) If the notice is for the sixth or greater false alarm in any calendar year, then the owner of the
alarm system shall pay to the Village $50.00 for each violation provided that said amount is paid
and received within five days from the issuance of the notice of violation, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays; and $75.00 for each violation provided that said amount is paid and received
within 30 days from the issuance of the notice of violation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays. The payment shall be made to the Village in care of the Village Treasurer.
9-92-6 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
(C) In the event that the owner of the alarm does not pay the required alarm permit fee surcharges
within the initial five-day period, as herein above provided, the Village or the Lake County Sheriff’s
Office shall mail written notice to the property owner or taxpayer of record, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, advising that prosecution may be initiated for such violation(s)
thereof and such violation(s) shall each be subject to the penalties as set forth below and shall be
responsible for the cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and
other costs and expense incurred thereto.
(Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15, 12-06 passed 3/19/12)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL IX-Chapt 92-Fire Prevention-3-15.docx
Title IX
9-93-1 (Rev. 10/19)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
§93.01 Definition
General Provisions
§93.02 Public Nuisances Prohibited
§93.03 Public Nuisances Affecting Health
§93.04 Public Nuisances Offending Morals and Decency
§93.05 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety
§93.06 Abatement Procedure
§93.07 Cost of Abatement
Noise
§93.35 Creating or Permitting Excessive Noise Prohibited
§93.36 Construction and Demolition Noise
Littering
§93.50 Littering on Public or Private Property
Pollution
§93.60 Pollution of Air or Water Prohibited
§93.61 Purple Loosestrife
Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments
§93.70 Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
§93.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§93.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, PUBLIC NUISANCE shall mean a thing, act, occupation, condition or
use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; or
(2) In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; or
(3) Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
(4) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous
for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way.
(‘77 Code, §12.02(a))
Title IX
9-93-2 (Rev. 10/19)
§93.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the
Village or within the police jurisdiction of the Village.
(‘77 Code, §12.01) Penalty, see §93.99
§93.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition
of PUBLIC NUISANCE provided in §93.01 of this chapter:
(A) All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to
the public;
(B) Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within
24 hours after death;
(C) Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding,
packing material, abandoned vehicles or machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies,
mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed;
(D) All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply;
(E) Garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
(F) The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within
the Village limits in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or
to threaten or cause substantial injury to property;
(G) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery
or industrial wastes or other substances;
(H) Any use of property, substances or things within the Village emitting or causing any foul, offensive,
noisome, nauseous, noxious, or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the
physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of
any appreciable number of persons within the Village;
(I) All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use;
(J) Any barn, stable or shed that has fallen into disrepair;
(K) Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or ravine;
(L) The deposit of garbage, rubbish, mud, dirt and construction waste, or any offensive substance on
any street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private property, except as may be permitted by
ordinance;
(M) Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by ILCS Ch. 505, Act 100, §2. (‘77 Code, §12.02(b))
(N) To permit or allow any private sewage disposal system to become offensive by the emission of foul
Title IX
9-93-3 (Rev. 10/19)
odors or polluted effluent or for any other reason so as to be dangerous or prejudicial to the health
of others. (Ord. 16-… passed 11/21/16)
§93.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES OFFENDING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude
other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the definition of PUBLIC NUISANCE
provided in §93.01 of this chapter:
(A) All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, house of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or structures
kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling;
(B) All gambling devices and slot machines;
(C) All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored,
brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this code
of ordinances, or by law.
(D) Any place or premises within the Village where ordinances or state laws relating to public health,
safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
(‘77 Code, §12.02(c))
§93.05 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances
affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances
affecting public peace or safety coming within the definition of PUBLIC NUISANCE provided in §93.01
of this chapter:
(A) All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of
the Village relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures;
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public
streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection
or pedestrian crosswalk;
(C) All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than eight feet above the surface thereof
or less than 10 feet above the surface of a public street;
(D) All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the state and ordinances of
the Village;
(E) All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary
or otherwise unfit for human use;
(F) All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface
of the street or ground;
(G) All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind;
Title IX
9-93-4 (Rev. 10/19)
(H) All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same,
except as permitted by the ordinances of the Village, or those which, although made in accordance
with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose
thereof has been accomplished;
(I) All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any
public street, alley or sidewalk;
(J) All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have not been
removed or which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside by pushing only with
the strength of a small child;
(K) Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or any
unauthorized or unlawful use of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds
of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks;
(L) Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire hazard or will impair the extinguishing
of any fire;
(M) Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(‘77 Code, §12.02(d))
§93.06 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
(A) The construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, renovation or repair of any structure and
mechanized earth moving and grading other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
on Monday through Friday; and 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturday. However, a homeowner
or occupant may engage in such activities personally any day of the week provided that the
homeowner or occupant does not begin before 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m.
Saturday and Sunday. The use of snow blowers is exempt from any time restriction contained
in this Section.
(B) The construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, renovation or repair of any structure on
the following holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day. However, a homeowner or occupant may engage in such activities
personally on these holidays provided that the homeowner does not begin before 9:00 a.m.
The use of snow blowers is exempt from any time restriction contained in this Section.
(Ord. 00-43 passed 12/18/00)
(C) Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists
on private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report
of his findings with the President, who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced
in the name of the Village.
(‘77 Code, §12.03)
§93.07 COST OF ABATEMENT.
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance
or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be
collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance,
and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed against the
Title IX
9-93-5 (Rev. 10/19)
real estate as other special taxes.
(‘77 Code, §12.04)
NOISE
§93.35 CREATING OR PERMITTING EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED.
No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by creating excessive noise on his or any
property. Excessive noise shall include but not by way of limitation any of the following:
(A) Loud playing of phonographs, radios, television sets, or music machines, or musical instruments.
(B) Barking or howling dogs or cats.
(C) Vehicles without mufflers, or the unnecessary use of horns on vehicles.
(D) The use of motorcycles, mini-bikes, all-terrain vehicles (“ATV’s”), motor driven scooters, go-karts,
snowmobiles or similar off-road motorized vehicles.
Penalty, see §93.99 (‘77 Code, §42.06) (Amd. Ord. 01-40 passed 10/15/01)
§93.36 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION NOISE.
Except as provided in Section 93.36(C), it shall be unlawful and punishable by a fine as provided in §93.99
for any person or business to permit the following to exist:
(A) The construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, renovation or repair of any structure and
mechanized earth moving and grading other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
on Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturday. However, a homeowner
or occupant may engage in such activities personally any day of the week provided the homeowner
or occupant does not begin before 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m.
Saturday and Sunday. The use of snow blowers is exempt from any time restriction contained
in this Section.
(B) The construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, renovation or repair of any structure on the
following holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day. However, a homeowner or occupant may engage in such activities
personally on these holidays provided the homeowner does not begin before 9:00 a.m. The use of
snow blowers is exempt from any time restriction contained in this Section.
(C) A person may apply for an exception to the restrictions in this Section. Such application may be
approved by the Administrator in his/her sole discretion.
Penalty, see §93.99 (Ord. 00-43 passed 12/18/00) (Amd. Ord. 16- 14 passed 11/21/16)
LITTERING
§93.50 LITTERING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No person shall litter any public or private property with paper or other debris or foreign matter. Any
stored or transported materials susceptible to blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or protected
to prevent littering. Penalty, see §93.99 (‘77 Code, §42.08)
Title IX
9-93-6 (Rev. 10/19)
POLLUTION
§93.60 POLLUTION OF AIR OR WATER PROHIBITED.
No person shall pollute the air or any water course by excessive discharge of waste products or foreign
matter. Penalty, see §93.99 (‘77 Code, §42.09)
§93.61 PURPLE LOOSESTRIFE.
(A) It shall be prohibited to plant within the Village any plants which are or are closely related
to Lythrum salicaria, L. virgatum which are commonly known as Purple Loosestrife.
(B) If in the Village’s reasonable discretion the Village determines the Purple Loosestrife is clogging
drainageways or poses a threat to do so, the Village shall give the landowner at least ten (10) days
prior notice that the Village shall enter the property for purposes of abating the nuisance plant.
(C) The owners of properties lying in the Village’s O-R, GB and PD Zoning Districts may be responsible
for the Village’s costs in abating Purple Loosestrife from their properties as set forth in Section
93.61(B).
(Ord. 01-34 passed 9/17/01)
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
§93.70 ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist in the
operation within the Village of any of the following:
(1) An Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishment, defined as a cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization or processor, infuser organization or infuser, dispensing
organization, or transporting organization or transporter.
(2) An Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower, defined as a facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure
and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make cannabis available
for sale at an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization or use at an adult-use cannabis
processing organization or processor, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(3) An Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center, defined as a facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process,
transport and perform necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused
products to licensed cannabis business establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(4) An Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization, defined as a facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for
the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds,
paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis
Title IX
9-93-7 (Rev. 10/19)
patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(5) An Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser, defined as a facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce
a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as
it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(6) An Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor, defined as a facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture
to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate
or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a
cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(7) An Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter, defined as an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis
on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under
the Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
A person, for purposed of this Section, shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, club,
society or other organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
(B) Operation of any prohibited Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishment within the Village in violation
of the provisions of this Section is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated
pursuant to all available remedies.
(Ord. 2019-18 passed 10/24/19)
§93.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 10.99 of this Code.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of Section 93.36 shall be subject to a fine of $250 per
occurrence and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited
to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto.
(Ord. 93-7 passed 10/18/93; Amd. Ord. 2015-02 passed 3/16/15, 11-10 passed 6/20/11)
9-94-1
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
§94.01 Names of Streets
§94.02 Numbering of Buildings
§94.03 Damage to Streets
§94.04 Laying of Pipe in Streets
§94.05 Moving Structures on Streets; Permit Required
§94.06 Littering, Depositing Debris in Streets Prohibited
§94.07 Protection of Work in Streets
§94.08 Advertising on Streets
§94.09 Removal of Snow and Ice
§94.10 Burning Leaves and Rubbish on Streets and Sidewalks
Obstructions and Encroachments
§94.20 Encroachments on Streets; Permit Required
§94.21 Obstructions in Streets and Sidewalks
§94.22 Storage of Building Materials on Streets and Sidewalks
§94.23 Street Obstructions Constituting Traffic Hazards Prohibited
Excavations
§94.35 Permit Required; Fee and Bond
§94.36 Village to be Held Harmless from Damages
§94.37 Repairing and Replacing Excavations
§94.38 Safety Requirements; Barricades and Lighting
§94.39 Liability for Damages
§94.40 Excavations by Village; Fencing and Lighting Required
§94.41 Notice to Village Clerk of Obstructed or Impassable Streets
Construction of Utility Facilities in the Rights-Of-Way
§94.51 Purpose and Scope
§94.52 Definitions
§94.53 Annual Registration Required
§94.54 Permit Required; Applications and Fees
§94.55 Action on Permit Applications
§94.56 Effect of Permit
§94.57 Revised Permit Drawings
§94.58 Insurance
§94.59 Indemnification
§94.60 Security
§94.61 Permit Suspension and Revocation
§94.62 Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status
§94.63 General Construction Standards
§94.64 Traffic Control
§94.65 Location of Facilities
§94.66 Construction Methods and Materials
9-94-2
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
§94.67 Vegetation Control
§94.68 Removal, Relocation, or Modification of Utility Facilities
§94.69 Clean-up and Restoration
§94.70 Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance
§94.71 Variances
§94.72 Penalties
§94.73 Enforcement
§94.74 Severability
§94.75 Small Wireless Facilities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§94.01 NAMES OF STREETS.
All streets of the Village shall be known and designated by the names applied hereto, respectively, on the
map of the Village kept on file in the Village Office and the street names designated on the map shall
continue to be the names of streets unless and until changed by ordinance of the Board of Trustees. (‘77
Code, § 5.01)
§94.02 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
Buildings located along the streets of the Village shall be numbered in accordance with a chart kept by the
Village Clerk showing the proper street number of each lot. The owner of any such building shall place
such number on his building so as to be visible from the street. (‘77 Code, § 5.02) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.03 DAMAGE TO STREETS.
No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way, park or other public property, or
any post, wire, lamp, street sign, traffic sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or any other
appurtenance thereon, except as may be authorized by the Village. (‘77 Code, § 5.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§94.04 LAYING OF PIPE IN STREETS.
(A) Permit. No sewer or water pipe, conduit pipe, gas pipe, wire or cable for conveying electric current
nor any street or alley pavement, sidewalk, or other like improvement shall be placed,
laid or maintained in, under, or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, easement of passage or
public place, except improvements constructed under special assessment proceedings, unless a
permit authorizing the same has been issued by the Village.
(B) Location of gas pipes. Any gas pipes when placed in any public street or alley shall be laid so
that there will be no interference with sewers or water pipes, and before any pipes are laid, permission
must be secured from the Village and same must be placed in a portion of the street or alley
as may be directed by the Village.
(C) Map to be filed. Every gas company that lays down gas pipes in any public street or alley
shall make and file with the Village Clerk an accurate map showing the exact location of every
line of pipe laid by it, which map shall be accessible for public inspection and shall be kept
constantly revised to show any changes or additions.
(‘77 Code, § 5.08) Penalty, see § 10.99
9-94-3
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
§94.05 MOVING STRUCTURES ON STREETS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall move any building or structure on any street without a permit from the Village Clerk.
The Village may issue the permit under such conditions as it may reasonably prescribe to protect the
streets and Village and private property and to minimize public inconvenience. It may require the
permittee to execute a bond or insurance contract in behalf of the Village in such amount as he deems
appropriate conditioned that the permittee will comply with the conditions of the permit and indemnify
the Village against any damage caused to Village or private property or any person by removal of the
building or structure. (‘77 Code, § 5.09) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.06 LITTERING, DEPOSITING DEBRIS IN STREETS PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall litter or deposit any foreign matter, on any street, alley, sidewalk, park or public
place, except building materials and merchandise as permitted under this Chapter, or as may be
permitted by the Board of Trustees.
(B) Any person violating this Section shall be liable for the cost of removal of the foreign matter in
addition to the penalty provided in § 10.99 for violation of this code of ordinances.
(‘77 Code, §5.10) Penalty, see §10.99
§94.07 PROTECTION OF WORK IN STREETS.
Any person laying, or making an excavation in, or doing any work in any street, sidewalk or other public
place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work.
Barricades shall be protected by suitable lights at night. Any defect in any pavement shall be barricaded
to prevent injury. Any person maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such
opening or excavation while the same remains open, by proper barricades and lights. No person shall
interfere with or disturb any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or make new pavement or
excavation or opening in any street, alley or sidewalk. (‘77 Code, § 5.11) Penalty, see §10.99
§94.08 ADVERTISING ON STREETS.
No person shall paint or post any signs or bills on any trees, poles or other structures in any street or on
the surface of and street or sidewalk. (‘77 Code, § 5.12) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.09 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
The person occupying the ground floor of any building, the user of any lot without a structure thereon,
and the owner of any vacant building or other premises shall remove the snow and ice accumulating on
the abutting sidewalks within 24 hours after any snowfall has ceased. If snow or ice cannot be removed
the surface shall be sanded or otherwise treated to lessen the hazard for pedestrians until the climate permits
removal. (‘77 Code, § 5.13) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.10 BURNING LEAVES AND RUBBISH ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
No person shall burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any street, sidewalk or alley.
(‘77 Code, § 5.14) Penalty, see § 10.99
9-94-4
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
§94.20 ENCROACHMENTS ON STREETS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall erect or maintain any structure or thing on, over or under any street, alley, sidewalk
or public way except by permit from the Board of Trustees. Application for such permit
shall describe the nature of the encroachment in such detail as the Board shall require. The
Board in its discretion may issue or deny the permit, and may impose any conditions to such
permit it deems appropriate.
(B) Any encroachment on any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way shall be maintained so that it
does not endanger or obstruct the public.
(C) Any encroachment maintained in violation of this Section is declared a nuisance and may be
abated by the Village.
(‘77 Code, § 5.04) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.21 OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
(A) No person shall obstruct or endanger the free passage or proper use by the public of any
street, sidewalk, alley or public place, except as may be permitted by this Chapter.
(B) Goods, wares and merchandise may be placed on sidewalks for such reasonable time as may
be necessary while loading and unloading, provided pedestrian traffic is not obstructed.
(‘77 Code, § 5.05) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.22 STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
No person shall store any materials on any street, sidewalk or public place. (‘77 Code, § 5.06) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§94.23 STREET OBSTRUCTIONS CONSTITUTING TRAFFIC HAZARDS PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place obstructions in any street or public right-ofway,
including rocks or any other item which the Village Engineer deems a traffic hazard. Any
person or individual who has placed such an obstruction on any street or right-of-way prior to the
enactment of this Section shall have the duty and obligation to remove such an obstruction as
soon as reasonably practicable.
(B) In the event that any offending obstruction has not been removed from the streets or rights-ofway
within one week after written notice by the Village to the adjoining property owner, the
Village shall have the right to remove such obstruction at the expense of the property owner. The
property owner in violation of this Section shall reimburse the Village for the reasonable costs
incurred in removal within 15 days after receipt of an invoice documenting such costs.
(Ord. 93-6, passed 10-18-93) Penalty, see § 10.99
9-94-5
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
EXCAVATIONS
§94.35 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE AND BOND.
(A) Permit. No person shall change the grade or level, or injure or tear up any pavement of any
street, sidewalk, crosswalk or curb, or any part thereof, dig any hole, trench, ditch or drain in,
or dig or remove any sod, stone, earth, sand or gravel from any street or public ground in the Village
without first obtaining a permit from the Village Office, as hereinafter provided. Before
such permit shall be issued, it shall first be approved by the Board of Trustees and, in the
event that the permit is obtained for the purpose of making a connection to a sewer or water facility
of the Village located in any public street, the Building Inspector may, if practical, require
the applicant to tunnel or auger instead of removing or injuring the pavement. (‘77 Code, §
5.07(a))
(B) Fee and bond.
(1) The fee for a permit required under this Section is $100. The applicant shall also deposit
a cash bond as designated by the Village Engineer
(2) The bond shall guarantee the applicant faithful and prompt restoration of the excavated
area in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and the maintenance thereof for
a period of two years. All public utilities operating under a franchise with the Village
shall be exempt from the requirements of this division (B).
(‘77 Code, § 5.07(b)) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.36 VILLAGE TO BE HELD HARMLESS FROM DAMAGES.
Any applicant using or excavating any portion of any street pursuant to the issuance of a permit shall save
and keep the Village free, clear and harmless from any loss or liability on account of any accident or
damages resulting from such excavating or work, and shall enter into a hold harmless agreement with the
Village to this effect at the time the permit is issued. The applicant shall fully remove all material, dirt
and rubbish from the space so occupied, and restore such street to its original condition immediately upon
the expiration of the period named in the permit. (‘77 Code, § 5.07(c)) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.37 REPAIRING AND REPLACING EXCAVATIONS.
The person excavating in any street or public place, shall, if required by the Building Inspector to do so,
immediately upon completion of the work, and as fast as practicable during the accomplishment thereof,
return the earth, ram and pack down the same as fast as practicable to a firm and solid bearing state and in
a manner, if possible, that will entirely prevent any settling of such earth. Such work shall be done to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector and under his direction. The Building Inspector may adopt proper
rules and regulations for such relaying and replacing of such pavement and material. The Building
Inspector may relay all pavement caused by any street opening other than those openings specifically
required to be relayed by others or by the President and Board of Trustees from time to time. (‘77 Code, §
5.07(d)) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.38 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; BARRICADES AND LIGHTING.
(A) Protected excavations and obstructions; lights at night. It shall be the duty of any person engaged
in digging into or working upon a street or public place, or any person who places
9-94-6
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
building materials on any street or public place, where such work if left exposed would be
dangerous to pedestrians, to erect a fence, barricade or railing at such excavation or work in
such manner as to prevent danger to pedestrians. It shall be the duty of such person to place
suitable and sufficient lights upon such railing or fence at sunset in the evening, and keep them
burning through the night. (‘77 Code, § 5.07(e))
(B) Enforcing compliance. It shall be the duty of the Police Department and the Building Inspector
to see that the requirements in regard to the erection of fencing and placing lights are complied
with. (‘77 Code, § 5.07(g)) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.39 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
Any person performing any of the work mentioned in this subchapter shall be liable for any damage
which may be occasioned to persons or property by reason of carelessness connected with the work. (‘77
Code, § 5.07(f))
§94.40 EXCAVATIONS BY VILLAGE; FENCING AND LIGHTING REQUIRED.
Whenever a street or other public place is excavated by the Village, the Village shall erect and maintain
the fencing and lights required by this Section. (‘77 Code, § 5.07(h)) Penalty, see § 10.99
§94.41 NOTICE TO VILLAGE CLERK OF OBSTRUCTED OR IMPASSABLE STREETS.
Whenever any public street is obstructed or rendered impassable for vehicles by an excavation therein, or
by the occupation thereof by building materials, or by any house in the process of moving, the person so
obstructing such street shall immediately notify the Village Clerk of the location of such excavation or
other obstruction, and of any change therein from day to day, during the progress of the work causing
such obstruction. (‘77 Code, § 5.07(I)) Penalty, see § 10.99
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§94.51 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent
with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
(B) Intent. In enacting this Chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-ofway
in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing
uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
1) prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other
public ways and places;
2) prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous
to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3) prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village’s utilities and of
other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
9-94-7
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
4) protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation
of utility facilities;
5) protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase
impermeable surfaces;
6) preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7) preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the Village’s
residential neighborhoods;
8) prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of- way; and
9) assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities
locations.
(C) Facilities Subject to This Chapter. This Chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise
provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement The provisions of this
Chapter shall supersede any provision of this Code inconsistent herewith.
(D) Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The Village, in its discretion and as limited by
law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege
of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of- way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request
that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide
for terms and conditions inconsistent with this Chapter.
(E) Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
1) Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a utility other
than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with
the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during
the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2) Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between,
the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar
agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions
of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
(F) Conflicts with Other Chapters. This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
(G) Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or
regulations.
9-94-8
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(H) Sound Engineering Judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering
this Chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this
Chapter when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of
the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
§94.52 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
Applicant: A person applying for a permit under this Chapter.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
Backfill: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
Bore or Boring: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical
conductor.
Cable operator: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
Cable service: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
Cable system: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
Carrier Pipe: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
Casing: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors,
and fiber optic devices.
Clear Zone: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use
by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non- recoverable slope,
and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASETO Roadside Design Guide.
Coating: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
Code: The Municipal Code of the Village of Deer Park.
Conductor: Wire carrying electrical current.
Conduit: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
9-94-9
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
Construction or Construct: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement,
demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
Cover: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
Crossing Facility: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
Director of Public Works: The Village Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
Disrupt the Right-of-Way: For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that obstructs the right-of- way
or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use, Such work may
include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or
permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or
loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
Emergency: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in
the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.
Encasement: Provision of a protective casing.
Engineer: The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
Equipment: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of
facilities.
Excavation: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
Extra Heavy Pipe: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
Facility: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails,
wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles,
conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within rights-of-way under this Chapter. For purposes of this Chapter, the term “facility”
shall not include any facility owned or operated by the Village.
Freestanding Facility: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna,
transformer, pump, or meter station.
Frontage Road: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where
it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
Hazardous Materials: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location,
or other characteristics, is determined by the Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment,
including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous
or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
Highway: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or
9-94-10
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
streets. “Highway” includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary
or convenient for vehicle traffic.
Highway Code: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
Holder: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
Jacking: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
Jetting: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
Joint Use: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities.
J.U.L.I.E.: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program.
Major Intersection: The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
Occupancy: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
Parallel Facility: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of- way.
Parkway: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
Pavement Cut: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
Permittee: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 94.54 and 94.56 of this
Chapter.
Practicable: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
Pressure: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per
square inch gauge (psig).
Petroleum Products Pipelines: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including,
but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
Prompt: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified,
the period shall be 30 days.
Public Entity: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal
level.
9-94-11
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
Restoration: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction
of a facility.
Right-of-Way or Rights-of-Way: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the
Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the Village. “Right-of-way” or “Rights-of-way” shall not include any real or personal Village
property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include Village
buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
Roadway: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
Sale of Telecommunications at Retail: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross
charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
Security Fund: That amount of security required pursuant to Section .10.
Shoulder: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement
edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
Sound Engineering Judgment: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles,
practices and experience.
Telecommunications: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile
or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. “Private line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive
service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. “Telecommunications” shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications arc used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall not include purchase of telecommunications
by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by
such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
“Telecommunications” shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as
defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or
hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
Telecommunications Provider: Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in
the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
9-94-12
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
Telecommunications Retailer: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications
at retail as defined herein.
Trench: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
Utility: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Chapter.
Vent: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
Video Service: That term as defined in Section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition
Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).
Village: The Village of Deer Park.
Water Lines: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
Wet Boring: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide
a sluice for the excavated material.
§94.53 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with
the Engineer, providing the utility’ s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each
such person, and evidence of insurance as required in § 94.58 of this Chapter, in the form of a certificate
of insurance.
§94.54 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
(A) Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this Chapter) any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which (1) changes the location
of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
Chapter), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application
with the Village Engineer and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
(B) Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be filed on a
form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village
may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or “confidential”
by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
(C) Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or
its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1) The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
9-94-13
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
2) The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy
numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3) The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
4) A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and
the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be
appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis
on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5) Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
i) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices
that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize
disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
ii) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials
emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response
shall include notification to the Village and shall promote protection of
the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for
emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this Section unless
the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6) Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification
of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable
codes, rules, and regulations;
7) Evidence of insurance as required in Section 94.58 of this Chapter;
8) Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 94.60 of this Chapter;
9) Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this Chapter (See Section
94.71); and
10) Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
(D) Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities. In addition to the requirements
of Subsection c) of this Section, the permit application shall include the following
items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1) In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications,
cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system,
evidence that any “Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity” or other regulatory
authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has
elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2) In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class,
and operating pressures;
9-94-14
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
3) In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;
4) In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements
of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution
Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District (other local or state entities
with jurisdiction), have been satisfied; or
5) In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products,
pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed.
6) In the case of the installation of Small Cell Antenna/Towers on either new or existing
poles or structures, the provisions of Section 94.75 also shall apply.
(E) Applicant’s Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review period
and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in
a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within thirty (30)
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
(F) Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications
for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of in
the amount established in Section 94.35. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
§94.55 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
(A) Village Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the Village Engineer within a reasonable time after
filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer shall reject such application iii writing, stating
the reasons therefor. If the Village Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to
the requirements of this Chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the Village Engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer,
that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements
of this Chapter.
(B) Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers.
1) Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications
retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence work governed by
this Chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice
shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate
the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring
no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring excavation. The Village Engineer shall specify the portion of the rightof-
way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
9-94-15
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
2) In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the
Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction,
the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this Chapter.
3) Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for
work pursuant to Section 94.54 of this Chapter the telecommunications retailer shall
submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall
be subject to the requirements of Subsection (a) of this Section.
(C) Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of State Authorization Under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a Stateissued
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed
granted forty- five (45) days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the
Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and regulations.
§94.56 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
(A) Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A permit from the Village authorizes
a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Chapter on
Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee
to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
(B) Duration. No permit issued under this Chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6)
months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently
pursued to completion.
(C) Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under
this Chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors
who will perform any work under the permit at a pie-construction meeting. The preconstruction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village
with such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting
shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence
of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of
other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
(D) Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse
the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and applicable statutes,
laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
§94.57 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations
identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee
9-94-16
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90) days after the completion
of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the
actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance
with Section 94.71 of this Chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the
permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
§94.58 INSURANCE.
(A) Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way
shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named
insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and
employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 below:
1) Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse,
and underground hazard (commonly referred to as “X”, “C,” and “U” coverages)
and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
i) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
ii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident;
and
iii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability;
2) Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single
limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury and property damage for
each accident;
3) Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
4) Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing
the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this Section.
(B) Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section may be in any combination
of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess
coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered
by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella
policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
(C) Copies Required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this Section
to the Village within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
(D) Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies required by this Section
shall contain the following endorsement:
9-94-17
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention
not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or
certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten
(10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence
of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
(E) Self-Insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required by Subsection a) of this Section. A utility that self- insures is not required,
to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under Subsection a), or the requirements of Subsections b), c) and d) of this
Section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required
under Subsection a) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self insurer”
under the Workers Compensation Act.
(F) Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility’s Liability. The legal liability of the utility to
the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self- insurance required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or selfinsurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
(G) Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this Section shall be affected under
valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee
in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or
better and of class size “X” or higher by AM. Best Company.
§94.59 INDEMNIFICATION.
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions,
failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or
offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this Chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility’s
indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Chapter by
the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
§94.60 SECURITY.
(A) Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth
in this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section
at the permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under
the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
1) The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Chapter;
9-94-18
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
2) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee’s
failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives
of the Village issued pursuant to this Chapter; and
3) The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the
Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or non- performance by permittee in
violation of this Chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this Chapter to perform that the Village
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure
to perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee
pursuant to this Chapter or any other applicable law.
(B) Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form, at the permittee’s
election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional
letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
1) Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee;
2) Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any
amounts covered by it; and
3) Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois at which
it can be drawn.
(C) Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably
estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior
to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee
fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction
in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Village Engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be
equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this Subsection
(c) for any single phase.
(D) Withdrawals. The Village, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written notice clearly stating
the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw
an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village
for such amount within the fourteen (14) clay notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
1) Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3) Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the
9-94-19
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance
by the permittee; or
4) Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the Village determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
(E) Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that
any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security
Fund to the amount specified in Subsection c) of this Section.
(F) Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security
Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal
to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the
minimum balance required in Subsection c) of this Section.
(G) Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit,
the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as
remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this Chapter
or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund,
and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent
necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said
revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
(H) Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are
in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized
by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund
shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may
be infringed or otherwise violated.
§94.61 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) Village Right to Revoke Permit. The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant
to this Chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1) Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2) Non-compliance with this Chapter;
3) Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat
to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4) Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit
and approved plans.
(B) Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke
or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revoca9-
94-20
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
tion or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 94.61.
(C) Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension. Upon receipt of
a written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following
options:
1) Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation
or suspension;
2) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the
written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village within five (5)
working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village
providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided
in this Subsection.
(D) Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village
may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation
set forth within Subsection a) of this Section.
(E) Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions
of Subsection c) of this Section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village:
1) correct the deficiencies;
2) upon not less than twenty (20) days’ notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities
or equipment; or
3) after not less than thirty (30) days’ notice to the permittee of failure to cure the
non- compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village.
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal.
§94.62 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
(A) Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to
the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility.
The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by
the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
including this Chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
(B) Amended Permit. A flew owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current
ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name,
the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village’s
right-of-way.
9-94-21
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(C) Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect
the name of the new owner upon transfer.
§94.63 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(A) Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable
ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic
control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time
to time:
1) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
2) Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
3) Highway Design Manual;
4) Highway Standards Manual;
5) Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
6) Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code §
545);
7) Flagger’s Handbook; and
8) Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
(B) Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principle. If a discrepancy exists between or
among differing principles and standards required by this Chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine,
in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision
shall be final. If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
§94.64 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
(A) Minimum Requirements. The Village’s minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained
in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.
(B) Warning Signs, Protective Devices. and Flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing
and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable
federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers
when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
(C) Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference
with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(D) Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that
will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall
notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
9-94-22
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to Section
94.70 of this Chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
(E) Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection
requirements that are brought to the utility’s attention by the Village.
§94.65 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
(A) General Requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility
facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location
requirements of this subsection.
(B) No Interference with Village Facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the
Village Engineer determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement
of any of the Village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance
of any of the Village’s utility facilities.
1) Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum
possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the
minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights’ and reasonable convenience
of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
2) No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes
with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
3) No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as
to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
4) Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the
facility owner, regardless of location, -for the particular application.
(C) Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
1) Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the
right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
i) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly
parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
ii) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb
with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where
available;
iii) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as
practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder
line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
iv) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
9-94-23
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
v) Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of- way line.
2) Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within
the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
i) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more
than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
ii) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if
other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment.
(e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting
the pavement); and
iii) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall
be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five
(5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance
shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as
practicable.
(D) Facilities Crossing Highways.
1) No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between
the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may require the incorporation of materials
and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2) Cattle Passes. Culverts or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in
cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3) 90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety (90)
degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
4) Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication facility
may cross a highway only if:
i) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s rules entitled,
“Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83 Ill. Adm. Code
305);
ii) Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway
and outside of the clear zone; and
iii) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5) Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or communication
facility may cross a highway only if:
i) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum
maintenance-free service life; and
9-94-24
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
ii) Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the
initial installation.
6) Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line
where an underground -facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a
highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency
phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations.
(49 C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989)).
(E) Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The Village may require that facilities
be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular
highways.
(F) Freestanding Facilities.
1) The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way.
2) The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right- of-way to be
screened from view.
(G) Facilities Installed Above Ground. Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
1) No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2) New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and
materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed
without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors
and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable;
the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
(H) Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
1) Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the
utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not
practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater,
independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated
from the bridge or roadway structure Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
2) A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or
roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing.
Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:
i) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to he transmitted and
an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of
9-94-25
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
damage to or failure of the facility;
ii) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the
transportation system;
iii) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
iv) The proposed method of attachment;
v) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
vi) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
vii) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
viii) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk
involved.
(I) Appearance Standards.
1) The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to
preserve visual quality.
2) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal
or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent
residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands
being traversed.
§94.66 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
(A) Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods.
1) Boring or Jacking.
i) Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished
from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village Engineer
[Director of Public Works] from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations
are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected
by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may
be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
ii) Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the
roadway.
iii) Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six inches (0.15
m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the
diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following
9-94-26
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
iv) Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or less in
diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger
and following pipe method.
v) Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated
by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around
the root system.
2) Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way
shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
i) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any intersection
may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained
from the Village Engineer.
ii) Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed excavated
material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material
shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection.
Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the
roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated
material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be
hauled to an off-road location.
iii) Drip Line of Trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved.
3) Backfilling.
i) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall
be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in
accordance with IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.”
When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill,
suitable granular backfill shall be used,
ii) For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed,
the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that
has settled clue to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Engineer, the
utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the
top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material,
and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades,
as determined by the Engineer.
4) Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a
highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the
limitation set forth in this paragraph 4) is permitted under Section 94.71, the following
requirements shall apply:
9-94-27
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
i) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated
by the Engineer.
ii) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable,
and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately.
Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be
rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
iii) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
iv) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base
in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall
not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other
work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction
or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.
5) Encasement.
i) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any
other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece
fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village.
ii) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m)
of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area
established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
iii) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished
between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is
used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to
highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are
of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased
regardless of installation method.
iv) In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
v) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of
more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe
is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of
the pipe is provided;
vi) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility
shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-ofway.
6) Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at
least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of
facility:
9-94-28
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
TYPE OF FACILITY MINIMUM COVER
Electric Lines 30 Inches (0.8 m)
Communication, Cable or Video
Service Lines
18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by Village)
Gas or Petroleum Products 30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or
Drainage Line
Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
(B) Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
1) Electric Power or Communication Lines.
i) Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within Village
rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with
the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the
Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction of Electric
Power and Communications Lines,” and the National Electrical Safety Code.
ii) Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single
pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities
shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and
braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative
and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
iii) Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing,
provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing is
installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking
or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed
by the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved method which compress
the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the installation
is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway
construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
iv) Burial of Drops. All t emp o r a r y service drops placed between November 1
of the prior year and March 1 5 of the current year, also known as snowdrops,
shall be buried by May 3 1 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (1 0) business
days after placement.
2) Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines. Underground
facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by:
(i) the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved methods which compress
the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
9-94-29
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(ii) jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or
toes of slopes of the highway;
(iii) open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of
slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
(iv) tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by
other means.
3) Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be
constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved manner and in conformance
with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation,
Part 192 – Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum
Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR §192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction,” and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4) Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall
conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid
Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5) Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines. Water
lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way
shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current “Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.”
6) Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground
facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a
vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in
all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting
pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Engineer. With the
approval of the Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place
of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted
a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
(C) Materials.
1) General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall
be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions
of IDOT’s “Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the requirements
of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other
official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2) Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without
the prior written approval of the Village Engineer. When such storage is permitted,
all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained
from the Village.
9-94-30
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
3) Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any
hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or
removal of any existing facilities.
(D) Operational Restrictions.
1) Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required
to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the
public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued
or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive
damage to the right-of-way or other property.
2) These restrictions may be waived by the Engineer when emergency work is required to
restore vital utility services.
3) Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are between 7:00
AM and 7:00 PM.
(E) Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village
shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and
underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by
J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours,
excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage
Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
§94.67 VEGETATION CONTROL.
(A) Electric Utilities: Compliance with State Laws and Regulations. An electric utility shall conduct
all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable
Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the Village as permitted by law.
(B) Other Utilities: Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility
with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws
and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation,
but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any
other permit required under this Chapter.
1) Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall
include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision
who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits
shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously
accomplished.
2) Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will
not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for
assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively
damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the
International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the com9-
94-31
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
pensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require
the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
(C) Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The Village may require that special measures
be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may
consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
(D) Chemical Use.
1) Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any
chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose,
including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2) Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way
unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Engineer that such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control.
§94.68 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
(A) Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its
own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
(B) Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from
the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related
appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
1) Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or franchise, unless otherwise
permitted by applicable law;
2) If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise,
if required;
3) If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in
violation of this Chapter; or
4) If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee’s
license or franchise.
(C) Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The Village retains the right and privilege to cut
or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine
to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to
cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
9-94-32
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(D) Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the Village,
the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice
the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove
it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed
to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
§94.69 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten
(10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction
or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances
and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by
the Village Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, re-sodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in
this Section may be extended by the Village Engineer for good cause shown.
§94.70 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
(A) General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights- of-way are to
be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility’s expense.
(B) Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal
procedures for securing a permit:
1) If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility
shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway
or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers.
If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as
to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency
will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.
2) In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Engineer or his
or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps
have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make
the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
3) In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as
practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
(C) Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs
undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
§94.71 VARIANCES.
9-94-33
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(A) Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of
this Chapter must do so in writing to the Village Engineer as a part of the permit application.
The request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a variance is requested
and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
(B) Authority to Grant Variances. The Village Engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized
for each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
(C) Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Village Engineer may authorize a variance only if
the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1) One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an
irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the
provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and all
other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the
provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested
approach.
(D) Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance,
the Village Engineer may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards
and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Chapter but which
carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
(E) Right to Appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including denial of a variance, made by the Village Engineer under the provisions of this Chapter
shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board or such other board or commission as it
may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk
within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village
Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board’s next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board
shall timely decide the appeal.
§94.72 PENALTIES.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be
times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Chapter. Unless the utility shows that
another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
Village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the
facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or
overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
§94.73 ENFORCEMENT.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village
may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
§94.74 SEVERABILITY.
9-94-34
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
hereof.
§94.75 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
(A) Purpose and Scope.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations, standards and
procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-ofway
within the Village’s jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property
zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner
that is consistent with the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (P.A.
100-0585).
(2) Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all Ordinances or
parts of Ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
(3) Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance, the wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance to the maximum
extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations.
(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
Act – the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (P.A. 100-0585), as may be
subsequently amended.
Antenna – communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
Applicable codes – uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes,
including the National Electric Safety Code.
Applicant – any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
Application – a request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate
small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole
for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
Collocate or collocation – to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless
facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
9-94-35
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
Communications service – cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
Communications service provider – a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as
amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless
provider.
FCC – the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
Fee – a one-time charge.
Historic district or historic landmark – a building, property, or site, or group of buildings,
properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or
formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual
who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and
determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i
through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47
CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property,
site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation
program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
Law – a federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance
or resolution.
Micro wireless facility – a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24
inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna,
if any, no longer than 11 inches.
Municipal utility pole – a utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rightsof-
way.
Permit – a written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate,
continue, or complete a project.
Person – an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
trust, or other entity or organization.
Public safety agency – the functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit
of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this
State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical,
9-94-36
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
Rate – a recurring charge.
Right-of-way – the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not
include Village-owned aerial lines.
Small wireless facility – a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
(i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume
or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed
elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and
(ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility
is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated
ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric
meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services.
Utility pole – a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications
service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar
function.
Wireless facility – equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated
with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiberoptic
cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless
facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable
that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable
that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
Wireless infrastructure provider – any person authorized to provide telecommunications
service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment,
wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless
services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider
for the application submitted to the Village.
Wireless provider – a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
Wireless services – any services provided to the general public, including a particular
class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
9-94-37
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
Wireless services provider – a person who provides wireless services.
Wireless support structure – a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either
guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to
support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not
include a utility pole.
(C) Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities.
(1) Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and
subject to administrative review, but not subject to zoning review or approval if
they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rightsof-
way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
(2) Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village
to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed,
and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
(a) Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following
information to the Village, together with the Village’s Small Cell Facilities
Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate
small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
(i) Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term
is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989;
(ii) The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or
location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This
should include a depiction of the completed facility;
(iii) Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering
Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility
covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
(iv) The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
9-94-38
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(v) A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
(vi) Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the
applicant’s knowledge.
(vii) In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached
to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village,
the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence
of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
(b) Application Process. The Village shall process applications as follows:
(i) The first completed application shall have priority over applications
received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
(ii) An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed
on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the
Village fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after
the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after
the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt
of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village’s
denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided
under this Ordinance.
(iii) An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission
of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted ac9-
94-39
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
tivity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after
the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt
of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village’s
denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided
under this Ordinance.
(iv) The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements
of this Ordinance.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations
that concern public safety, or the Collocation Requirements
and Conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or
wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation,
approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility
pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial
is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before
the day the Village denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village
and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application
within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application
or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application
within 30 days of denial shall require the application to
submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement
of the Village’s review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial. However, this revised application does
not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or
different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
9-94-40
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(v) Pole Attachment Agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole
Attachment Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation
on a municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent
approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on
a municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter
into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
(c) Completeness of Application. Within 30 days after receiving an application,
the Village shall determine whether the application is complete and
notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically
identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated
in the Village’s permit application form are submitted by the applicant to
the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice
of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
(d) Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
(i) An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village;
or
(ii) A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay.
(e) Consolidated Applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single
permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility
and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village
may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and
treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated
treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for
each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
9-94-41
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(f) Duration of Permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not
less than 5 years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations
unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the
new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this Ordinance.
If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable Village code provisions or regulations
in effect at the time of renewal.
(g) Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit applications,
supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery at
the Village’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on
the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic
mail.
(3) Collocation Requirements and Conditions.
(a) Public Safety Space Reservation. The Village may reserve space on municipal
utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation
of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
(b) Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain,
repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good
repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this Ordinance.
The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable
industry and governmental standards and regulations.
(c) No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless
provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere
with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency’s communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance
with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed
by a public safety agency.
9-94-42
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider
has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference
in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures
for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on
such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the
Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
(d) The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village
utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the
electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the
pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms “communications space”,
“communication worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as
published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
(e) The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local
code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
(f) The wireless provider shall comply with the following design standards
and any variations from these design standards may only be granted pursuant
to the variance provisions of this chapter:
(i) Screening. Whenever any equipment or appurtenances are to be installed
at grade, screening must be installed to minimize the visibility
of the facility and shall not be permitted to obstruct sight
lines or to create other traffic or safety problems.
(ii) Color and Stealth. All wireless facilities subject to this section, including
all related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color
that blends with the surroundings of the pole, structure tower or in9-
94-43
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
frastructure on which it is mounted. The color must be comprised
of nonreflective materials which blend with the materials and colors
of the surrounding area and structures. The Applicant shall use
good faith efforts to employ reasonable stealth techniques to conceal
the appearance of the wireless facilities. Any pole extensions
shall not be metallic or wood and shall blend with the color of the
pole upon which they are mounted.
(iii) Wiring and Cabling. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to
the remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with
the national electrical code and national electrical safety code
adopted by the Village and in force at the time of the installation of
the facility. Any wiring must be covered with an appropriate cover.
No wiring and cabling serving the facility will be allowed to interfere
with any existing uses.
(g) Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this Collocation Requirements
and Conditions Section, a wireless provider shall not be required to
collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category
of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on
a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation
of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the
Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet
of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the
right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and
the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional
material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
(h) Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall
be no more than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure
on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which
small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
(i) 10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a
utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located
within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the ju9-
94-44
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
risdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the
height limitation for such facility; or
(ii) 45 feet above ground level.
(i) Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in the manner provided in this chapter.
(j) Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and
a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the
right-of-way.
(k) Ground-mounted Equipment Spacing. Subject to the variance provisions
of this chapter and state law, the wireless provider shall comply with applicable
spacing requirements of this chapter concerning the location of
ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
(l) Undergrounding Regulations. Subject to the variance provisions of this
chapter and state law, the wireless provider shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit
the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a
right-of-way without prior approval.
(m) Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted
shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay
is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance
of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional
time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance
of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village
grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
(4) Application Fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
(a) Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to collocate
a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed in a
9-94-45
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility
on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
(b) Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless
facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new
utility pole for such collocation.
(c) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
(d) The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require
any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized
to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
(i) routine maintenance;
(ii) the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least 10 days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment type and model numbers for
any of the replacement equipment; or
(iii) the installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety
codes.
(e) Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
(5) Exceptions to Applicability. Nothing in this Ordinance authorizes a person to collocate
small wireless facilities on:
(a) property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the
Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
(b) property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve
district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation
purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement
of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are
under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as
provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
9-94-46
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
(c) property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the
Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter
rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Ordinance do
not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities
if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent
with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public
Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, “public utility” has the meaning given
to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement
(a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service
or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install,
place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small
wireless facilities subject to this Ordinance.
(6) Pre-Existing Agreements. Existing agreements between the Village and wireless
providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-ofway,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles,
that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the Village’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the
Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained
therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this
Ordinance.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the effective
date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village makes
available under this Ordinance for the collocation of small wireless facilities or
the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities
that are the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective
date of the Act by notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees
and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated
on the Village’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village
before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under
this paragraph.
(7) Annual Recurring Rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring
rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located
in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable
costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on the Village utility
pole.
9-94-47
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee
shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance
of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary
date thereafter.
(8) Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice
from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If
the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the Village
may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its
pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions
are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers
small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice
shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(D) Dispute Resolution. The Circuit Court of Lake County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending
resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal
utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person
to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility
pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(E) Indemnification. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless
against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements
or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its
employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under
this Ordinance and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold
harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence
of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive
any claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental,
or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(F) Insurance. The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost and expense
such insurance as is required by this chapter.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial
general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of
the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wire9-
94-48
Title IX
(Rev. 7/18)
less facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required,
to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional
insureds under this Section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the Village.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 12-17-07; Amd 18-11, passed 7-19-18, 17-17, passed 10-19-17)
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-1
CHAPTER 95: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
General Provisions
§95.01 Planting and Removal Permits Required
§95.02 Injuring Trees or Shrubs Prohibited
§95.03 Advertisements on Trees or Shrubs Prohibited
§95.04 Trimming of Dangerous Trees
§95.05 Attachment of Wires or Ropes to Trees; Permission Required; Specifications
Tree Preservation
§95.06 Intent and Purpose
§95.07 Definitions
§95.08 Applicability
§95.09 Exemptions
§95.10 Vegetation Requiring Preservation
§95.11 Issuance of Tree Removal Permits
§95.12 Tree Protection During Construction
§95.13 Tree Replacement
§95.14 Emergencies
§95.15 Stop Work Order
§95.16 Trees Preservation Escrow
Deer Park Tree Committee
§95.17 Tree Committee Established
§95.18 Tree Committee Functions
§95.19 Arborist
§95.20 Celebration of Arbor Day
Nuisance Trees; Inspection, Abatement, and Violation
§95.21 Right to Inspect
§95.22 Nuisance Declared
§95.23 Duty of Owner/Occupant to Abate
§95.24 Notice to Abate
§95.25 Abatement by Village; Certain Costs Constitute a Lien
§95.26 Failure to Remove Tree Prohibited
Enforcement, Penalties
§95.27 Enforcement; Appeals
§95.28 Penalties
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§95.01 PLANTING AND REMOVAL PERMITS REQUIRED.
(A) Planting permit. No person shall plant any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or other public
place without first having secured a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be made
to the Village Office, and shall be referred by him to the Board of Trustees for approval.
(B) Removal permit. No person shall remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any street,
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefor. Application for
such permit shall be made to theVillage Office, and shall be referred by him to the Board of
Trustees for approval. Penalty, see §95.28
§95.02 INJURING TREES OR SHRUBS PROHIBITED.
No person shall injure any tree or shrub planted in any street, parkway or public place Penalty, see
§95.28
§95.03 ADVERTISEMENTS ON TREES OR SHRUBS PROHIBITED.
No person shall attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or
public place. Penalty, see §95.28
§95.04 TRIMMING OF DANGEROUS TREES.
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the Village in such a
way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the owner
of the abutting premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any limb
of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the
owner of the premises on which the tree grows or stands. Penalty, see §95.28
§95.05 ATTACHMENT OF WIRES OR ROPES TO TREES; PERMISSION REQUIRED;
SPECIFICATIONS.
No person shall attach any wire or rope to any tree within Village Right of Way or Village Property
without the permission of the Board of Trustees. Any person granted the right to maintain poles and
wires in the streets, alleys or other public places in the Village shall in the absence of provision in the
franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or
shrubs in such places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed,
subject to the supervision of the Village, to insure that injury shall not be done to the poles, wires, shrubs
and trees by contact with wires. Penalty, see §95.28
TREE PRESERVATION
§95.06 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(A) The purpose of this subchapter is to conserve and protect the land, vegetation and other natural
resources of Deer Park, while allowing for reasonable improvement of the land and to take
necessary measures to preserve and protect trees and other vegetation during all phases of
construction of improvements or regrading of land. This subchapter is intended to have the effect
of strongly encouraging the configuration of buildings and other site improvements which
retains the natural features of the site including its trees, without rendering the site unbuildable.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-3
Tree removal for convenience or to accommodate non-essential functions shall not be permitted
except as specifically set forth herein.
(B) The preservation of existing trees in the Village is intended to accomplish, where possible, the
following objectives:
(1) To preserve trees as an important public resource enhancing the quality of life and
general welfare of the Village and enhancing its unique character and physical,
historical, and aesthetic environment;
(2) To preserve the essential character of those areas throughout the community which
are heavily wooded and in a natural state;
(3) To enhance and preserve the air quality of the Village through the filtering effect of
trees on air pollutants;
(4) To reduce noise within the Village through the baffle and barrier effect of trees on
the spread of noise;
(5) To reduce topsoil erosion through the soil retention effect of the tree roots;
(6) To preserve and enhance nesting areas for birds and other wildlife which assist in
the control of insects;
(7) To reduce storm water runoff and the costs associated with runoff through the waterretaining
characteristics of existing woodlands and replenish ground water supplies;
and
(8) To protect and increase property values.
§95.07 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CALIPER. A measurement of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk measured six inches above
natural grade for trees. For purposes of this subchapter, caliper shall be the measure of all new
trees planted pursuant to the provisions hereof.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. The area inscribed by an imaginary line on the ground beneath a tree
having its center point at the center of the trunk of the tree and having a radius equal to one foot for
every inch of DBH and shall extend five feet below surface ground level.
DEVELOPMENT. The performance of any building or mining operation, the making of any
material change in the use or size of any structure or land, demolition of a structure and removal of
trees, the division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or termination of rights or
access or riparian rights.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of a tree measured at four and one-half
feet above the existing grade at the base of the tree. DBH shall be the measure of all pre-existing
trees on a site for purposes of this subchapter.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-4
FREE-STANDING TREE. An existing tree with a DBH of six inches or greater that is located by itself
outside of any woodlands on a site.
REMOVE or REMOVAL. The causing or accomplishing of the actual physical removal of a tree, or the
effective removal through severe pruning, damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect action
resulting in, or likely to result in, the death of a tree.
SITE WORK. The making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, the
division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or termination of rights of access or riparian
rights, as well as demolition of a structure or removal of trees and other vegetation. Also, any clearing,
excavating, grading, trenching, filing or similar land-disturbing activities.
SWALE. A topographical indentation which channels periodic water runoff.
TREE PRESERVATION AREA. That area of a lot or parcel of land within which all trees and shrubs
shall be protected.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN. A written plan having text and/or graphic illustrations indicating the
methods which are to be used to preserve existing trees during construction.
TREE PRESERVATION SUPERVISOR. A member of the petitioner's development team who is a
professional landscape architect or certified arborist with training in tree preservation techniques. This
person shall take responsibility for ensuring the protection of existing trees designated for preservation
during construction.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT. The permit required by the tree preservation regulations to be issued in
order to remove any tree within the corporate limits of the Village.
TREE SPADE TRUCK A truck with a cone-shaped appendage specifically designed for digging
established trees for the purpose of transplanting.
TREE SURVEY. A written plan having text and/or graphics indicating the location, size, species and
condition of all existing free-standing trees with a caliper of six inches or greater and the boundary line,
variety of species, range of sizes and condition of trees within a woodedarea.
WOODLAND. A group of three or more trees in close proximity to one another in which at least one of
the trees has a DBH of a minimum six inches.
VEHICULAR USE AREA. All areas used for the display or parking of four or more vehicles,
including boats and heavy construction equipment, whether such vehicles, boats or equipment are selfpropelled
or not (i.e., trailers), and all land upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function
of the primary use, including but not limited to driveways, parking lot aisles, drive-through window
lanes, stacking areas for car washes and gas stations.
§95.08 APPLICABILITY.
(A) The Tree Preservation regulations of this subchapter shall apply to all lands in theVillage.
(B) No land shall be cleared of woodlands nor shall free-standing trees with a DBH of six inches
or greater be cleared and/or removed without a Tree Removal Permit issued by the Building
Inspector unless exempt from regulation under §95.09.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-5
(C) Clearance and removal of trees shall mean, but not be limited to, damage inflicted to
the root system by machinery, storage of materials and soil compaction; changing the
natural grade above or below the root system or around the trunk; damage inflicted on the
tree permitting fungus infection or pest infestation; excessive pruning; excessive thinning;
paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious materials within such proximity as to
be harmful to the tree.
(D) No Site Work shall occur without a Tree Survey, Tree Preservation Plan and, where
necessary, a Tree Removal Permit.
(E) No building permit, grading plan, or soil removal or filling permit shall be issued for the
construction, alteration or addition to a building, or the grading or alteration of the land
surface without conformance to this subchapter.
(F) No Tree Removal Permit shall be issued for any parcel of land or development which
requires an approved site plan under §158.38 until a site plan, including a Tree Survey
and Preservation Plan, is submitted to and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Village Board of Trustees.
(G) No Tree Removal Permit shall be issued for any parcel of land or development which
requires a Subdivision Plan approval, until a Final Subdivision Plan is approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board of Trustees.
Penalty, see §95.28
§95.09 EXEMPTIONS.
The following activities and properties are exempt from the Tree Preservation regulations in this
subchapter and no Tree Removal Permit is required:
(A) Removal of a tree with a DBH of six inches or less by an individual homeowner on a
privately-owned lot, except trees and other vegetation protected in landscape preservation
or conservation easements, or other deed restricted tree preservation areas.
(B) The removal of a dead, diseased or critically damaged tree.
(C) The removal of trees in time of an emergency or when they pose potential danger to life or
property. See also §95.14.
(D) The removal of trees necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of drainage
facilities, sanitary and storm sewers approved by theVillage.
(E) The removal of trees for construction of public roadways and associated improvements
approved by the Village.
(F) The removal of trees required for the installation, maintenance and repair of underground
and overhead utilities approved by the Village.
(G) Exempt Trees: Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter to the contrary, the
following species of trees shall not be required to be preserved or protected as part of any
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-6
tree preservation plan:
Ash (Fraxinus species)
Boxelder (Acer negundo)
Buckthorn (Rhamnus species)
Cottonwood (Populus species)
Chinese Elm & Siberian Elm (Ulmus parviflora & Ulmus pumila)
Honeysuckle (Lonicera species)
Silver Maple & Norway Maple (Acer saccharinum & Acer platanoides)
Mulberry (Morus species)
Pear (Pyrus species)
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus species)
Willow (Salix species)
The written approval of the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall be required
for the removal of any of the species of trees specified in this subsection in order to confirm
that said tree is one of the exempt species as listed above or is otherwise an exempt tree.
After such a written determination has been made by the Village Administrator, or his or
her designee, such trees shall, therefore, be considered "exempt trees" for the purposes of
this Chapter. Until a tree has been determined by the Village Administrator, or his or her
designee, to be an "exempt tree", it shall be presumed to be a protected tree.
§95.10 VEGETATION REQUIRING PRESERVATION.
(A) Existing trees shall be preserved as follows:
(1) Free-Standing Trees. Any Free-Standing Tree having a DBH of six inches or greater
shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. Additionally, a smaller tree can be
considered a specimen meriting preservation if it is a rare or unusual species or of
exceptional quality. If existing trees cannot be preserved they shall be transplanted
where feasible. Trees over seven inches in caliper should not generally be
transplanted.
(2) Woodlands. A Woodland shall be measured by drawing a line around the Critical
Root Zone of all trees on the outer edge of the woodland and measuring the area
contained therein. Where more than one Woodland exists on a site the area as
defined above shall be added together to obtain the total from which to calculate the
percentage of Woodlands required to be retained.
(B) To the extent sufficient Woodlands exist on a site, the existing Woodlands shall be
protected as a conservation area according to the following sliding scale criteria for
minimum retention of total Woodlands: 10% in the commercial districts; 20% in office and
research districts (0 & R); 25% in medium-low density residential areas (R-1); and 50% on
large-lot residential lots (R-2 and R-3).
(C) Priority areas. Wooded 100-year floodplains, wooded wetlands, wooded stream corridors,
and steep wooded slopes shall be considered "priority areas" to help prevent erosion and
protect wildlife. Preservation of priority areas shall not be counted toward meeting the
requirements of division (A)(2) above.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-7
(D) Credit for preserved trees. All preserved trees and vegetation, and transplanted trees shall
be credited toward meeting the landscaping and screening requirements of §158.32 for the
applicable portion of a site.
(E) Procedures and submittal requirements.
(1) Plan approval procedures.
(a) For any parcel of land that requires a site plan or subdivision plat approval
and that contains Free-Standing Trees which have a DBH greater than or
equal to six inches or woodlands, a Tree Survey and Tree Preservation Plan
must be submitted at the time of application for site development plan or
preliminary subdivision plat approval. The Tree Preservation Plan shall be
reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the
Village Board as part of the site development plan or preliminary
subdivision plan.
(b) Prior to issuance of a building permit for development activities covered by
this subchapter, a preapplication advisory conference, as provided for in
§158.37, may be called by the Village to review procedures for protection
and management of all protected landscape elements identified on the Tree
Preservation Plan and to designate one or more persons on the petitioners
development team as "Tree PreservationSupervisor(s)."
(c) Tree Surveys and Tree Preservation plans shall be prepared by qualified
professionals, including landscape architects and certified arborists. The
development applicant must designate a Tree Preservation Supervisor who
must have training in landscape preservation techniques and take
responsibility for ensuring the protection of existing trees during
construction.
(2) Tree Survey. The Tree Survey shall include the following:
(a) A scale at a minimum of l '= 50' and a north arrow.
(b) All existing, buildings, structures and paved areas.
(c) The location, species (common and botanical), size and condition of each
FreeStanding
Tree of six inches or greater DBH.
(d) Delineate stands of natural woodlands by a circumferential line around all
stands of trees with similar characteristics, such as type or species, defined
as areas which include the outer perimeter of the Critical Root Zone of the
individual trees. A notation shall be included which indicates the range of
height and DBH of the trees within the area, the predominate species within
the area, and the general health of the trees.
(e) Name and address of the preparer and the date of preparation.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-8
(3) Tree Preservation Plan. The Tree Preservation Plan shall include the following
information:
(a) A scale at a minimum of 1 '= 50' and a north arrow.
(b) The footprint of any existing and proposed buildings, structures, paving and
any other facilities.
(c) The location, species (common and botanical), size and condition of each
tree to be preserved, transplanted or removed for all trees with a DBH of six
inches or greater. Existing tree canopies and critical root zones should be
graphically depicted to scale for all trees to remain.
(d) Delineate stands of natural woodlands by a circumferential line around all
stands of trees with similar characteristics, such as type or species, defined
as areas which include the outer perimeter of the Critical Root Zone of the
individual trees. A notation shall be included which indicates the range of
height and DBH of the trees within the areas, the predominant species within
the area, and the general health of the trees.
(e) The location and type of protective tree fencing (orange snow fence or red
picket construction fence being approved types).
(f) Proposed grading and site changes around trees to be preserved and any
proposed retaining walls.
(g) A statement concerning where and how deliveries for construction purposes
are to be made to the site.
(h) Name and address of preparer and date of preparation.
(i) A utility trenching plan containing the following information: all storm
drains, sewers, easements, area drains, gas lines, electrical service, cable TV
and water mains.
(j) Additionally, the plan must show all lateral lines serving structures. The
plans should be developed to avoid going into the Critical Root Zone of any
tree on its path from the street to a building. Where it is not possible to avoid
some encroachment, the design must minimize the extent of encroachment
or provide a root pruning plan.
§95.11 ISSUANCE OF TREE REMOVAL PERMITS.
(A) Unless otherwise specifically authorized in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person without a Tree Removal Permit from the Village to remove, injure, destroy, or
undertake any procedure the result of which is to cause the death or substantial destruction
of any tree having a diameter of six inches DBH or larger. Tree Removal Permits
authorizing the removal of such trees may be issued by the Building Inspector for, but not
necessarily limited to, the criteria outlined below. Any petition for a Tree Removal Permit
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-9
associated with a site plan approval or subdivision approval shall require review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the Village Board of Trustees.
(B) Criteria for tree removal.
(1) The tree is diseased, dying or dead;
(2) The tree is damaged or injured to the extent that it is likely to die or become
diseased, or that it constitutes a hazard to person or property;
(3) Removal of the tree is consistent with good forestry practices;
(4) Removal of the tree will enhance the health of remaining trees within the immediate
vicinity;
(5) Removal of the tree will permit a lot or property to be buildable, if nonremoval
causes the lot or property to be unbuildable.
(6) Removal of the tree will avoid or alleviate a hardship of another nature on the lot or
residence located on the lot as approved by the Village Board ofTrustees.
(C) Tree removal permit when a building permit is sought. In the event a Tree Removal
Permit is sought in connection with construction requiring a building permit, the
application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A Tree Removal Permit fee, to be established from time to time by the Village Board
of Trustees;
(2) A Tree Survey of the lot prepared in conformance with the requirements of
§95.l0(E)(2); and
(3) A Tree Preservation Plan in conformance with the requirements of §95.l0(E)(3).
(D) Tree removal permit when no building permit is sought. In the event a Tree Removal Permit
is sought in connection with work for which no building permit is required, there shall be
no charge for such permit. The application for such Tree Removal Permit shall contain:
(1) Name and address of applicant;
(2) Commonly known address of Lot or property where tree or trees sought to be
removed are located;
(3) A written statement indicating the reason for removal of the tree or trees and
supporting documentation therefor;
(4) A general description and site plan showing the tree or trees to be removed,
including species and size; and
(5) Name and address of contractor or other person who is proposed as having
responsibility for tree removal.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-10
(E) Fees. A fee shall be paid for permit processing, and site inspections by Village Officials and/or
consultants, and appeals based on the size of the site. Government agencies and licensed public
utility companies shall be exempt from paying such fees. Fees shall be waived in the case of a
permit to remove a tree deemed to be damaged or diseased.
Penalty, see §95.28
§95.12 TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION.
During construction, best practices for tree preservation and all reasonable steps necessary to prevent
the damaging or destruction of trees (other than those specified to be removed) shall be taken,
including, but not limited to the following:
(A) No construction activity, movement and/or placement of equipment or material or spoils storage
shall be permitted outside the building activity area or within the Tree Preservation Area and no
excess soil, additional fill, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the Critical Root
Zone of any tree that is required to be preserved; nor shall storage of hazardous chemicals occur
within 100 feet of a protected tree.
(B) Unless otherwise authorized by a Tree Removal Permit, no soil is to be removed from within
the Critical Root Zone of any tree designated for preservation;
(C) Within a designated preserved woodland, a property owner or builder may clear underbrush
inside the woodland boundary line for the purpose of removing undesirable vegetation as noted
in §95.11, consistent with good forestry practices and best practices for tree preservation, subject
to the Critical Root Zone Protection requirements in this subchapter. A description of vegetation
management activities within the preserved woodland, including species to be removed, shall
be provided with the Tree Preservation Plan.
(D) Prior to commencing any grading or construction activity on a site, the developer shall tag the
trees that are intended for removal.
(E) The following guidelines shall apply to site grading:
(1) Building elevations and street elevations shall minimize the change in existing natural
grade of yards.
(2) Storm sewers, sanitary sewers and septic systems should be located and elevations set
in a manner that requires a minimum of regrading and tree removal.
(3) Tree retaining walls shall be required if grades will be lowered by more than 12
inches to create level ground for road or building construction nearby. Those walls
shall be used to protect roots from exposure and damage. If grades are to be raised
around a tree by filling with new dirt, a dry wall around the base of a tree shall be
provided to allow infiltration of water and air, and drainage tiles shall be provided
to facilitate drainage away from the trunk and to avoid smothering the roots. Light
porous materials shall be used for fill material. If retaining structures are used, they
shall be carefully designed so as to minimize impacts on the critical root zones of
trees to be preserved. Construction within Critical Root Zones shall use root
pruning techniques as described in the Tree Preservation Plan.
(F) Where possible, no digging or trenching shall take place within the established Tree Preservation
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-11
Area. If there is no alternative, certain precautions shall apply:
(1) Trenches shall be no closer to the trunk than half the distance of the Critical Root Zone
area;
(2) Prior to construction, the Tree Preservation Plan shall specify trees to be root pruned.
Roots shall be pruned under a supervision of a certified arborist with sharp instruments
to reduce the potential damage to the tree; and
(3) The trench shall be filled within the shortest amount of time possible and the returned
soil shall not be compacted.
(G) Appropriate protective fencing shall be temporarily installed to protect remaining trees. Trees to
be saved in any development shall be surrounded by orange plastic or red picked snow fencing
placed outside the critical root zone. The area within this fence shall be known as the Critical
Root Zone. The snow fencing shall be secured in place by posts spaced six feet apart and sunk
two feet into the ground with a minimum above-ground height of four feet.
(H) All required protective fencing or other physical barriers must be in place and approved by the
Village prior to beginning construction. Such fencing must remain in place during the entire
construction period to prevent the impingement of construction vehicles, materials, spoils, and
equipment into or upon the Tree Preservation Area and should not come down until all
construction is completed and equipment and materials and debris have been moved off site.
(I) No attachments, signs, fences or wires, other than those approved for bracing, guying or wrapping
trees, shall be attached to trees during the construction period.
(J) Other measures such as construction pruning and root pruning of trees directly affected by
construction must also be indicated on the plan.
(K) Trees must be fertilized and watered to aid in the recovery from possible construction damage.
(L) Periodic photo surveys may be required at the discretion of the Building Inspector during and
after construction completion to document that appropriate tree preservation techniques were
observed.
(M) The following guidelines shall apply to tree transplanting:
(1) Trees may be transplanted with a "tree spade" truck or be hand dug. The following
procedures shall be followed for hand digging: tree balls shall be hand shaped,
burlapped, and tied with twine to provide maximum protection to the root system
structure. A ball chain shall be used to remove a hand dug ball from thehole.
(2) Ten percent (10%) of the vegetative growth shall be pruned from the top of the tree prior
to transplanting or stockpiling, to balance root loss, except for certain base root shrubs
where most of the vegetative growth must be removed prior to transplanting when
determined to be necessary by a certified arborist or landscapearchitect.
(3) If transplanted trees will be stockpiled they shall be set far enough apart to allow for air
circulation. The balls will be covered with mulch. The root balls will be watered
regularly and fertilized as needed.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-12
(4) Upon planting, all trees shall be given the same orientation to the sun as they maintained
in their previous location. The trunks should be marked with paint, indicating which side
faced north, in its original location, prior to relocation.
Penalty, see §95.28
§95.13 TREE REPLACEMENT.
(A) In the event that a tree or trees designated for preservation on an approved Tree Preservation
Plan are severely damaged, destroyed or removed they shall be replaced upon notice by the
Building Inspector at the rates specified in division (E) below.
(B) All trees planted to meet the tree replacement requirements of this chapter shall be common and
native to northeastern Illinois and to the specific existing plant community found on the site.
The tree replacement species are subject to the approval of the Building Inspector or designee.
(C) Replacement trees shall be located close to the damaged or removed trees. If such placement is
not feasible, an alternate location shall be approved by the BuildingInspector or designee.
(D) In the event that the Building Inspector determines that full replacement would result in the unreasonable
crowding of trees upon the lot, the cash value of the outstanding trees including the
cost of the tree and labor to install, as determined by the Building Inspector, shall be paid to the
Village for the improvement of Village land.
(E) Tree Replacement Schedule.
TREE REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE
DBH Inches
of Existing
Trees
(in inches)
Minimum Caliper Inches
of Each Replacement Tree
(see footnotes*/**)
6 - 10 3 inches
11- 15 3 inches
16+ 3 inches
*The number of replacement trees required will vary depending on the size of the existing
tree(s), subject to approval of the Buildings Inspector.
**In such cases the combined calipers of the replacement trees shall equal 1.50 times the DBH
of the existing tree(s) which are designated for removal. For existing trees, in the event of the
DBH is expressed in whole number of inches plus a fraction of an inch, the number shall be
rounded to the nearest whole number (with one-half being rounded upwards).
Calculation Example:
DBH Inches x 1.5 equals (X) divided by 3 inches of Caliper equals numbers of replacement trees
(F) Maintenance Plan
Developers submit a 3-year maintenance plan for post-planting to include:
• Watering during the summer at 15 gal per tree per week,
• Mulch according to best practices: a 3in layer of double-ground mulch and that it doesn't
touch the trunk of the tree or the bark (this is to prevent volcano mulching).
• Tree replacement for trees that do not survive the first 3 years.
Penalty, see §95.28
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-13
§95.14 EMERGENCIES.
(A) In order to avoid danger or hazard to persons or property, during emergency conditions requiring
the immediate cutting or removal of a tree or trees protected hereunder, a Tree Removal Permit
shall be issued by the Building Inspector upon notice by the person removing the tree, and
without submittal of a formal application.
(B) 1n the event of such an emergency if neither the Building Inspector nor a designated
representative are available to issue such a Tree Removal Permit, it shall be lawful to proceed
with the cutting of the tree or trees to the extent necessary to avoid immediate danger or hazard.
In such event the person causing the cutting shall report the action taken to the Building Inspector
within 48 hours thereof.
§95.15 STOP WORK ORDER
If, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the necessary tree preservation precautions as specified in
this subchapter were not undertaken before construction commenced or are not maintained at any time
during construction, a Stop Work Order shall be issued by the Building Inspector until such time as the
permittee compiles with these precautions. If the situation is not promptly rectified penalty fees shall be
charged as specified in §95.28.
§95.16 TREES PRESERVATION ESCROW.
A Tree Preservation Escrow shall be provided by the permittee to insure the installation, maintenance,
and adequate performance of preservation measures on a project. These measures include installation of
tree protection devices during construction, repair of damaged trees, removal of dead, dying, or
hazardous trees, and planting of replacement trees. If the agreed-upon measures are not followed, the
Village can use the funds to perform the work. On completion of the installation of vegetation, the
permittee shall post a two-year letter of credit in the amount of 125% of the total cost of landscape
material for the first year, following Village acceptance of the installed landscaping, to guarantee the
maintenance and replacement of planting and landscaping materials shown on the final development
plan. This letter of credit may be reduced to 25 percent of total costs in the second year. The amount of
the letter of credit shall be based on costs determined by a plant nursery and approved by the Building
Inspector.
DEER PARK TREE COMMITTEE
§95.17 TREE COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.
A standing committee of the Corporate Authorities of the Village, hereinafter called " the Deer Park
Tree Committee", is hereby established and will consist of one Tree Committee chair, being the Village
President or a Trustee of the Village, as so duly appointed by the Village President for an indefinite term
as determined by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. One such
member shall be a certified arborist who has volunteered for such service to the Village or has been
engaged by the Village to provide arborist services to the Village, and one Village staff member as
recommended by the Village Administrator. The Deer Park Tree Committee shall meet not less than
once annually in order to make its tree budget recommendation to the VillageBoard.
§95.18 TREE COMMITTEE FUNCTIONS.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-14
The Tree Committee's functions will be to support, advise, and consult with the Village Administrator
in the enforcement of this Chapter regarding trees, recommend an annual budget to the Corporate
Authorities of the Village for a community forestry program, and to provide recognition of "Arbor Day"
with observance information and annual "Arbor Day" proclamations as so determined by said
committee.
§95.19 ARBORIST.
The Village Administrator of the Village, or his or her designee, is appointed as the enforcement officer
on the behalf of the Village for this Chapter. Said enforcement officer shall have the right to hire
by contract an ISA (International Society of Arboriculture) Certified Arborist as a Village Arborist
to investigate the condition of trees, to provide consultation, and submit recommendations to the
enforcement officer and to the Tree Committee for the purposes of the implementation of this
Chapter.
§95.20 CELEBRATION OF ARBOR DAY.
In 1872, J. Sterling Morton proposed to the Nebraska Board of Agriculture that a special day be set
aside for the planting of trees. The special day established for that purpose was called Arbor Day
and was first observed with the planting of more than a million trees in the state of Nebraska. Arbor
Day is now observed throughout the United States and the world. Trees have a positive effect on
the environment and on the economy by reducing the erosion of precious topsoil by wind and water,
lowering heating and cooling costs, assisting in moderating the air temperature, by producing clean
air, oxygen and providing a habitat for wildlife. Trees are a renewable resource from which paper
is made, wood is produced for the construction of homes, fuel for fires and for the production of
countless other wood products. The existence of trees in our Village increases property values,
enhances the economic vitality of business areas, beautifies our community, and wherever they are
planted, are a source of joy and spiritual renewal.
It shall be the policy of the Village of Deer Park and its Tree Committee to promote and celebrate
Arbor Day within the Village and to support efforts to protect trees and woodlands within the
Village and to encourage Village residents to plant and care for trees to promote the well-being of
Village residents and future generations.
NUISANCE TREES: INSPECTION, ABATEMENT, AND VIOLATION
§95.21 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
The officers, employees, and agents of the Village are hereby authorized and directed to enter on
and upon private property whereon there is located any tree that is suspected to be dead, diseased,
infected, or infested with a condition creating a substantial risk of harm to or spreading a condition
significantly injurious to other trees, persons, property, or animals, including without limitation, elm
trees having the appearance of or suspected of being diseased with Ceratocystis ulmi, commonly
called the Dutch elm disease, ash trees infested with the Emerald Ash Borer (Agrilus planipennis
Fairmaire), or any tree of the species of oak having the appearance of or suspected of being affected
with the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearurn, commonly called "oak wilt," and/or any tree having the
appearance of or suspected of being infected with conifer bark beetles, all as determined by the
Village Administrator, or designee, for the purpose of inspecting any suspected tree, after
giving notice of the Village's intent and purpose to enter in or upon any such property in the
Village, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspecting said suspected tree(s) and removing
therefrom samples or portions thereof to be tested to establish whether said tree is, in fact, dead,
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-15
diseased, infected, or infested.
§95.22 NUISANCE DECLARED.
In the event it is determined by the Village Administrator, or designee, or the Village Arborist,
that any pa rt of a tree is dead and any part of the tree imposes an imminent danger to a person
or property, and/or any tree is, in fact, diseased or infected or infested with a condition creating
a substantial risk of spreading such condition that would significantly be injurious to other trees,
persons, or animals, including without limitation, the Dutch elm disease, infested with the Emerald
Ash Borer, affected with oak wilt, or infected with conifer bark beetles, all as determined by the
Village Administrator, or designee, or Village Arborist, said tree or trees shall forthwith be and are
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§95.23 DUTY OF OWNER/OCCUPANT TO ABATE.
(A) Ash and Oak Trees: When requested in writing by the Village or its agent, each owner or
occupant of private property shall be required, within 30 days after such request has been
delivered or mailed to them by the Village Administrator, or designee, to have an inspection
on any tree(s) located on such private property by a qualified forestry professional in order
to determine whether any diseased elm tree(s) and/or tree(s) infested with the Emerald Ash
Borer, or any tree of the species of oak having the appearance of or suspected of being
affected with the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum, commonly called "oak wilt," and/or trees
infested with conifer bark beetles exists on such parcel of land. Written report(s) of the
results of such inspection shall also be provided to the Village within such 30-day period.
Such inspection and report shall include the marking and photographing of any tree(s) found
to be diseased elm tree(s), tree(s) infested with the Emerald Ash Borer, and/or any tree(s)
affected with the oak wilt, and/or trees infested with conifer bark beetles.
(B) Trees, Parts of Trees: The owner(s)or occupant(s) of private property on which a tree
(or part of a tree or trees) constituting a nuisance exists shall forthwith remove and destroy
said tree (or part of a tree or trees) and shall chip the same or shall cause the same to be
removed, destroyed, and ground, milled, chipped, or otherwise disposed of consistent
with the provisions of the applicable state or federal quarantine within 10 days of
notification to such owner, occupant, or agent that said dead, diseased, infected, and/or
infested tree is, in fact, dead, diseased, infected, and/or infested. No chips or other
particles resulting from such removal operation shall exceed one inch in any dimension,
unless allowed pursuant to the provisions of any applicable state or federal quarantine. All
stumps of such dead, diseased, infected, and/or infested trees shall be removed to a depth of
not less than eight inches below the ground surface and then covered with soil of the same
depth. No ash tree material shall be removed from any quarantine zone as imposed from
time to time by any state or federal agency, unless such removal is done consistent with the
provisions of the state or federal quarantine. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
Section to the contrary, all removal operations for such dead, diseased and/or infested tree(s)
or part of a tree shall fully comply with all applicable state and federal statutes and/or
regulations as exist from time to time.
§95.24 NOTICE TO ABATE.
Whenever the owner or occupant of any private property containing a dead, diseased, infected
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-16
and/or infested tree permits the dead, diseased, infected and/or infested tree to remain on such
premises, the Village shall proceed as follows:
(A) A notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or delivered to the occupant
and to the person to whom was sent the property tax bill for the general taxes for the last
preceding year on the subject parcel of land.
(B) Such notice shall state that there is a tree constituting a nuisance on the premises. The notice
shall describe the subject parcel of land by legal description or by street address, and shall
state that unless the dead, diseased, infected, or infested tree is removed on or before the
date stated in the notice, the dead, diseased, infected, or infested tree shall be removed at
the property owner's expense. The date stated in the notice shall be not less than 30 days
after the date of delivery or mailing of the notice.
(C) The notice shall also include a copy of this Chapter and a copy of 65 TLCS 5/11-20 -12.
§95.25 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE; CERTAIN COSTS CONSTITUTE A LIEN.
In all cases where the owner, occupant, or agent of the subject parcel of land on which said dead,
diseased, infected , or infested tree is located cannot be found, or if found and notified as aforesaid
neglects or refuses to abate said nuisance, it shall be lawful for the Village to abate the same
by the removal, destruction, and chipping of said dead, diseased, infected, or infested tree, and in
that event said owner, occupant, and agent, or any of them, shall be charged with those expenses
which may be incurred by the Village in the removal or abatement of the dead , diseased, infected,
or infested tree as aforesaid, which expense shall be collected by the Village by suit or otherwise
in addition to the fine or penalty provided. Such expenses incurred for the removal of a tree or trees
shall be a lien upon the affected subject parcel of land in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/IL-20-12.
§95.26 FAILURE TO REMOVE TREE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any parcel of land in the Village to permit any tree, or
portion thereof, determined to be a nuisance, as determined by the Village Administrator, or
designee, and/or the Village Arborist, to remain on such premises or anywhere within the
Village.
ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES
§95.27 ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS.
(A) The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall be the enforcement authority for
the purposes of the provisions of thisChapter.
(B) The owner of property on which one or more trees is located or on which any activity
affecting one or more trees regulated by this Chapter is or will be undertaken which is the
subject of any decision of the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, made pursuant
to this Chapter may appeal that decision in writing to the Corporate Authorities of the
Village. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Corporate Authorities of the Village shall schedule
and hold an informal hearing on such appeal as soon as practical after having given seven
(7) days' written notice to the parties to such appeal. The Corporate Authorities of the
Village shall render a final decision in writing on such appeal as soon as practical after such
hearing.
Title IX
Rev. 09/19
9-95-17
§95.28 PENALTIES.
Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or other entity who or which violates any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00
and not in excess of $750.00 per day and shall be responsible for the Village's cost of prosecution,
including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the
Village thereto. Each day that any violation of this Chapter shall exist or continue to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. The cutting or destruction of each separate tree in violation of this
Chapter shall also constitute a separate violation.
9-96-1 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 96: PARK PROPERTY
Section
§96.01 Definition
§96.02 Hours of Operation
§96.03 Damage to Property
§96.04 Dumping Garbage, Refuse and Trash
§96.05 Animals
§96.06 Assault, Battery, Fighting
§96.07 Fires
§96.08 Alcoholic Beverages
§96.09 Motorized Vehicles
§96.99 Penalties
§96.01 DEFINITION.
PARK. Open space property owned by the Village, whether or not designated as part of the Village park
system.
§96.02 HOURS OF OPERATION.
The Village parks shall be open daily to the public during hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o’clock
(10:00) P.M. (of any one day), and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons (other than Village
employees or contractors conducting Village business therein) to occupy or be present in the Village
parks during any hours in which such park is not open to the public.
§96.03 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
No person shall perform or attempt to perform any of the following acts on any park property in the
Village: Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges,
tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards,
whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures
or equipment, facilities or park property including shrubs, trees and other landscaping or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
§96.04 DUMPING GARBAGE, REFUSE AND TRASH.
No person shall perform or attempt to perform any of the following acts on any park property in the
Village: Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt,
rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are
not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§96.05 ANIMALS.
No person shall lead or allow to be loose upon park premises any animal unless held by a suitable line,
chain or strap and further, the person with the animal must remove any and all feces deposited by the
animal.
9-96-2 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
§96.06 ASSAULT, BATTERY, FIGHTING.
No person shall perform or attempt to perform any of the following acts on any park property in the
Village: Commit any assault, battery or engage in fighting.
§96.07 FIRES.
No person shall perform or attempt to perform any of the following acts on any park property in the
Village: Light or make use of any fire in the park system, except at such places as may be posted or
designated for that purpose; in which case, such fire shall be continuously under the care and direction
of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is completely extinguished.
§96.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
No person shall perform or attempt to perform any of the following acts on any park property in the
Village: Carry, possess, consume, sell, or give away any beverage or container containing alcoholic liquor,
beer, wine, or any intoxicating compound.
This Section shall not apply to licenses issued for special events on park property by the Village pursuant
to Chapter 112 of the Municipal Code.
§96.09 MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
(A) No vehicles subject to registration in Illinois as motor vehicles shall be operated on park property
outside of parking lots or other designated areas.
(B) The use of mini-bikes, ATV’s, motor driven scooters, snowmobiles or other off-road motorized
vehicles on park property is prohibited.
(C) Emergency vehicles, vehicles operated by public utility and vehicles used for park maintenance
are exempt from this section.
§96.99 PENALTY.
Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or other entity who or which violates any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00) and not in
excess of $750.00 per day and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not
limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. Each day
that any violation of this Chapter shall exist or continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The
cutting or destruction of each separate tree in violation of this Chapter shall also constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 00-29 passed 9/18/00; Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL IX-Chapt 96-Park Property-3-15.docx
CHAPTER 97: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
§97.01 Definitions
§97.02 Permit and Requirements
§97.03 Exceptions
§97.04 Permit Conditions and Approval Criteria
§97.05 Permit Procedure
§97.06 Review Process Reference Table
§97.07 Permits for Parades, Processions, Races, Marathons, and Certain Public Meetings
§97.01 DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words, terms and/or phrases are used in this Chapter, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section as specified below, except where the context
indicates otherwise:
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY: Any state, federal or local governmental entity created either by
state or federal law. Any affiliates who are directly connected to that same governmental entity
which are duly authorized and sanctioned by the governmental entity shall be considered a
governmental entity for purposes of this chapter.
PRIVATE SPECIAL EVENT: Those events of a temporary nature, provided for an exclusive or
invited group of a limited number of attendees, held on a premises approved by the Village, does
not exceed approved occupancy limits of the premises on which said special event is held, not
intended for the general public, without a fee, admission, or other charge assessed to attend.
PUBLIC SPECIAL EVENT: Those events for which the general public is invited or has access
and/or ability to attend and/or participate.
§97.02 PERMIT AND REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Permit Required: Any person or entity desiring to hold a special event within the Village is required
to apply to the Village and obtain approval by the Village for a special event permit prior to the
commencement or establishment of any special event or preliminary work thereon. All applications
for a special event permit must be completed in full and be accompanied by any and all required
fees, certificate of insurance, and related submittals. Special event permits shall not be transferrable
and shall be null and void upon written notice by the Village to the permittee based on the
following:
(1) The applicant fails to provide all the necessary information required;
(2) The applicant provides false information;
(3) The applicant or the business is not in compliance with any provision of this code, state or
federal laws, rules or regulations;
(4) The applicant has a background or history of violating local ordinance, state or federal law,
rule or regulation;
(5) The public health, welfare or safety would be adversely affected by the continuation of the
permit;
(6) The permit was issued in error;
(7) The applicant has outstanding fines, fees, or monies due the village and has failed to pay
them.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-1 Title IX
(05/12)
Should additional special events be contemplated by the applicant, which special event(s) were not
part of the original permit application submitted or approved after the issuance of the permit, the
applicant shall submit an additional application therefor to the Village requesting approval of the
additional proposed special event(s) or respective amendment(s) to the current special event permit.
(B) The fee for a special events permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day of the event.
Any refund of the permit fees shall be at the discretion of the Village Board or its designee.
(C) Inspection: All special events and the premises on which it is held shall be subject to periodic
inspections by authorized Village personnel to ensure continual compliance with the terms of this
Chapter and/or the special event permit issued therefor.
(D) Posting: Once issued, a special event permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the site of
the event and made available upon request by any authorized Village personnel.
§97.03 EXCEPTIONS:
Certain exceptions have been made for the following entities; however, these exemptions shall not
include tent and right-of-way permits and other required permits and licenses:
(A) Governmental entities shall be exempt from special event permitting.
(B) Educational institutions, approved or authorized by the State of Illinois, shall be exempt from
special event permitting.
(C) Daycare centers holding private special events shall be exempt from special event permitting.
(D) Private special events when held within the confines of a building shall be exempt from the special
event permitting (provided, however, this exemption for private special events shall not exempt the
event from all applicable liquor regulations and health and sanitation regulations).
(E) Potluck events as defined in 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/3.1 shall be exempt from special
event permitting.
§97.04 PERMIT CONDITIONS AND APPROVAL CRITERIA:
Special event permits shall be reviewed and considered by the Village based upon the following criteria
and shall be issued subject to compliance with this section:
(A) Access To Event For Attendees: There shall be in every permitted premises not less than two (2)
doors for exits leading to the outside, each not less than three feet (3') in width and opening
outward. Additionally, every room used for event purposes shall have a direct entrance from the
public street unless the entire interior thereof shall be visible through windows from the street, and
all parts of the premises shall be open and unobstructed by partitions, screens or other devices. This
provision shall not, however, be applicable to licensed hotels, motels or restaurants whose principal
business is the furnishing of food and/or lodging to patrons or existing establishments that have
been granted approval for the use of partitions.
(B) Access By Authorized Village Personnel: As a condition of the permit, the permittee shall permit
free and unobstructed access to the premises during the preinspection, licensing inspection, and
postinspection phases of event approval, by authorized village personnel while acting on village
business.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-2 Title IX
(05/12)
(C) Activities Allowed: Any activity occupying or using any street, public place, or public right-ofway
in the village may be allowed only in accordance with the provisions of this Code where
applicable.
(D) Admission Fee Charged: The application must provide, in sufficient detail, information regarding
whether admission fees or charges are to be assessed to attendees.
(E) Advertising and Signage For Special Event: The application must provide, in sufficient detail,
information regarding the proposed location of, and what type of event advertising and signage is
proposed to be utilized. All signage, and the location thereof, for the special event shall be
subject to the approval in advance by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, prior to
the posting thereof, and sign permits for temporary signs shall be required in accordance with this
Code.
(F) Alcohol Beverage Service: If consumption of alcohol is proposed, said use must comply with all
applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code and Illinois State law, including but not
limited to the applicant’s application for and obtaining of the required Village and State liquor
license(s).
(G) Amusement Rides/Equipment: If amusement rides/equipment use is proposed, said use must
comply with all applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code and Illinois State law.
(H) Animal Shows; Demonstrations; Exhibits; Exhibitions: If animal use is proposed, said use must
comply with all applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code, all applicable rules,
regulations, ordinances and Illinois State law.
(I) Certificate Of Insurance: All applications for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a
certificate of general liability insurance which shall name the Village of Deer Park, the Lake
County Sheriff’s Office, and their respective officers, officials, employees, agents, and volunteers
as additional insureds and shall be subject to the prior approval of the Village Attorney.
(J) Compatibility With Surroundings And Existing Development: The nature and intensity of the
special event must be so planned that the special event will be compatible with the surroundings
and the existing development in the vicinity of the site.
(K) Compliance With Village Standards: The special event proposed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code.
(L) Deposits: A cash deposit to reimburse the Village for any costs incurred by the Village relative to
the event for which a special event permit is issued may be required. A minimum cash deposit of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more may be required depending on the nature of the event as
determined by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee.
(M) Entertainment License Also Required: If the special event includes entertainment, as defined in
the Deer Park Municipal Code, a separate entertainment license shall be required.
(N) Event Description: The application must provide, in sufficient detail, a complete and accurate
description of the event for which the permit is applied.
(O) Fees: No permit shall be issued until all applicable fees are paid.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-3 Title IX
(05/12)
(P) Fire and Life Safety: Events must comply with all applicable provisions of the Deer Park
Municipal Code.
(Q) Food Service: If food is prepared or served, said event must comply with all applicable provisions
of the Deer Park Municipal Code and all applicable State and County rules, regulations, and laws.
A food menu shall be provided with the application.
(R) Fundraising Activities: Events including fundraising activities shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code and all applicable State of Illinois rules, regulations,
and laws.
(S) Health, Safety, And Welfare: In all respects, the event shall not significantly or materially be
detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the public or injurious to other property or
improvements in the surrounding area, including, but not limited to, excess traffic, parking, noise,
pedestrian safety, and adverse effects on neighboring areas.
(T) Indemnification Agreement; Waiver and Release: As a condition of approval of the proposed
special event permit, the applicant shall be required to execute an Indemnification Agreement,
Waiver and Release provided by the Village and in substantially the form contained in Section
97.07 of this Chapter.
(U) Lighting and Sound Systems Utilization: Lighting, sound, and/or stage systems will be inspected
by the village and shall be in compliance with village and state laws. All proposed lighting and
sound system utilization, and the location thereof, for the special event shall be subject to the
approval in advance by the Village Board, or its designee, prior to issuance of the respective
special event permit.
(V) Municipal Property Use Permit: If the event includes use of municipal property, said use must
comply with all applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code and any other applicable
Village policies.
(W) Nuisance Control: Efficient means shall be employed to prevent ordinary sounds of the event
emanating from and/or within the premises from being heard on adjoining premises or on the
public street; and no unusually loud entertainment noise or any boisterousness or noisy conduct
on the part of the patrons shall be permitted. All premises shall be reasonably lighted at all times
when any patrons shall be therein, and at all times when such premises are open to the public.
Premises access doors shall remain closed during the course of any event. No deliveries shall be
accepted while an event is in progress.
(X) Occupancy/Attendance: Occupancy and attendance at the proposed special event shall be limited
to the maximum occupancy for the respective premises at which said special event is held and
shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code, Fire
District ordinances, and County and State laws.
(Y) Open To The General Public: The application shall provide, in sufficient detail, information
regarding who is invited to attend and/or participate in the event and whether the general public
may attend and/or participate.
(Z) Parking Availability: Parking areas, both on and off street, for the particular event, shall be of
adequate size, properly located, and the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to prevent
traffic hazards and nuisances.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-4 Title IX
(05/12)
(AA) Premises And/Or Parcel Of Sufficient Size: The size of the premises and/or parcel shall be of
sufficient size to adequately accommodate the event.
(BB) Police Activity During The Preceding Year: The application must provide, in sufficient detail,
information regarding past police activity at any prior similar events or events sponsored by the
same party in the Village.
(CC) Police Activity At Any Prior Events In Other Jurisdictions: The application must provide
information regarding past police activity at any prior similar events or events sponsored by the
same party in jurisdictions outside of the Village.
(DD) Public Right-of-way Use: Any event or activity occupying or using any street, public place, or
public right-of-way in the Village may be allowed only in accordance with these provisions and
only after a right-of-way permit has been issued by the Village.
(EE) Refuse And Recycling Needs: Refuse and recycling shall be in compliance with Village rules,
regulations, and ordinances. As needed, a recycling container shall be placed next to each refuse
container for public use. Materials recycled shall include, but may not be limited to, plastic, glass,
aluminum, and paper. Final disposal of the refuse and recyclables shall be placed in the
appropriate designated dumpsters.
(FF) Restroom Facility Availability: Every premises shall be provided with separate isolated toilets
and lavatory facilities for each sex, which shall be constructed and maintained in a sanitary
condition in conformance with the laws of the State of Illinois, of the applicable county health
department, and all other applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code.
(GG) Sales And/Or Promotions: The sale, service, or consumption of commodities for which permits
and licenses are otherwise required shall not be permitted in any premises unless the proper
license or licenses therefor are obtained for the premises in the name of the owner or manager of
such premises.
(HH) Security Required: The application must provide, in sufficient detail, information regarding the
security plan, as well as whether security personnel are armed or unarmed.
(II) Smoking: Smoking shall be in compliance with Village and State law.
(JJ) Temporary Structures (Tents/Canopies): Any tent, canopy, and/or temporary structure erected to
house all or part of an event shall require a permit and shall be removed within three (3) days of
the completion of the event. There shall be no exemptions to this requirement. Such temporary
structure(s) shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Deer Park Municipal Code.
(KK) Traffic: The location of the event shall be designed so that adverse effects on surrounding
properties will be minimal, particularly regarding the traffic generated by the event.
(LL) Village Services: The application must provide information regarding request for Village
services, including but not limited to police services, and any request to waive fees associated
with providing these services in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Deer Park
Municipal Code and any other Village policy.
(MM) Other Conditions And Approval Criteria:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-5 Title IX
(05/12)
(1) The permit holder shall be required to pay for any additional police, fire or other Village
response required to attend any event.
(2) A review of the specific premises may be required by the Village to determine that any life or
safety codes are not in violation during the proposed event.
(3) In addition to the specific regulations, standards, and time limitations set forth in this section,
events shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions on their location and operation as
deemed necessary from time to time by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee.
(4) No person shall give away or use any live animal as a prize or as an inducement to enter any
contest or game.
§97.05 PERMIT PROCEDURE:
(A) Application: An application for a special event shall be made by the owner of the affected property
or duly authorized agent. Written permission from the property owner or duly authorized agent to
hold such an event shall accompany the application, if applicable. In situations where there is
question as to whether the event is regulated by the special event provisions, the applicant may first
submit a letter of request for preliminary review to the Village Administrator, or his or her
designee.
(B) Review; Approval Or Denial Of Application: All special event applications, together with all
required submittals and payment of respective fee(s) and/or deposit(s), shall be submitted to the
Village Administrator, or his or her designee, for his initial review. Applications shall be submitted
forty five (45) days prior to the event. Applications that do not meet the time criteria will be
reviewed on a case by case basis. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all applications
shall be subject to the final approval of the Village Board, or its designee. The Village
Administrator, or his or her designee, may deny the permit if it is determined that the Village Board
has insufficient time to review and consider any application. Within seven (7) days of notice of
denial or revocation of a special event permit, a written appeal may be made to the Village Board or
its designee by the applicant.
(C) Information Required For Conditions And Approval Criteria: Applications for special events shall
include all of the information required for the conditions and approval criteria.
(D) Entertainment License: Applications which also require an entertainment license shall be referred to
the Village Board for approval.
(E) Special Events Allowed: Events that may be allowed as special events pursuant to this Chapter shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Block Parties And Street Dances: A special event permit shall be required for block parties
and street dances.
(2) Car Wash Events: A special event permit shall be required for all car wash events, and such
permits may only be granted for fundraising activities.
(3) Carnivals, Zoos, Animal Exhibits (Except Charitable Pet Adoptions), Petting Zoos, And
Animal Rides: A special event permit and entertainment license shall be required for a
carnival, zoo, animal exhibit (except charitable pet adoptions), petting zoo, or animal rides
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-6 Title IX
(05/12)
and may only be granted to Deer Park not-for-profit organizations (Deer Park not for profit
organizations shall either be based in Deer Park or have a minimum of 51 percent of their
membership residing within the Village limits). Each such permit shall be valid for a period
not to exceed ten (10) days per calendar year. A limit of two (2) permits per calendar year
will be allowed at the same location. All operations shall cease activities by ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Friday and Saturday.
(4) Christmas Tree Sales: A special event permit shall be required for the outdoor display and
open lot sales of Christmas trees, and such permits may only be granted to Deer Park not-forprofit
organizations (Deer Park not-for-profit organizations shall either be based in Deer Park
or have a minimum of 51 percent of their membership residing within the Village limits).
However, a permit shall not be required for the outdoor display and sale of Christmas trees
within permanent outdoor sales areas which are incidental and accessory to an approved
permitted use. Each such permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed forty five (45) days.
All unsold trees must be removed from the property by December 31 of each calendar year.
(5) Circuses: A special event permit and entertainment license shall be required for circuses.
Each special event permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed ten (10) days per calendar
year. A limit of two (2) permits per calendar year will be allowed at the same location.
(6) Film Production: A film production using public or private property within the Village for the
purpose of producing, videotaping or filming of commercials, movies, television programs,
training tapes or films and other moving picture media activity shall require a permit.
(a) If a production is of a simple nature, does not involve closing of any streets, requires no
Village employees and/or Village equipment to participate in the event, then the
Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall issue a special event permit to the
person, persons, or organization making application therefor.
(b) If a production involves the closure or blockage of any Village streets and/or Village
employees, Village equipment, or other Village resources are to be used in the course
of the production, the special event permit shall require Village Board approval.
Film production for the filming of actual news events by the media or by the Village and
other governmental entities serving the community shall not require a special event permit.
(7) Neighborhood Or Residential Garage Sales: A special event permit is required for
neighborhood or residential garage sales conducted by several residential property owners
within the same block or contiguous blocks, and may be allowed only in accordance with the
provisions of this Code.
(8) Promotions, Corporate Functions, Gatherings, Grand Openings And Ribbon Cuttings, And
Nonresidential Open Houses Occurring Outside A Building:
(a) Any private promotion or event scheduled outside of a building or structure shall be
required to secure a special event permit.
(b) Any public promotions, corporate functions, gatherings, grand openings and ribbon
cuttings, and nonresidential open houses shall require special event permit and Village
Board approval.
Each such permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed a total of thirty (30) days per
calendar year for the same location and the days need not be consecutive.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-7 Title IX
(05/12)
(9) Parades, Processions, Marathons, And Public Meetings: Parades, processions, marathons, and
public meeting special events must comply with all applicable provisions of the Deer Park
Municipal Code.
(10) Public Events/Food Consumption: Whenever food is available for consumption by the
general public, a special event permit and the approval of the applicable county health
department shall be secured.
(11) Temporary Outdoor Sales:
(a) Arts And Crafts Show: A special event permit shall be required for all temporary
outdoor arts and crafts shows. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than ten (10) days and may be renewed twice during any calendar year.
(c) Other Temporary Outdoor Sales: A special event permit shall be required for all
temporary outdoor sales. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than
ten (10) days and may be renewed twice during any calendar year. Such sales may be
conducted only on the premises of a business where the same products are sold and as
an accessory use to an existing business that sells the product, or on the premises of
regional shopping centers. Such temporary sales shall be conducted by the operator of
said business with a Deer Park business license for that purpose. All sales transactions
must take place either on the premises of a Deer Park business or on the premises of a
regional shopping center. Storage of trucks and trailers and sales and/or display of
products from trucks or truck trailers is prohibited.
(12) Vehicle Exhibits Or Demonstrations Held Outdoors: A special event permit and
entertainment license shall be required for vehicle exhibits and demonstrations including, but
not limited to, cruise nights and car or truck demonstrations. Such a special event permit shall
require Village Board approval.
§97.06 REVIEW PROCESS REFERENCE TABLE:
SPECIAL EVENT REVIEW PROCESS REFERENCE TABLE
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-8 Title IX
(05/12)
Administrative Review
(By Village Administrator, Lake County Sheriff’s
Office and Building Department)
Village Board Approval
Assembly, open air public meeting, and rally.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Assembly, open air public meeting, and rally.
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Bicycle race and bike-a-thon.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Bicycle race and bike-a-thon.
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Block party and street dances.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Block party and street dances.
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Car wash event fundraiser.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Car wash event fundraiser.
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
§97.07 PERMITS FOR PARADES, PROCESSIONS, MARATHONS, RACES, AND CERTAIN
PUBLIC MEETINGS:
(A) Requirement: All parades, processions, footraces, marathons, walk-a-thons, bike-a-thons, bike
races, open air public meetings, or any other group sponsored activity occupying or using any street
or other public place in the Village, hereinafter referred to as a “special event”, except funerals, are
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-9 Title IX
(05/12)
Carnivals, zoos, animal exhibits, petting zoos, and
animal rides.
Both a special event permit and an entertainment
license are required.
Ceremony/wedding processions.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Ceremony/wedding processions.
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Christmas tree sales on open lots.
(for Deer Park not-for-profit organizations only)
Circuses.
Both a special event permit and an entertainment
license are required.
Film production.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Film production.
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Marathon, walk-a-thon, and races.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Marathon, walk-a-thon, and races
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Neighborhood or residential garage sales.
Same block or contiguous blocks.
Other group sponsored activity occupying or using any
street or public place
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Processions and parades.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Processions and parades
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Promotions, corporate functions, gatherings,
grand openings and ribbon cuttings, and
nonresidential open houses.
No street closures, blockages, or other Village
resources required.
Promotions, corporate functions, gatherings, grand
openings and ribbon cuttings, and nonresidential open
houses.
With street closures, blockages, and/or other Village
resources required.
Public special event food consumption
Temporary outdoor sales:
Arts and crafts shows
Other outdoor sales
Tent/canopy/temporary structure. Vehicle exhibits and demonstrations held outdoors.
Both a special event permit and an entertainment
license are required.
forbidden unless public right-of-way permits are first obtained. Public right-of-way and special
event permits, dependent upon class, require either Village staff approval or Village Board permit
approval. It is unlawful for any person to participate in any of the aforementioned activities that
have not been authorized by a public right-of-way permit and special event permit issued by the
Village.
(B) Application, Grounds For Refusal: Written application of the purpose, time, number of participants,
and desired route of any of the events and the names of the officers or persons in charge of the same
must be provided to the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, at least forty five (45) days
prior to the event by the person or persons responsible therefor. The Lake County Sheriff’s Office
may designate the route, the location, and the width of the street the special event may use. Special
reference to crowded thoroughfares and impact on the surrounding community shall be considered.
It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge of the activity to obey such designation when
made. The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may refuse to issue or may revoke such
permit(s) if the applicant, group, organization, or person associated with the applicant has in
previous years, in connection with any previous activity, violated the provisions of a similar permit,
municipal ordinances, or laws of any state or of the United States, or if by reason of the nature of
the proposed activity the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, or the Lake County Sheriff’s
Office shall be of the opinion that the granting of such permit(s) will result in a breach of the peace,
undue interference with traffic by those involved in such activity, or for other specific grounds
contrary to public order or safety. The Village Board may also deny issuance of such permit(s) on
any of the above grounds. Within seven (7) days of notice of denial or revocation of such permit(s)
issued by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, a written appeal may be made to the
Village Board, or his or her designee, by the applicant.
(C) Information Required: An application for such permit(s) shall set forth the following information:
(1) The route along which such aforementioned activity is to proceed;
(2) The time such event is to start;
(3) The duration of such event;
(4) The number of anticipated participants;
(5) The name of the person, persons, or organization in control thereof or responsible therefor;
(6) The purpose of such event;
(7) A detailed list of village support requested or required.
(D) Issuance Of Permits: If the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, upon recommendation
from the Lake County Sheriff’s Office, finds that such event is to be held for a lawful purpose, will
not tend to be a breach of the peace, will not interfere with the public use of the public ways of the
village, or will not interfere with the peace and quiet of the residents of the Village, permits issued
for right-of-way usage and the related special event may be approved as follows:
(1) Class A Permit: If a special event is of a small nature, i.e., not more than one hundred (100)
anticipated participants, not closing any streets, requiring no Village employees or Village
equipment to participate in the event, then the Village Administrator, or his or her designee,
shall issue such public right-of-way permit and special event permit to the person, persons, or
organization making application therefor.
(2) Class B Permit: If a special event has more than one hundred (100) anticipated participants,
some Village streets may be closed or blocked, or Village employees or Village equipment or
Village resources (including but not limited to the resources of the Lake County Sheriff’s
Office) are to be used in the course of this event, the Village Administrator, or his or her
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-10 Title IX
(05/12)
designee, may recommend to a Village Board issuance of the permit(s). The Village Board
shall review the request and approve or disapprove an application for such permit(s).
(E) Insurance And Indemnification Requirements:
(1) A person, persons, or organization making application for a Class A or Class B public rightof-
way permit and/or a related special event permit shall execute an agreement to indemnify
and hold harmless the Village and the Lake County Sheriff’s Office, relative to the special
event on a form provided by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, and
substantially in the form set forth in this Chapter. The Village and the Lake County Sheriff’s
Office, their respective officers, trustees, employees, agents, and volunteers, shall be listed as
additional insured on a general liability insurance policy in the amount of at least two million
dollars ($2,000,000.00) per claim. The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may
reasonably require special events insurance and dram shop insurance if liquor will be sold or
served at the event.
(2) The applicant for a Class A or Class B public right-of-way permit and/or a related special
event permit shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement indemnifying the
Village and the Lake County Sheriff’s Office, and their respective officers, ,trustees,
employees, volunteers, and other agents, which shall be in substantially the following form:
INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT, WAIVER AND RELEASE
The undersigned, as the duly-authorized agent of the Applicant(s) for certain permits and
approvals from the Village of Deer Park (the “Village”) relative to the above-captioned
Special Event (“Village approvals”) related to the use of certain Village public ways(s), for
his, her, and/or their respective officers, members, volunteers, invitees, participants, agents,
heirs, successors and/or assigns, do(es) hereby agree to, to the greatest extent permitted by
law, hold harmless, indemnify, and defend the Village and the Lake County Sheriff’s Office
and their respective officers, officials, employees, volunteers, and other agents (collectively
referred to as the “Indemnitees”) from and against any costs, claims, and/or damages, losses,
liability, and/or other expense (including but not limited to attorneys’ fees and other costs of
defense of counsel for the Village selected by the Village, and including but not limited to
attorneys’ fees and other costs of defense of counsel for the Lake County Sheriff’s Office
selected by Lake County) directly or indirectly arising out of or related to the Village
approvals granted by the Village and/or any agreement made or entered into with the Village,
and/or arising out of or related directly or indirectly to the aforesaid Special Event and the
applicants’ use of the Village’s public way(s), including but not limited to any challenge to
such Village Approvals, and/or any claim whether or not arising out of or related to, in whole
or in part, any act(s) or omission(s) of the Applicant(s), or its respective officers, members,
volunteers, invitees, participants, and/or agents, whether or not such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this Resolution or any permit, license, or other approval
granted by the Village or any agreement made or entered into with the Village relative to the
aforesaid special event; and the undersigned also agree(s) to and do(es) hereby waive and
release any claim or cause of action the undersigned and/or his, her, or its respective officers,
members, volunteers, invitees, participants, agents, heirs, successors, and/or assigns might
have now or in the future against the Indemnitees arising out of and/or related directly or
indirectly to the aforesaid Special Event and/or the use by the Applicant(s) and its officers,
members, volunteers, invitees, participants, agents, heirs, successors and assigns of the
Village public way(s).
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-11 Title IX
(05/12)
This Indemnification Agreement shall be and is binding on the applicant(s) and on any of
his, her, its, and/or their respective officers, members, volunteers, invitees, participants,
agents, heirs, successors, and/or assigns of the Applicant(s).
The undersigned states that he or she is duly authorized to execute this
Indemnification Agreement, Waiver and Release on behalf of the Applicant(s) set forth below
and hereby accepts the terms and conditions of the Village approvals for the aforesaid Special
Event granted by Resolution for the Applicant(s) and their respective officers, members,
employees, agents, volunteers, invitees, participants, agents, successors and assigns, and
agrees to be bound by same.
__________________________________ (“Applicant”)
By: _______________________________________
[Print Name] ____________________________
Its __________________, and duly authorized agent
ATTEST:
_______________________________________
Its _______________________________
(F) Cash Deposit Required: A person, persons, or organization making application for a public right-ofway
permit shall be required to post a cash deposit with the Village Treasurer in order to reimburse
the Village for any expenses incurred by the Village relative to the proposed special event, in the
amount of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or such other amount as reasonably
determined necessary by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, prior to a permit being
issued. Subject to the approval of the Village Board, issuance of the permit by the Village
Administrator, or his or her designee, shall be granted upon presentation of proof that the cash
deposit has been paid. This cash deposit shall be refundable to the permit holder upon completion
of the aforementioned activity, less any funds expended to reimburse the Village for its costs
incurred relative to the special event.
(G) Waiver Of Cash Deposit; Reduce Amount Of Insurance: A request for the waiver of the cash
deposit or reduction in the insurance amounts shall be presented to the Village Board. Only the
Village Board has the authority to waive the cash deposit and/or reduce the amount of insurance
required.
(H) Class B Permit; Additional Insurance, Cash Deposit: The Village Board may require additional
insurance, cash deposit, or indemnification after a review of a Class B public right-of-way permit
application, as determined reasonable and necessary to protect the interests of the Village, its
residents, officials, employees, agents, or property.
(Ord. 2012-08, passed 3/19/12)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9-97-12 Title IX
(05/12)
9-98-1 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 98: DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
§98.01 Definitions
§98.02 Charges for Service
§98.03 Illicit Discharge
§98.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning hereby ascribed to them, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
BMP means “Best Management Practices”, as defined in General NPDES Permit No. ILR40.
General NPDES permit No. ILR40 means the General NPDES Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems, issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division
of Water Pollution Control, effective April 1, 2009, as the same may hereafter be amended.
Hazardous Material means anything which threatens physical harm to the health or safety of any person,
plant, animal, or real or personal property.
Illicit Discharge means any discharge to the Village storm water sewer system that is not composed entirely
of storm water, except discharges authorized under NPDES Permit ILR40, as defined in 40 CFR
122.26(b)(2).
Responsible Party means any person who owns, leases, operates or controls any facility, equipment or vehicle
from which a discharge of hazardous material has occurred or threatens to occur, or who proximately
causes any discharge of hazardous materials, within or into the Village of Deer Park.
§98.02 CHARGES FOR SERVICE.
Any Responsible Party shall be liable to the Village or agency acting on behalf of the Village for the full
actual cost incurred in responding to, containing, remediating or otherwise dealing with a discharge of
hazardous material, including the cost of replacing equipment or products, and for any specialized
equipment or service involved.
§98.03 ILLICIT DISCHARGE.
A. Pursuant to General NPDES Permit No. ILR40 and other applicable laws, rules and regulations,
it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into the Village storm water sewer system
any unpermitted (illicit) discharge.
B. The Village Engineer shall promulgate rules and regulations to:
1. Establish and enforce a program to detect and eliminate illicit discharges;
2. Require prompt reporting to the Village of any unpermitted discharge;
3. Respond to reports of any such discharge in a timely manner;
4. Inform public employees, businesses and the general public of hazards associated with
9-98-2 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
unpermitted discharges, improper disposal of waste and the requirement and mechanism
for reporting such discharges;
5. Define appropriate BMPs for minimum control and measurable goals to ensure the reduction
of all pollutants of concern in the Village storm water sewer system to the maximum
extent practicable; and address non-storm water discharges identified in General
NPDES Permit No. ILR40, §1.B.2, which are identified as significant contributors of
pollutants to the Village storm water sewer system;
6. Provide for periodic inspections of the storm sewer outfalls for detection of non-storm
water discharges and illegal dumping.
C. The Village Engineer shall maintain a storm sewer system map showing the location of all outfalls
and the name and location of all waters that receive discharges from those outfalls.
D. Any violation of this Chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this Chapter, is
prohibited and shall be punishable, upon conviction therefor, by a fine of not more than $750.00
and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney
fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. Each day on which a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
E. The Village, after a reasonable effort to require a responsible party to terminate a discharge
of hazardous material or an unauthorized discharge into the Village storm water sewer system,
may enter upon private lands and do all things reasonably necessary to terminate such discharge.
(Ord. 07-03 passed 2/20/07; Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15, 09-13 passed 8/17/09)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL IX-Chapt 98-Discharge Hazardous Materials-3-15.docx
9-99-1 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 99: SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Section
§99.01 Definitions
§99.02 Smoking Prohibited in Public Places and Places of Employment
§99.03 Exemptions
§99.04 Designation of Other No-Smoking Areas
§99.05 Responsibilities of Proprietors
§99.06 Enforcement
§99.07 Penalties
§99.01 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter, the below terms shall have the following ascribed meanings:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by
guests on the premises and that derives no more than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed
on the premises. “Bar” includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary
wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation,
trust, or non-profit entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with (i)
solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or (ii) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive
of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium,
health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where
members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois Gaming
Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming
equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical,
mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or
chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists,
and all specialists within these professions. “Healthcare facility” includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private
rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees
are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including, but not
9-99-2 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
limited to entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking
is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias;
and other common areas. A private residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed
child care, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a “place of
employment.”
PRIVATE CLUB: A not-for-profit association that (i) has been in active and continuous existence for at
least 3 years prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, whether incorporated
or not; (ii) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club
purposes at all times; (iii) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent,
or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and (iv) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its
operation. For purposes of this definition, “private club” means an organization that is managed by a board
of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established
bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the
payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private
home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes
of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation,
hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of
whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois,
the Village of Deer Park, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission,
including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes
that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A “public place” does not include a private
residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar
social service care on the premises. A ‘public place’ includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants,
retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert
halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially
enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places,
private clubs, gaming facilities, all government-owned vehicles and facilities, healthcare facilities or
clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities,
ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns,
bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters within a
hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented
to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich
stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere.
‘Restaurant” includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than 80% of its gross revenue
from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices
for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental, “retail tobacco store” does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger
commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license. “Smoke” or
“smoking” means the carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette,
hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment.
9-99-3 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or burning cigarette, cigar,
pipe, hookah pipe, pipe weed, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form.
§99.02 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or place of employment within
the Village of Deer Park.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place designated as a “No Smoking Area,” as
provided in Section 99.05 of this Chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in any
place of employment.
(4) It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to
knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in said public place.
(5) It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to fail
to post signage or remove ash trays, as provided in Section 99.05 of this Chapter.
§99.03 EXEMPTIONS.
The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this Chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking
rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from
these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited
under the provisions of this Chapter. Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to guests
in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is permitted. The status of
rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional non-smoking
rooms.
(2) Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or government vehicles.
(3) Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a child care, adult day care, health care
facility, or any other home-based business open to the public.
(4) Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied
by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a
room where smoking is permitted.
(5) Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco dealer, whose principal business is the
sale of retail of tobacco and tobacco-related products; provided that smoke generated by smoking
on the premises of the tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is
otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been granted.
§99.04 DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO-SMOKING AREAS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a non9-
99-4 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
enclosed area of said public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where
smoking is also prohibited, provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously
post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in Section 99.05 of this Chapter.
§99.05 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPRIETORS.
Each owner, lessee, occupant, employer or other person in control of a public place or a place of
employment shall be responsible for all the following:
(1) Post conspicuous signs in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place, place
of employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may be, bearing the text
“No Smoking” or the international “No Smoking” symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation
of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it. Such signs shall also be posted
outside of the main entrance to the public place or place of employment, and shall reference the
fifteen foot buffer zone in which smoking is prohibited.
(2) Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended for the deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes,
cigars or other tobacco products from public places.
(3) Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited to refrain from smoking,
and if the person continues to smoke, request the person to leave.
(4) Notify employees regarding the requirements of this Chapter.
§99.06 ENFORCEMENT.
(1) This Chapter shall be enforced by the Village of Deer Park and the Lake County Sheriff’s Office.
(2) Notice of the provisions of this Chapter shall be given to all applicants for a business license in
the Village of Deer Park.
(3) Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this Chapter may initiate enforcement
by contacting the Lake County Sheriff’s Office.
(4) An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by
this Chapter shall inform persons violating this Chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof
and request that the violator cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to
smoke, request the person to leave.
§99.07 PENALTIES.
(1) Any person who shall violate Section 99.03 or 99.04 of this Chapter shall, on conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine of $100 for a first violation and $250 for any subsequent violations within
one year and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited
to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. Each day
in which a violation occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
(2) Any person who shall violate Section 99.02 of this Chapter shall, on conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of $500.00 upon conviction for the first violation and $750.00 for each subsequent
conviction stemming from a violation within one year of the initial violation and shall be responsible
for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs
9-99-5 Title IX
(Rev. 3/15)
and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. Each separate instance of a violation
or each day on which a continuing violation of Section 99.02 occurs constitutes a separate and
distinct violation.
(3) Any person who shall violate Section 99.05 of this Chapter shall, on conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of $250 for each violation and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution,
including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred
by the Village thereto. Each day during which a violation of Section 99.05 continues beyond the
specified time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable offense, although owners, operators,
managers or other controllers of public places and places of employment shall be given a
reasonable time to come in to compliance with Section 99.05 following issuance of a notice of
violation, but such period shall not, in any event, exceed one week.
(4) In addition to the fines established by this Section, violation of this Chapter by a person who
owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result
in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on
which the violation occurred.
(5) Violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by an
action in the Circuit Court for injunctive relief or other means provided for by law, and the Village
may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
(Ord. 07-25, passed 10/22/07) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15, 12-06 passed 3-19-12)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL IX-Chapt 99-Smoking in Public Places-3-15.docx
11-109-1 Title XI
(5/19)
CHAPTER 109: LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXPAYERS’ BILL OF RIGHTS
This Chapter shall apply to the administration and enforcement of Village tax laws when the
Village is responsible for collecting any taxes lawfully imposed under a Village ordinance.
This Chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the Village’s tax
ordinances. To the extent that any Village tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this
Chapter, this Chapter shall be controlling unless otherwise prohibited by state law.
Section
§109.01 Definitions
§109.02 Notices
§109.03 Late Payment
§109.04 Payment
§109.05 Certain Credits and Refunds
§109.06 Audit Procedure
§109.07 Appeal
§109.08 Hearing
§109.09 Interest and Penalties
§109.10 Abatement
§109.11 Installment Contracts
§109.12 Statute of Limitations
§109.13 Voluntary Disclosure
§109.14 Publication of Tax Ordinances
§109.15 Internal Review Procedure
§109.16 Application
§109.01 DEFINITIONS.
In addition to those terms defined in this code, certain words or terms herein shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et. seq.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The Village Administrator who is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff,
employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the
local tax administrator’s stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement
the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the
local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this Chapter and the Act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX: Each tax imposed by the Village that is
collected or administered by the Village not an agency or department of the state. It does not
include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the
Village other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
11-109-2 Title XI
(5/19)
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in
connection with each of the Village’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance passed by the Village that imposes any locally imposed and
administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally
includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to
consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the Village.
§109.02 NOTICES.
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing
mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit
or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
(A) First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the
persons' last known address, or
(B) Personal service or delivery.
§109.03 LATE PAYMENT.
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the Village pursuant to any
tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a) physically received by the Village on or before
the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S.
postal service postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the Village, with
adequate postage prepaid.
§109.04 PAYMENT.
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a)
first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second to the interest due for the applicable period;
and c) third to the penalty for the applicable period.
§109.05 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
(A) The Village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at
the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared
invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a
taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the
taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
11-109-3 Title XI
(5/19)
(B) Unless a different statute of limitations is included in the specific provisions imposing a
tax under this municipal code, the statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall
be two (2) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The Village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes,
interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the Village.
(C) The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes,
interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit
or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or
receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return,
in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be
applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable,
related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be
no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to
the Village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a
refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason
for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund
or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate
of four percent (4%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365)
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date
of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
11-109-4 Title XI
(5/19)
§109.05 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
Any request for proposed audit of the taxpayer’s books and records pursuant to any local
administered tax shall be in writing to the taxpayer and shall comply with the notice requirements
of this chapter.
(A) Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. the tax;
2. the time period to be audited;
3. a brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor;
and
4. an identification of who will be conducting the audit, and in the case of a thirdparty
auditor, the Village must provide written authorization for them to review the
books and records of the taxpayer before such third-party auditor contacts the
taxpayer.
(B) Any audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days
from the date the notice is given during normal business hours. However, if the date and
time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date
and time may be requested by the taxpayer. If such time is convenient to the local tax
administrator, the local tax administrator may approve the new date in writing and shall
have the discretion to grant an extension to this time period.
(C) Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s business or
activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions
which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction.
All books shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the Village.
(D) It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records
for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for
audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination
and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the
taxpayer’s tax liability.
(E) Upon the completion of an audit, the Village must issue an audit closure report to the
taxpayer with the results of the audit.
(F) If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and
administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall
be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the Village's determination of the amount
of overpayment. If the overpayment is the result of the incorrect application of some or all
of the taxpayer’s tax payment to the Village instead of to another local government entity,
then upon a request by that other unit of local government, the audit information must be
given to any unit of local government that may be affected by the overpayment.
11-109-5 Title XI
(5/19)
§109.07 APPEAL.
(A) A taxpayer shall have the right to appeal a determination of a tax due.
(B) Whenever the local tax administrator issues a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim
denial or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax, the local tax administrator shall
send written notice via United States registered or certified mail to a taxpayer. Such notice
shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment (which may be satisfied by including
a copy of this Chapter of the Village’s Code, The Local Government Taxpayers’
Bill of Rights); and
4. The obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection
process (which may be satisfied by including a copy of this Chapter of the Village’s
Code, The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights).
(C) A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination
of tax due or a notice of tax liability, may protest such finding by filing with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the
taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed
with the local tax administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written notice
of the tax determination and assessment.
(D) If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall
fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing
shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and
petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
(E) If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five (45) day period,
the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without
further notice.
(F) Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested
tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax
administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for
hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be
reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty-five
(45) day period.
11-109-6 Title XI
(5/19)
§109.08 HEARING.
(A) Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for
hearing under this Chapter, the Village President shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
(B) No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely
necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for
a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
(C) At the hearing the Village President shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any
evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
(D) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Village President shall make a written determination
on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision.
§109.09 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment
or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
(A) Interest: Unless provided differently in a specific section of this code imposing a specific
tax, the Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment,
underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be four percent (4%) per annum, based on a
year of three hundred sixty-five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
(B) Late Filing and Late Payment Penalties: Unless provided differently and for a lower
amount in a specific section of this Code imposing a specific tax,
1. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling
tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required
to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed.
2. If a tax is due and not timely paid to the Village, a late payment penalty of five
percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed.
3. If no return is filed prior to the Village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice
of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five
percent (25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the
return was required to be filed. A late filing or late payment penalty shall not apply
if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
11-109-7 Title XI
(5/19)
§109.10 ABATEMENT.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late
payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable
cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing.
§109.11 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
At the discretion of the local tax administrator, on behalf of the Village, the local tax administrator
may, but is not required to, enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of
taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any
installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing on time
and fails to cure the delinquency in the time allowed in the installment contract or if the taxpayer
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring any installment plan agreement or contract with the
local tax administrator.
§109.12 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
The Village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely
manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five
(45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or
provide any tax still due and owing.
(A) No notice of determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years
after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed
or the end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due,
whichever occurs later.
(B) If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the Village, the tax paid was less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due for that period, the statute of limitations shall be
six (6) years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which the return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable
period was filed, whichever occurs later.
(C) No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer.
§109.13 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written
notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax
due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due,
along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the
application, but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. Except for
the amount of tax and interest due under this Section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
11-109-8 Title XI
(5/19)
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the
amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the
underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which
case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be
made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or
the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional
amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this Section
must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals
of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is
longer.
§109.14 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing
requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication
requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at
the Village Clerk’s office.
§109.15 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed
against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that
the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
(A) Timely remove the lien at the Village’s expense;
(B) Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
(C) Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Ord. 19-09 passed 5/23/19)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XI-Chapt 109-Taxpayers Bill of Rights-5-19.docx
11-110-1 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS AND OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
Section
Municipal Occupation Taxes
§110.01 Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Service Occupation Tax
§110.02 Use of Tax Revenues for Public Infrastructure
§110.03 Collection of Taxes
Utilities Tax and Fees
§110.15 Definitions
§110.16 Imposition of Tax; on Whom Imposed
§110.17 Exemptions
§110.18 Compensation for Use of Streets, Alleys or Other Public Places
§110.19 Tax Returns
§110.25 Definitions
§110.26 Tax Imposed
§110.27 Collection of Electric Utility Tax
§110.28 Tax Remittance and Return for Electric Utilities Tax
§110.29 Resale of Electricity
§110.30 Books and Records for Electric Utilities Tax
§110.31 Credits and Refunds for Electric Utilities Tax
§110.50 Cable/Video Service and Customer Protection Regulations
§110.99 Penalty
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
§110.01 NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX.
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled and registered with an agency of this
State’s government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of 0.5% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 0.5% of
the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of
service. This “Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” and this “Non-Home Rule Municipal
Service Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption that
is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food
that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of these non-home rule taxes is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Sections 8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1,
8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4).
11-110-2 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
§110.02 USE OF TAX REVENUES FOR PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
All revenues resulting from the imposition of any Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
and Service Occupation Tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be used by the Village for expenditure
on public infrastructure, as that term is defined in Section 8-11-1.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, which
includes municipal roads and streets, access roads, bridges, and sidewalks; waste disposal systems; and
water and sewer line extensions, water distribution and purification facilities, storm water drainage and
retention facilities, and sewage treatment facilities.
§110.03 COLLECTION OF TAXES.
The Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Service Occupation Tax imposed pursuant
to Section 110.01 of this Chapter, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident of these taxes,
shall be collected and enforced by the State of Illinois Department of Revenue. To the extent that the State
of Illinois Department of Revenue does not collect any of such taxes, the Village Administrator shall be
authorized to establish such rules and procedures as may be necessary or convenient for the collection of
such taxes. (Ord. 10-18 passed 12/20/10)
(Ord. 18-03; Am. Ord. 19-07 passed 4/18/19)
UTILITIES TAX AND FEES
§110.15 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for
all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of transmitting the messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or
commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
(‘77 Code, §32.01) (Am. Ord. 02-09 passed 9/16/02)
§110.16 IMPOSITION OF TAX; ON WHOM IMPOSED.
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
(A) Repealed by Ordinance 02-21 effective 11/18/02.
(B) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use
or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of
the gross receipts therefrom.
11-110-3 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
(C) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity for use
or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of
the gross receipts therefrom. The tax imposed under this Section shall not apply with respect to
gross receipts to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the
use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under Section 110.26.
(Ord. 99-14 passed 5/15/99, 99-19 passed 6/21/99, 00-31 passed 9/18/00; Amd. Ord. 02-09 passed 9/16/02)
§110.16.1 IMPOSITION OF GAS TAX.
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling
gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5%
of the gross receipts therefrom.
§110.16.2 Repealed by Ordinance 02-21, effective 11-18-02.
§110.16.3 IMPOSITION OF UTILITY TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS BASIS.
A fee of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom is imposed on persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
Village. A tax is imposed by this section 110.16.3 shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining
to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing, or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the
electricity is subject to the tax imposed by Section 110.26(A). (Am. Ord. 06-13 passed 9/18/06)
§110.17 EXEMPTIONS.
No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise
to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof, nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, electricity, or engaged in the business
of transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for such transactions
as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the “Municipal Retailers’ Occupation
Tax Act” authorized by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §8-11-1, as amended. (‘77 Code, §2.03)
§110.18 COMPENSATION FOR USE OF STREETS, ALLEYS OR OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this
municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayer’s business. (‘77 Code, §32.04)
§110.19 TAX RETURNS.
(A) On or before the last day of January, April, July and October of each year each taxpayer shall make
a return to the Village Treasurer for the three month period ending on the last day of the previous
month, stating:
(1) His/her name;
(2) His/her principal place of business;
(3) His/her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
(4) Amount of tax;
11-110-4 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
(5) Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
(B) The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay
to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with
any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings
of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences
between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(‘77 Code, §32.05) Penalty, see §110.99
§110.25 DEFINITIONS.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation, facility,
distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent,
or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or
other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in
this State permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or
qualified to do business in this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption,
and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in Section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production, transmission,
delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the Village, electricity
acquired in a purchase at retail.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through
use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telephone services, personal wireless services, commercial radio services, paging services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or other means, between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities.
TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
§110.26 TAX IMPOSED.
(A) A tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail
and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village of Deer Park at the following rates
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
(1) For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.5375 cents per kilowatt
hour;
(2) For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.3525 cents per
kilowatt hour;
(3) For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.3175 cents per
kilowatt hour;
11-110-5 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
(4) For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.31 cents per kilowatt
hour;
(5) For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.3 cents per kilowatt
hour;
(6) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2825 cents per
kilowatt hour;
(7) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2775 cents per
kilowatt hour;
(8) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.2725 cents per
kilowatt hour;
(9) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month; 0.27 cents per
kilowatt hour; and
(10) For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month;
0.265 cents per kilowatt hour.
(B) EFFECTIVE DATE OF ELECTRIC UTILITIES TAX. Pursuant to Section 8-1 1-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in Section 110.26.A above shall be effective:
(i) on August 1, 1999, for residential customers; and (ii) on the earlier of (1) the first bill issued
on or after January 1, 2001, or (2) the date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-104,
for nonresidential customers.
(C) MISCELLANEOUS.
(1) The tax imposed by Section 110.26.A is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue
measures imposed by the Village, the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision
of the State.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the tax imposed by Section 110.26.A
shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the Constitution of the State of
Illinois.
(3) The tax imposed by 110.26.A shall not be imposed upon transactions involving the distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling of electricity to the Village.
(D) EXISTING GROSS RECEIPTS TAX. The tax imposed under this Section shall not apply with
respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of
electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under
Section 110.16.
§110.27 COLLECTION OF ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX.
(A) Subject to the provisions of Section 110.29 regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the
tax imposed under Section 110.26 shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a
place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute
a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable
at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
(B) Any tax required to be collected by Section 110.27, and any tax in fact, collected, shall constitute
a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering
electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
11-110-6 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are
thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
(C) Persons delivering electricity shall collect tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross
charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing
returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village upon request. For purposes of this
Section, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be
deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.
(‘77 Code, §32.06) Penalty, see §110.99
§110.28 TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN FOR ELECTRIC UTILITIES TAX.
(A) Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the Village
Treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of
the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected
under Section 110.27.
(B) If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from
c o l l e c t i n g the tax under Section 110.29.E(ii), then the purchaser shall file a return in a form
prescribed by the Village Treasurer and pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or before
the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
§110.29 RESALES OF ELECTRICITY.
(A) Electricity that is delivered to a person in this Village shall be considered to be for use and
consumption by that person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number
issued by the Village Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity,
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
(B) If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity,
that person shall apply to the Village Treasurer for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts
showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by Section 110.26 on any purchases of electricity
and shall furnish such additional information as the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.
(C) Upon approval of the application, the Village Treasurer shall assign a resale number to the applicant
and shall certify the number to the applicant.
(D) The Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any
tax payable under Section 110.26 for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number
(1) was obtained through misrepresentation, or (2) is no longer necessary because the person
has discontinued making resales.
(E)
(i) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for
resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by Section 110.26 directly to the Village
Treasurer pursuant to Section 110.28(B) on the amount of electricity that the reseller
uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to Section 110.27 and remit the tax
pursuant to Section 110.28(A) on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a
purchaser.
11-110-7 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
(ii) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and
complying with all other conditions of Section 110.29 shall be excused from collecting
and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided
that the person reports to the Village Treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered
to the reseller, and such other information that the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.
§110.30 BOOKS AND RECORDS FOR ELECTRIC UTILITIES TAX.
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the Electric Utilities Tax, shall keep accurate
books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this chapter. The books and
records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village during normal business hours.
§110.31 CREDITS AND REFUNDS FOR ELECTRIC UTILITIES TAX.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting
by the Village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under Section
110.25 unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax
was raid or remitted to the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 00-31 passed 9/18/00)
(A) DEFINITIONS: As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. §522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois Commerce Commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits,
property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system
to provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the Village.
(1) Gross revenues shall include the following:
(i) Recurring charges for cable or video service.
(ii) Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited
to, pay- per-view and video-on-demand charges.
(iii) Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
(iv) Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including
but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges.
(v) Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service,
including but not limited to service order and service termination charges.
(vi) Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges
assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
(vii) A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates
pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition
of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder’s
network to provide cable service or video service within the Village. The allocation
shall be based on the number of subscribers in the Village divided by the
total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement.
11-110-8 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
(viii) Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the
holder’s network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions
that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition
of any products or services on the holder’s network, such as a “home
shopping” or similar channel, subject to subsection (ix).
(ix) In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated
functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the
holder’s revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications
shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify
the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept
in the regular course of business.
(x) The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
(2) Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
(i) Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220
ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
(ii) Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross
revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent
the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally
integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services
not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue
received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision
of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed
by the holder to noncable service or non-video service in accordance with the
holder’s books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and
any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
(iii) The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is
required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser’ s subscribers
to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within
the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the
service.
(iv) Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction
by a city, State, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by
the holder of the State-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing
entity, including sales and use taxes.
(v) Security deposits collected from subscribers.
(vi) Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar vendors for merchandise
sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable
service or video service.
(3) Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues
to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the
holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-
801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service
from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
11-110-9 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR: A person or entity that provided cable services or video services
in the Village of Deer Park under a franchise agreement with the Village pursuant to Section 11-42-
11 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-42-11) on January 1, 2007.
SERVICE: The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers
with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder
to a Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection
or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities
located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet
protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial
mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. §332(d) or any video programming provided solely as
part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other
services offered over the public Internet.
(B) CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
(1) Fee Imposed. A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the Village.
(2) Amount of Fee. The amount of the service provider fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder’s gross revenues.
(3) Notice to the Village. Unless the holder has earlier sent notice to the Village pursuant
to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(a), the holder shall notify the Village at least ten (10) days prior to
the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the Village.
(4) Holder’s Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee
to the Village. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the
calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this
Chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this Chapter shall be sent by mail, postage
prepaid, to the address listed on the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220
ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village. Together with this ordinance the Village shall send
the holder instructions for remitting the payment and statement required hereby.
(5) Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis,
forty- five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered
paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining
the basis for the calculation of the fee.
(6) Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable service or video service providers
that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village, under 65 ILCS 5/11-
42-11 , in which a franchise fee is paid.
(7) Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an
existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise
fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator
owes under Section (B)2.
(C) PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS: On the date set forth in Section (B)4, but not
earlier than 90 days after the holder sends notice to the Village under 220 ILCS 5/21-801(a), the
holder shall: (i) designate the same amount of capacity on its network to provide for public,
education, and government access use, as the incumbent cable operator is required to designate
11-110-10 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
under its franchise terms in effect with a local unit of government on January 1 , 2007; and (ii)
retransmit to its subscribers the same number of public, education, and government access channels
as the incumbent cable operator was retransmitting to subscribers on January 1 , 2007.
(D) APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES: All determinations and calculations under this Chapter shall be
made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(E) NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER: Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village,
including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect
to cable service or video service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement
of the holder with respect to payment of the Village’s simplified municipal telecommunications
tax or any other tax as it applies to any telecommunications service provided by the holder. A
State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment
of the local unit of government’s 9-1-1 or E9-1-1 fees, taxes or charges.
(F) AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
(1) Audit Requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on
other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and
records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the Village imposes on
other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s
books and records and to re- compute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operators
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those set forth in The Local Government
Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as
an accord that the amounts are correct.
(2) Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty
(30) days after the municipality’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
(G) LATE FEES/PAYMENTS: All fees due and payments which are past due shall be subject to a
late payment fee of $25.00 plus interest on the unpaid balance at the statutory rate for judgments.
(H) CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
(1) Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the Village’s
boundaries.
(2) Amendments. Any mandatory amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this Chapter shall be incorporated
into this Chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers
offering services within the municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that
makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into
this Chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village.
(I) ENFORCEMENT: The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the
customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law.
11-110-11 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
(J) PENALTIES: The Village does hereby declare that for any material breach of the standards and
requirements of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, as incorporated by reference in
this ordinance, or any applicable rights and obligations of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition
Law of 2007, as enumerated in this Chapter, a cable or video provider shall be subject to
monetary penalties which shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall
not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. Such penalties
shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the Law and shall not represent the Village’s
exclusive remedy for any material breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis.
(1) Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply
with service quality and other applicable standards, tights arid obligations specified in any
provision of the law.
(2) The Village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged
material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of
the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
(3) A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for
each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service
provider after the notice in (B).
(4) The Board of Trustees hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to the Village Administrator.
(5) Any decision of the Village Administrator to levy penalties may be appealed to the
Board of Trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged material breach and
penalties levied therefore within twenty-one (21) days following receipt of the cable or
video providers request for an appeal.
(K) CUSTOMER CREDITS: The Village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule
of customer credits for violations of the Law provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-
501(s). Those credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing
cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider
is responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation
to request the credit.
(Ord. 07-26 passed 1/16/08)
§110.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided
shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 10.99 of this Code.
(B) Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates
any other provision of Sections 110.15 through 110.20 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and, in addition,
shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due and shall be responsible for the Village’s
cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense
incurred by the Village thereto.
(‘77 Code, §32.07) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XI-Chapt 110-Business and Occ Taxes-5-19.docx
11-111-1 Title XI
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 111: REGISTRATION OF BUSINESSES
Section
§111.01 Purpose
§111.02 Definitions
§111.03 Registration Required
§111.04 Registration Form
§111.05 Fees
§111.06 Inspections
§111.07 Registration Certificate
§111.98 Violations
§111.99 Penalty
§111.01 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide sufficient information relative to business establishments
within the Village to enable the Village to provide better life, health and safety services to business
establishments and better security for them, as well as provide a means to facilitate communication
between the Village and the owners of such business establishments. (Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93; Am. Ord. 12-
21 passed 9/17/12)
§111.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial or business use.
PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, association, partnership or any other legal entity. (Ord. 93-
11 passed 12/20/93)
§111.03 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish and/or operate a business establishment in the Village
without first obtaining from the Village Administrator, a registration certificate for such business in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. Each registration certificate issued by the Village shall
expire on December 31. (Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93; Am. Ord. 12-21 passed 9/17/12) Penalty, see §111.99
§111.04 REGISTRATION FORM.
All owners of business establishments shall, on or before January 1 of each calendar year (the “due
date”), register with the Village Administrator each business establishment on a form provided by the
Village Administrator. A business that intends to commence any operations or any activity related thereto
at any location within the Village shall register such business and location with the Village Administrator
prior to commencement of any operations or any activity related thereto within the Village. The registration
form shall include the following information:
(A) Name of the business establishment.
(B) Place of business establishment.
11-111-2 Title XI
(Rev. 3/15)
(C) Owner of business establishment.
(D) Owner’s address and emergency telephone number.
(E) Nature of business establishment.
(F) Hours of operation of business establishment.
(G) Municipal retailer’s occupational tax number (sales tax registration number).
(H) Federal employment identification number of Social Security number.
(I) Nature of security system, if any, and the telephone number of the company providing the security
service, as well as the name of the company.
(J) Number of employees of the business establishment.
(K) Type of owner of the business establishment - individual, partnership, corporation or other.
(L) If the owner of the business establishment is in possession of the premises by virtue of a lease,
the name, address and telephone number of the lessor.
(Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93, 01-33 passed 8/20/01; Amd. Ord. 12-21 passed 9/17/12)
§111.05 FEES.
The fee for a business registration certificate and each annual (i.e., for each calendar year) renewal thereof
shall be $125 plus the cost of inspections of the business premises. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this Code for any business to operate within the Village without having first obtained the required
registration certificate and paying the respective fee(s) in compliance with this Code. The fees for the
initial and annual fire department inspection shall be as follows for all businesses:
SQUARE FOOTAGE OF BUSINESS COST OF FIRE DEPARTMENT INSPECTION
1 to 2,000 square feet $65
2,001 to 5,000 square feet $100
5,001 to 10,000 square feet $200
10,001 to 50,000 square feet $400
Over 50,001 square feet $800
(Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93; Am. Ord. 03-8 passed 4/21/03, 07-13 passed 5/21/07, 12-21 passed 9/17/12)
§111.06 INSPECTIONS.
(A) An inspector of the fire protection district serving the property and the Village Building Inspector
shall make or cause to be made such investigations as they deem necessary to determine that
the applicant’s proposed occupation and operation of the premises is in conformity with the provisions
of the Village Code. No certificate shall be issued to an applicant whose proposed occupation
or operations do not comply with the applicable provisions of the Village Code. In
the event that a certificate is denied, the reasons for denial shall be submitted in writing to the applicant.
11-111-3 Title XI
(Rev. 3/15)
(B) The above-described officials shall inspect as often as they deem necessary the operations
and premises of any business establishment within the Village during normal business hours, to
confirm that the occupancy and utilization of the premises is in conformity with the applicable
provisions of the Village Code.
(Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93)
§111.07 REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
The Village Administrator shall, upon receipt of the registration forms and payment of any required fee(s)
from the owner of the business establishment, supply to that owner, after the required inspection, a
registration certificate which shall in turn be prominently displayed by the applicant upon the premises of
the business establishment. (Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93)
§111.98 VIOLATIONS.
It shall be unlawful to own or operate a business establishment within the Village as herein defined
without having registered such business establishment with the Village Administrator and/or without
paying to the Village any and all required fee(s) and/or cost(s) related thereto in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93)
§111.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100.00
nor more than $500.00 for each offense and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including
but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village
thereto. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day in which a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. 93-11 passed 12/20/93; Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XI-Chapt 111-Registration of Businesses-3-15.docx
11-112-1
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
General Provisions
§112.01 Construction of Provisions
§112.02 Definitions
Licensing Provisions
§112.03 License Required
§112.04 Application for License
§112.05 Persons Ineligible to be Licensed
§112.06 Violation of Federal Law, State Statute or Village Ordinance or Regulation; Privilege; Term
§112.07 Classification and Fees
§112.08 Number
§112.09 Disposition of Fees
§112.10 Death or Bankruptcy of Licensee
§112.11 Change of Location
§112.12 Abandonment
§112.13 Transfer
§112.14 Displaying License: Replacement License
§112.15 Insurance
§112.16 Sanitary Conditions
§112.17 Renewal
Standards of Operation
§112.18 Hours of Operation
§112.19 Service Limitations
§112.20 Age Restrictions for Dispensing and Serving of Alcoholic Liquor
Administration and Enforcement
§112.21 Purchase or Accept or Gifts or Possession or Consumption of Liquor by Persons Under the Age
of 21
§112.22 Sale of Alcohol to Minors
§112.23 False Identification
§112.24 Local Liquor Control Commissioner
§112.25 Powers of Local Liquor Control Commissioner
§112.26 Books and Records of Licensee
§112.27 BASSET, TIPS Programs
§112.28 Acts of Agent or Employee; Liability of Licensee; Knowledge of Licensee
§112.29 Owner of Premises Permitting Violation; Penalty
§112.30 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§112.01 CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS.
This Chapter shall be liberally construed, to the end that the health, safety and welfare of the people of the
Village shall be protected and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and
promoted by sound and careful control and regulation of the manufacture, sale and distribution of alcoholic
liquors.
11-112-2
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
§112.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ACT: The Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq.)
ALCOHOL: A product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may
be the origin, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol; it does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing
alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BANQUET/CATERING FACILITY: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where by prearrangement, events which involve the service of food may be catered.
BASSET: A state certified Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Educational Training program or other
similar program, licensed by the state Liquor Control Commission pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/2-12(11.1) and
6-27 and Title 77 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Chapter XVI, Section 3500.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcohol fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other
grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the
like
BOWLING ALLEY: A recreational area or facility both contained within a building and so constructed as
to permit the public to engage in a recreational form commonly known as bowling and constructed primarily
for use in connection with such recreational pursuit.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion
of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained
by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and
comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate
kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and
employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided,
that such club files with the Commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this Chapter two
copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten days of the election
of any additional member his or her name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and management
are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members
at their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly
or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale
of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the
amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of
directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
COMMISSION: The Local Liquor Control Commission as defined herein.
COMMISSIONER: The Local Liquor Control Commission as defined herein.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to
be a place where food is both actually served and consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for
adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 25 or more
rooms are used for sleeping accommodations
11-112-3
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
LICENSE YEAR: January 1 through December 31 of the calendar year.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER: The President of the Village.
MANAGER: A person either directly in control of day-to-day operations of a facility in which beverages
described herein are kept, sold, or served.
POPULATION: The population determined by the most recent official Federal, State or Village census.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A refreshment, entertainment or recreation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges or advantages are extended, offered, sold or
otherwise made available to the public.
MINOR: A person under the age of 21 years
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place
where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations,
such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity
and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve
suitable food for its guests.
RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not
for resale in any form.
RETAIL SALES: A sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
SALE: Transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever and includes and means
all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance
in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when
rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TIPS: The Training for Intervention Procedures “On Premises” program.
UNDERAGE PERSON (MINOR): A person under the age of 21 years.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or vegetables,
containing either sugar or a sugar substitute, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of
alcohol or spirits, as above defined.
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§112 .03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any alcoholic liquor without having a local
liquor dealer’s license and a valid liquor license from the State of Illinois or in violation of the terms,
conditions and restrictions of such license.
§112.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(A) Application for a liquor license shall be made to the Commissioner and filed with the Village Clerk,
in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a group
11-112-4
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall be addressed to the Commission. All applicants
may be subject to a background check, which may be conducted by the Village through the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Illinois State Police or other law enforcement agency. The
Commission shall act to approve or deny the application and, if approved, to issue the license. In
furtherance of the public good, safety and morals, when evaluating an application for a liquor license,
the number of establishments already operating under such classification in the Village, and
the proposed establishment’s marketing plan as it compares to the Village’s profile, branding and
image objectives.
(B) For any startup business, the applicant must make application not less than 45 days prior to the
issuance date of the license to provide sufficient time for a background check.
(C) An applicant applying for an annual liquor license shall first deposit the license fee and application
fee, if applicable, with the Commissioner. If application is made after the beginning of the license
year but on or before July 1 of that year, the full amount of the required license fee shall apply. If
application for a liquor license is made after July1, but prior to the beginning of the next license
year (January 1), 50 percent of the required license fee shall apply.
(D) In the event there is a change of ownership in a licensed business, or change of managers, or partners
in a partnership, or shareholders in a corporation who own more than 5 percent of the stock of
a corporation, or members in a limited liability company, or partnership, the Commissioner may
issue the license prior to receiving the results of the background check. The owner/manager of the
existing business is to be retained by the purchaser until such time as the purchaser’s background
investigation has been received, reviewed and approved by the Commissioner. However, if the
background check reveals information provided in the application is false, the license will be subject
to immediate revocation, the applicant will be subject to a fine and there shall be no refund of
any portion of the license fee.
(E) A liquor license application shall contain the following statements, information and attachments:
1. If a partnership, proprietorship or joint venture: The name, date of birth and address of all
applicants, including all partners, general or limited, character of business in which applicant
is engaged and for which said license is desired.
If a corporation: The name, corporate address, principal place of business; character of
business; the names and addresses of the officers and directors; if a majority interest of
stock in said corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and address of
such person; the name and address of the two largest shareholders of each class of stock in
said corporation; the name and address of the person or persons owning controlling interest
in said corporation; the name and address of the manager or person(s) in daily charge and
control of the business operation; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to
share in the profits thereof; the name, date of birth and address of the party to be manager
of the corporate facility for which the license is sought.
If a limited liability corporation: The name, date of birth and address of all members, character
of business in which applicant is engaged and for which said license is desired; and
the name and address of the manager or person(s) in daily charge and control of the business
operation.
2. Citizenship of the applicant(s), respective places of birth, and if a naturalized citizen(s) of
the United States, the date and place of said respective naturalization.
3. Length of time said applicant has been in business of that character; or if a corporation,
whether the corporation is either a continuation or successor of a prior entity and if so, the
11-112-5
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
character of the prior entity’s business.
4. Location, general description and approximate square footage of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license, including a scaled drawing of the
premises showing all ingress and egress locations, windows and location of bar.
5. A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises
other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application; a statement
whether an application was filed or a similar license was issued in any other state,
county or local municipality; the date of issuance, name and address of the governmental
entity; the disposition of said application or license; and the reasons therefore.
6. On initial applications, or whenever there has been remodeling, photographs depicting the
interior of the premises including all ingress and egress locations, windows and bar and
service areas.
7. A statement that the applicant will allow neither illegal gambling nor illegal gambling devices
on the premises.
8. Whether a previous license issued by any municipality, state or subdivision thereof, or the
federal government has been either revoked or suspended and the reasons therefore and
date of said revocation or suspension. This includes, but is not limited to suspension and
revocation of licenses held by any individual, partner, corporation, majority of controlling
shareholder or manager of the applicant seeking a license hereunder.
9. A statement that the applicant has neither been convicted of a felony nor is disqualified to
receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this Chapter, the ordinances
of this Village or the laws of this State and the United States.
10. A statement that applicant will not violate any laws of the State, the United States or any
ordinance of the Village in the conduct of his place of business.
(F) Refunds: No portion of the annual license fee shall be refunded in the event the licensed business
ceases to operate during the license year except when a licensee’s business is terminated due to
eminent domain proceedings. If a licensee’s business ceases during the license year due to eminent
domain proceedings, the Village shall prorate the license fee and refund the portion relating to the
part of the license year after the business ceases.
§112.05 PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO BE LICENSED.
The issuance of a liquor license is a privilege and the Commission may deny an application if the issuance
of such license would tend to create a law enforcement problem, result in or add to an undue concentration
of licenses, or have a deleterious impact on the health, safety or welfare of the area in which the licensed
premise is to be located. No such license shall be issued to:
1. A person who is not a resident of the State of Illinois;
2. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides;
3. A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
4. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, unless the Commission
determines that such person will not be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed
practice after considering matters set forth in such person’s application in accordance with 235
11-112-6
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
ILCS 5/6-2.5 and the Commission’s investigation;
5. A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or keeping a place of juvenile
prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves keeping a place of prostitution or promoting juvenile
prostitution that involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution;
6. A person who has been convicted of pandering;
7. A person whose license issued has been revoked for cause;
8. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be
eligible for such license upon a first application;
9. A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning
more than 5 percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such co-partnership would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than residence in the Village, unless
residency is required by local ordinance;
10. A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer, manager or director thereof, or
any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5 percent of the stock of such
corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship
and residence within the Village;
11. A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated or organized in Illinois, or unless
it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the
Business Corporation Act of 1983 (805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.) or the Limited Liability Company Act
to transact business in Illinois. The Commission shall permit and accept from an applicant for a
license under this Act proof prepared from the Secretary of State’s website that the corporation or
limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified under the Business Corporation Act
of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact business in Illinois;
12. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent
possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee;
13. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture,
possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of the Illinois Liquor Control
Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) or has forfeited bond to appear in court to answer charges
for any such violation, unless the Commission determines, in accordance with 235 ILCS 5/6-2.5,
that the person will not be impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice;
14. A person who does not beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought, or does not
have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued;
15. Any law enforcing official in Lake County, including the President and any member of the Village
Board shall be interested directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor, except that license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not
located within the Village;
16. A member of the Village Board may have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale or distribution
of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is not a law enforcing public official in Lake County or the
President. To prevent any conflict of interest, the Trustee with the direct interest in the manufacture,
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not participate in any meetings, hearings or decisions
on matters impacting the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcohol;
11-112-7
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
17. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee;
18. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a)(3)
through (a)(11) of Section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by Section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code
of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid
statutory provisions;
19. A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government,
unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act
or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act; and
20. A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail
premises who does not have liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that
is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in Section 112.15 of the Code.
If a licensee shall, during the term of said license, fall into any of the above listed categories, said licensee shall
no longer be eligible to hold a license and said license shall be subject to revocation.
§112.06 VIOLATION OF FEDERAL LAW, STATE STATUTE OR VILLAGE ORDINANCE OR
REGULATION; PRIVILEGE; TERM
(A) A liquor license is purely a personal privilege. It is effective until the first or earliest of 1) one year
from the date of issuance; 2) December 31 of the year following the date of issuance; 3) suspension
or revocation; or 4) abandonment as defined in this Chapter.
(B) No person holding a liquor license issued by the Village shall:
1. Violate or allow or permit a violation of any federal or state statute including, but not limited
to, gambling, or any rule or regulation of the Illinois Liquor Commission, or any ordinance
or regulation regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor, or violate any rule or regulation
of the Commission.
2. Make any false statements on the Liquor License Application or do any act which would
cause statements on said application to be false if currently made, even though true at the
time of the application.
(C) Violations of federal law, state statute or Village ordinance or regulation may be proved by:
1. Evidence that the licensee has been convicted of a violation of a federal law or a law of the
State, or has been found guilty of violating any Village ordinance regulating the sale of
alcoholic liquor; or
2. Proof before the Commission of facts which establish, by a preponderance of the evidence,
a violation of any federal law, state statute, Village ordinance or resolution or rule of the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
(D) A violation shall be sufficient cause of the revocation or suspension and/or fine of any license
issued by the Village, irrespective of whether or not a conviction has been obtained in any court.
11-112-8
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
§112.07 CLASSIFICATION AND FEES.
There shall be the following classes of licenses with the respective fee as indicated:
(A) Class One: A Class One license allows the licensee to sell and offer for sale alcoholic liquor for
consumption only on the premises where sold, but not for resale in any form. The fee for a Class
One license shall be $3,000 per year.
(B) Class Two: A Class Two license allows the sale or offer for sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises provided the primary purpose of such a facility is as a restaurant or club and providing
also that sales occur only during the hours when the facility is being operated as a restaurant or
club. The Class Two license shall also authorize sale of wine by the bottle for consumption off the
premises to a customer who has purchased food for consumption on the premises provided that not
more than two bottles of wine may be sold to any customer at any one time. The fee for a Class
Two license shall be $2,500 per year.
(C) Class Three: A Class Three license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor not for consumption
on the premises where sold. The fee for a Class Three license shall be $2,500 per year.
(D) Class Four: A Class Four license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine for consumption
on or off the premises where bought. The fee for a Class Four license shall be $2,500 per year.
(E) Class Five: A Class Five license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in food stores or
other stores approved for the issuance of such license by the Commissioner for the Village. Such
beer and wine shall not be consumed on the premises thereof. The fee for a Class Five License shall
be $1,500 per year.
(F) Class Six: In addition to all other permitted licenses, the Commissioner may from time to time issue
a special license to permit the temporary retail sale of beer and wine for consumption only on the
premises or grounds where sold, and not for resale in any form, to be issued for temporary stands,
booths and counters such as used at picnics, campgrounds, celebrations and the like, with specific
locations designated on the license. This license is issued for limited periods not to exceed 24 hours.
The fee for the license shall be $10 per day; the fee may be waived by a majority vote of the Village
Board. The issuance of such permit shall be contingent upon the applicant providing the Village or
such public body, as shall own the premises for which license is issued, with good and sufficient
dram shop and liability insurance which insures the Village or such other public body or agency
against any loss or liability arising out of the sale of alcoholic liquor thereon, in the amount of
coverage and with the company issuing same as shall be issued for the specific 24-hour period in
the Village. No person or group shall be entitled to the issuance of a permit hereunder who would
under any applicable statute or ordinance not be entitled to the issuance of a liquor license for any
reason.
(G) Class Seven: A Class Seven license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption
on the premises owned or leased by nonprofit, profit or governmental organizations and occupied
by the licensee. Class Seven Licenses shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations:
(1) Non-profitOrganizations.
a. Special events sponsored by nonprofit organizations must be for the licensee’s
members and theirguests.
b. Special events for nonmembers on the licensed premises are limited to two events
per calendar year.
11-112-9
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
c. The fee for each special event license shall be $15.00.
(2) ProfitOrganizations.
a. Special events sponsored by profit organizations must be for the licensee’s invited
guests.
b. Special events for invited guests on the licensed premises are limited to three
events per calendaryear
c. The fee for each special event license shall be $15.00.
(3) GovernmentalOrganizations.
1. Pre-arranged events sponsored by governmental organizations and individuals
shall be held on the premises owned or leased by the governmental organization.
Such events must include the service of food.
2. The annual fee for an annual license for the governmental organization shall be
$1.00.
(H) Class Eight: A Class Eight license may be issued to the Chamber of Commerce (“Chamber”) for
mixer events, which will allow a host business to purchase alcoholic liquors to sell, offer for sale
or deliver at business mixers sponsored by the Chamber, but not for resale in any form.
(1) A Class Eight license allows a licensed Illinois retailer to transfer a portion of itsalcoholic
inventory from its retail licensed premises and to offer for sale such transferred alcoholic
liquor for use or consumption at a mixer event but not for resale.
(2) Upon issuance of a Class Eight license for a mixer event, the Chamber assumes responsibility
that property security is utilized at each mixer to ensure that only those age 21 years
and older are served, that no one is over served and no alcohol is allowed to be consumed
on any public or private property not specified in the license.
(3) The Chamber shall submit with the application satisfactory proof of dram shop liability
insurance to the maximum statutory limits covering all such mixers and shall obtain a state
special event or special use permit as may be applicable pursuant to the Act.
(4) The license shall be limited to that day (or days) approved by theCommissioner.
(5) The fee for each mixer license permit shall be $15.00.
(6) All other requirements of this Chapter shall be met.
§112.08 NUMBER.
The Village shall issue not more than four Class One licenses, six Class Two licenses, two Class Three
licenses, two Class Four licenses, and zero Class Five license.
§112.09 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
All license fees required by this Chapter shall be paid to the Village Treasurer at the time application is
made. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license
11-112-10
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
is granted, the fee shall be deposited in the general fund or in such other fund as shall be designated by the
Village Board.
§112.10 DEATH OR BANKRUPTCY OF LICENSEE
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, not to exceed one year after issuance unless revoked sooner,
and shall neither constitute property, nor be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor be alienable
or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or be encumbered or hypothecated.
Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or in
testate devolution, provided that either the executors or administrators of the estate of a deceased licensee,
and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor,
may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate
court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankruptcy, until the expiration of
such license, but only for a period of six months after the date of death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such
licensee.
§112.11 CHANGE OF LOCATION
The location of the license may be changed only upon the receipt of written permission from the Commission.
No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the
provisions and regulations of this Chapter. The written permission of change shall be posted with the license
as provided for in this Chapter.
§112.12 ABANDONMENT
If the licensee to which a license has been issued discontinues operations at the premises described in the
application and license for a period of 60 consecutive days, (except as hereafter set forth) or whenever there
is evidence of a clear intent of the licensee to abandon the premises, said license shall be subject to revocation.
If said discontinued operation is due to fire or other such damage wherein the Building and Zoning
Official deems the premises uninhabitable, said 60-day period shall be tolled only until occupancy is
granted by the Building and Zoning Official.
§112.13 TRANSFER.
Licenses issued hereunder apply only to the premises described in the application and in the license issued
thereon, and only one location shall be so described in each license. After a license has been granted for a
particular premises, the Village Board upon proper showing, may endorse said license permission to abandon
the premises therein described and remove therefrom to other premises approved by it, but in order to
obtain such approval the licensee shall file with the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and the Commissioner
a request in writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to which removal
is to be made comply in all respects with the requirements of this Chapter and Act.
§112.14 DISPLAYING LICENSE; REPLACEMENT LICENSE.
Every licensee shall cause the license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises. In the event the current license is not displayed pursuant to this Section, the Village shall
presume that the license has been lost and the licensee shall purchase and display a replacement license
pursuant to this Chapter.
§112.15 INSURANCE.
No license or permit shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant files with the application an insurance
certificate, issued by an insurance company that is authorized to do business in this State, certifying that
11-112-11
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
the applicant, and the owner of the premises housing the establishment from where the liquor will be sold,
has in force and effect liquor liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000
annual aggregate and general liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$2,000,000 annual aggregate. “Host” insurance shall not satisfy the terms of this Section. The Village shall
be named as an additional insured.
§112.16 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
All premises used for retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in
full compliance with the local, county and state laws and ordinances regulating the condition of the premises
used for the storage or sale of food or alcoholic liquor for human consumption.
§112.17 RENEWAL.
(A) Any licensee may renew its license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to
receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for that
purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as
a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Village Board from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within the Village.
(B) Late Fee: Not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of a liquor license, a renewal application
with the required documentation and fees shall be submitted to the Village. When a renewal application
is filed less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the license, a late fee equal to 20 percent
of the total license fee(s) shall be submitted with the completed renewal application. The late fee is
in addition to the license fee(s) required in Section 112.07 herein.
STANDARDS OF OPERATION
§112.18 HOURS OF OPERATION.
Except as provided herein, it shall be lawful to sell or offer for sale, give away or deliver, either in, upon or
from any licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor between the hours of 12 noon and 11 p.m. on Sundays and
between the hours of 9 a.m. and 1 a.m. the following morning on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays,
Fridays and Saturdays.
It shall be unlawful to either keep open for business, to admit the public to, to permit the public to remain
within, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor in or upon any premises in or on which alcoholic
liquor is sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided, that in
the case of restaurants and clubs, such establishments may be kept open, but no alcoholic liquor may be
sold to or consumed by the public during the hours prohibited. Only employees engaged in the actual conduct
of cleaning or closing the business shall be allowed in the premises during closed hours.
Notwithstanding the hours of operation above, and provided a request has been made by a licensee, the
Commissioner has the discretion to grant expanded hours of operation if so warranted.
§112.19 SERVICE LIMITATIONS.
Notwithstanding any other section of this Chapter to the contrary, the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquor in a room in which video or arcade style games is located is prohibited.
§112.20 AGE RESTRICTIONS FOR DISPENSING AND SERVING OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to attend any bar, prepare, pour, mix or draw any
alcoholic liquor on the premises of a licensed establishment; provided, however, for restaurants or clubs
11-112-12
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
holding a Class 2 license, persons at least 19 years of age may be employed as waiters or servers for the
purpose of selling, serving, giving or delivering of food and alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. It
shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of
such licensee to engage, or employ, or permit any person less than 19 years of age to sell, serve, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§112.21 PURCHASE OR ACCEPT OR GIFTS OR POSSESSION CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR
BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.
(A) No person under the age of 21 may purchase, receive, accept, have in his possession or control, or
imbibe any alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this Section alcoholic beverages shall mean
and include any alcoholic beverage as defined in an Act relating to alcoholic liquors approved
January 21, 1934, as amended and codified as 235 ILCS 5/6-16.
(B) Permitting Violation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer, permit, allow the
violation of the provisions of the this Section in any motor vehicle, conveyance, house, apartment,
room, shed, yard, or area of which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee or legal possessor
or occupier thereof.
(C) Exemptions: The possession and dispensing or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under
21 years of age in a performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person
under 21 years of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent, guardian
or spouse of such minor in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this Chapter.
§112.22 SALE OF ALCOHOL TO MINORS.
(A) No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee
shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years.
(B) No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service.
§112.23 FALSE IDENTIFICATION.
No person under the age of 21 years shall present or offer to any licensee, his agent or employee, any
written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity that is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her
own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting
to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or falsely state in writing that he or she is at least 21 years
of age when receiving alcoholic liquor from a representative, agent or employee of an express company,
common carrier, or contract carrier or have in his or her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed
or photostatic evidence of age and identity.
§112.24 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
The President shall be the Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the appropriate
provisions of this Chapter and of such other ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may
be enacted. However, the President may appoint a person or persons to assist in the exercise of the powers
and the performance of the duties herein provided for such Commissioner.
11-112-13
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
§112.25 POWERS OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
The Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses:
(A) To grant and or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for cause all local licenses issued to
persons for premises within the Village;
(B) To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed
hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this Chapter or any Village adopted rules
or regulations adopted by him or by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission have been or are being
violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith;
(C) To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the General Not for Profit Corporation
Act or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this State under a certificate of authority
issued under that Act has violated the Act by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors
without a retailer’s license;
(D) To receive complaint from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of the Act,
this Chapter or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated
and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
(E)
(1) The Commissioner may revoke or suspend any Village liquor license if it is determined
that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter or any applicable rule
or regulations established by the Commissioner or the Illinois Liquor Control Commission
which is not inconsistent with law. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the Commissioner
may instead levy a fine on the licensee for such violations and shall be responsible for the
Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and
other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. Proceeds from such fines shall be
paid into the Village treasury.
(2) However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined
except after a public hearing by the Commissioner with a three-day written notice to the
licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings shall
be open to the public and the Commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall
maintain an official record of the proceedings. If the Commissioner has reason to believe
that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the
reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing order the licensed premises closed
for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that
period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business
or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
business orbusinesses.
(3) The Commissioner shall within five days after such hearing, if he determines after such
hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined,
state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order, and either the amount
of the fine, the period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a
copy of such order within the five days upon the licensee.
(F) To keep a complete record of all licenses issued by himpursuant to this Chapter.
(G) To grant approval for product sampling in accordance with 235 ILCS 5/6-31 and TPP-14 of the
11-112-14
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
Illinois Liquor Control Commission, subject to the following conditions:
1. Any holder of a Class One, Two, Three, Four or Five license issued by the Village may
submit a written request to the Commissioner for approval of a single product sampling
event. The request shall identify the applicant; the date, location and hours of such event;
shall describe the products to be offered for sampling, and shall set forth the applicant’s
agreement to conduct the event in compliance with applicable law.
2. Any person serving alcoholic beverages at a product sampling event shall be not less than
21 years of age and shall have completed a BASSET or similar training programand hold
a current certificate of completion of such training.
3. Granting of approval for product sampling shall not constitute issuance of a license, but
rather an additional privilege of an existing license.
§112.26 BOOKS AND RECORDS OF LICENSEE.
It shall be a duty of every licensee to make books and records available upon reasonable notice for the
purpose of investigation and control by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission or the Commissioner. Such
books and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained in the State.
However, all original invoices covering purchases of alcoholic liquor must be retained on the licensed
premises for a period of 90 days after such purchase.
§112.27 BASSET, TIPS PROGRAM.
(A) Successful completion of a BASSET or TIPS program, or other similar program approved by the
State, is required for all persons who prepare, pour, mix, draw, sell or serve alcoholic liquor; all
management personnel working in a licensed premises; and anyone whose job description entails
the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license. Any new
owner, manager, employee or agent requiring such State approved training program shall, within
90 days from their first day of employment with a licensee, complete a State approved training
program. Until successful completion of the program, such person shall work under the supervision
of a person who has successfully completed a State approve training program.
(B) Training Expiration: The State approved training program shall be valid only for three years following
the date of successful completion.
(C) Certificate of Completion: Photocopies of certificates of completion of a State approved training
program shall be maintained by the licensee in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand,
by a member of the Lake County Sheriff’s Department or the Commission.
(D) Liquor Violations: In the event a licensed premises is found to be in violation of any provision of
this Chapter or the Act, the Commissioner, within his sole discretion, may require all persons who
sell or serve alcoholic liquor and/or all management personnel working in a licensed premises
and/or anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic
liquor pursuant to the license to re-apply, attend and successfully complete a State approved
training program.
§112.28 ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYEE; LIABILITY OF LICENSEE; KNOWLEDGE OF LICENSEE
Every act or omission of whatever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of federal law,
state statutes, rules and regulations of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and ordinances or resolutions
of the Village by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed
11-112-15
Title XI
(Rev. 06/18)
and held to be the act of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in
the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally for the purposes of
these regulations.
§112.29 OWNER OF PREMISES PERMITTING VIOLATION; PENALTY
If the owner of a licensed premises, or any person from whom the licensee derives the right to possession
of such premises, or the agent of such owner or person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use such
licensed premises in violation of the terms of this Code, such owner, agent or other person shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this Code to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to the same penalties.
§112.30 PENALTY
Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter for which a specific penalty is not stated shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including
reasonable attorney fees. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
11-113-1 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
CHAPTER 113: HOTEL TAX
Section
§113.01 Hotel Defined
§113.02 License Required
§113.03 Tax Imposed
§113.04 Payment and Collection
§113.05 Administration
§113.06 Enforcement
§113.07 Interest, Penalties and Fines
§113.08 Disposition of Tax Proceeds
§113.01 HOTEL DEFINED.
The term “hotel” within the meaning of this Chapter, includes every building or structure kept, used maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where lodging or lodging and food, suites or other
accommodations are offered for hire or rent to guests, in which ten or more rooms, suites, or other accommodations
are used for the lodging or lodging and food for such guests. Motels as commonly used are hotels
under this chapter.
§113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall conduct, keep, manage or operate, or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated a
hotel without having first obtained a business license as required by this Chapter.
§113.03 TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing and letting of rooms in a hotel in
the Village at a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental receipts from such rental, leasing or letting, in
accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14 (“the Act”). Persons subject to this tax may reimburse themselves for
their tax liability by separately stating such tax as an additional charge, in accordance with the Act. The tax
levied by this Chapter shall be in addition to any and all other taxes; provided, however, that said tax shall
not apply to the rental, leasing or letting of a room or rooms by the same user, lessee or tenant for a period
of more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
§113.04 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION.
The owner and operator of each hotel and the person to whom the license to operate said hotel shall have
been issued by the Village, shall bear, jointly and severally, the responsibility and liability for collection of
the tax from each user, lessee, or tenant of rooms in such hotel. Every person required to collect the tax
levied by this Chapter shall secure the tax from user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that
he/she collects the price, charge or rent to which it applies. The amount due under the tax levied by this
Chapter shall be stated separately upon the invoice receipt or other statement of the gross rental receipts
done.
§113.05 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The Village Administrator or the Village Administrator’s designee is designated the administration
and enforcement officer of the tax imposed on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility
11-113-2 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
of the Village Administrator or designee to collect all amounts due the Village from the owners,
operators and licensee’s of hotels within the Village.
(B) A sworn and certified monthly hotel occupancy tax return shall be filed by each owner, operator or
licensee of each hotel in the Village with the Village Administrator or designee, on forms prescribed
by the Village Treasurer, showing all receipts from each renting, leasing or letting of rooms during
the preceding month. All persons subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall remit the tax to
the Village Treasurer by the tenth (10th) day of each month for the period of the preceding month.
(C) The Village Treasurer or any person certified by him/her as his representative may enter the premises
of any hotel for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and records for the
proper administration of this article, and for the enforcement of collection of the tax hereby imposed.
It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village Treasurer or
his/her representative in the discharge of his/her duties hereunder.
§113.06 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax provided in this Chapter, or when any owner, operator
or licensee of a hotel in the Village shall fail to collect the tax imposed from any person who has
the ultimate liability for payment of the same, the Village Attorney, shall, upon the request of the
Village Administrator or designee bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of
such tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) In addition, if the Village Administrator, after holding a hearing, in the manner provided in the
Village’s Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights provisions of Chapter 109, finds that any
hotel owner operator or licensee has willfully evaded his or her responsibility to collect the tax
imposed by this Chapter, the Village Administrator may suspend or revoke all Village licenses held
by the tax evader. The person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such a hearing, to be held
not less than fourteen days after receipt of notice of the time and place thereof, addressed to him or
her at his or her last known place of business. Any suspension or conviction resulting from the
hearing shall not relieve or discharge any civil liability for non-payment of the tax due.
§113.07 INTEREST, PENALTIES AND FINES.
Failure to pay the tax imposed by this Section shall constitute a violation of this Code. Any violator shall
be subject, upon conviction therefore, to a fine of $750.00 and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of
prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by
the Village thereto. Each day on which the tax is not paid as required herein shall constitute a separate
violation. Conviction of a violation of this Section shall not constitute a criminal conviction. In addition to
any prosecution for violation of this Section, any tax not paid when due shall be subject to interest, a late
filing penalty, a late payment penalty and a failure to file penalty all as provided in the Village’s Local
Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Provisions of Chapter 109. Any unpaid tax shall become a lien
against the property of the taxpayer in the Village, which may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law.
§113.08 DISPOSITION OF TAX PROCEEDS.
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Chapter, including interest and penalties,
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of
the Village.
(Ord. 00-7, passed 3/20/00; Amd. Ord. 09-02 passed 1/22/09, 15-02 passed 3/16/15; 19-09 passed 5/23/19)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XI-Chapt 113-Hotel Tax-5-19.docx
11-114-1 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
CHAPTER 114: ENTERTAINMENT TAX
Section
§114.01 Entertainment Defined
§114.02 License Required
§114.03 Tax Imposed
§114.04 Payment
§114.05 Administration
§114.06 Enforcement
§114.07 Interest, Penalties and Fines
§114.08 Disposition of Tax Proceeds
§114.01 ENTERTAINMENT DEFINED.
“Entertainment” is defined to include: any exhibition, performance, presentation or show for entertainment
purposes viewed outside the home, including, but not limited to, any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular
performance, promotional show, motion picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act,
circus, rodeo, professional athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition such as boxing, wrestling,
skating, dancing, swimming, racing, or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball, softball, football,
tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling, or billiard and pool games; as well as any entertainment
or recreational activity offered for public attendance including, but not limited to, carnivals, amusement
park rides and games, bowling, billiards and pool games, dancing, tennis, racquetball, swimming,
weightlifting, body building or similar venue.
§114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall conduct, keep, manage or operate, or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated an
entertainment entity without having first obtained a business license as required by this Title.
§114.03 TAX IMPOSED.
That the Village shall impose a four percent (4%) tax on the revenue for ticket related admissions imposed
upon the patrons of any entertainment entity and collected by the owner, operator or licensee of any entertainment
entity for the privilege to enter, to witness, to view or to participate in such entertainment.
§114.04 PAYMENT.
The owner and operator of each entertainment entity and the person to whom the license to operate said
entertainment entity shall have been issued by the Village, shall bear, jointly and severally, the responsibility
and liability for collection of the tax from the patron and remittance of the tax to the Village.
§114.05 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The Village Administrator or the Village Administrator’s designee is designated the administration
and enforcement officer of the tax imposed on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility
of the Village Administrator or designee to collect all amounts due the Village from the owners,
operators and licensee’s entertainment entities within the Village.
(B) A sworn and certified monthly tax return shall be filed by each owner, operator or licensee of each
entertainment entity in the Village with the Village Administrator or designee, on forms prescribed
by the Village Treasurer, showing all receipts from the entertainment entity during the preceding
11-114-2 Title XI
(Rev. 5/19)
month. The dates upon which the monthly returns are to be filed shall be provided by rules and
regulations promulgated by the Village Treasurer.
(C) The Village Treasurer or any person certified by him/her as his representative may enter the premises
of any entertainment entity for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and
records for the proper administration of this article, and for the enforcement of collection of the
tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village
Treasurer or his/her representative in the discharge of his/her duties hereunder.
§114.06 ENFORCEMENT
(A) Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax provided in this Chapter, or when any owner, operator
or licensee or an entertainment entity in the Village shall fail to remit tax, the Village Attorney
shall, upon the request of the Village Administrator or designee bring or cause to be brought an
action to enforce the payment of such tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) In addition, if the Village Administrator, after holding a hearing, in the manner provided in the
Village’s Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Provisions of Chapter 109, finds that an
entertainment owner, operator or licensee has willfully evades his or her responsibility to collect
the tax imposed by this Chapter, the Village Administrator may suspend or revoke all Village licenses
held by the tax evader. The person shall have an opportunity to be heard at a hearing, to be
held not less than fourteen days after notice has been sent regarding the time and place of the hearing,
addressed to him or her at his or her last known place of business. Any suspension or conviction
resulting from the hearing shall not relieve or discharge any civil liability for non-payment of the
tax due. (Amd. Ord. 19-09 passed 5/23/19)
§114.07 INTEREST, PENALTIES AND FINES.
In the event of failure by any entertainment entity owner, operator or licensee to collect and pay to the
Village Administrator the tax required hereunder within 30 days after it is due, the entity shall be subject
to interest, a late filing penalty and a failure to file penalty all as provided in the Village’s Local Government
Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Provisions of Chapter 109. In addition, any entertainment entity owner, operator
or licensee shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney
fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15;
19-09 passed 5/23/19)
§114.08 DISPOSITION OF TAX PROCEEDS.
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Chapter, including interest and penalties,
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate fund of
the Village.
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XI-Chapt 114-Entertainment Tax-5-19.docx
11-115-1 Title XI
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 115: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
§115.01 Definitions
§115.02 Village Policy on Soliciting
§115.03 Notice Regulating All Soliciting and Peddling
§115.04 Duty of All Solicitors and Peddlers
§115.05 Uninvited and Unlawful Soliciting
§115.06 Penalty
§115.01 DEFINITIONS.
In addition to those terms defined in the Illinois Compiled States, for the purposes of this Chapter the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
PEDDLER. Every person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise,
fruits, vegetables, or produce by traveling from place to place on, along, or upon the streets, alleys, or
sidewalks of the Village or who shall sell and deliver any such items from any wagon, pushcart, automobile,
or other vehicle going from place to place or who shall go about from place to place selling and delivering
any such items. The term peddler shall mean and include hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors
of merchandise.
PEDDLING: The selling, bartering or exchanging or the offering for sale, barter or exchange of any tangible
personal property upon or along the streets, highways or public places of the Village or from house to house,
whether at one place or from place to place, from any wagon, truck, pushcart or other vehicle or from
movable receptacles of any kind, but shall not include the delivery of any item previously ordered or the
sale of items along delivery routes where the purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and
exhibit his items. Nor shall peddle be taken to include the solicitation of orders by sample where the goods
are not delivered at the time the order is taken.
PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, association, partnership or any other legal entity.
SOLICITOR. Any person engaged in any one or more of the following activities:
(a) Seeking to obtain orders either for immediate or future delivery for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, food stuffs, services of any kind, character, or description whatever, for any kind of
consideration whatever.
(b) Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind,
or character.
(c) Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, and any other type
or kind of publication.
(d) Going upon any premises and ringing the doorbell upon or near any door or creating any sound in
any manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such premises for the purpose of
engaging in any of the activities described in subsections (a) through (c).
§115.02 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING.
11-115-2 Title XI
(Rev. 3/15)
It is the policy of the Village that the occupants of the residences in this Village shall make the determination
of whether solicitors and peddlers shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§115.03 NOTICE REGULATING ALL SOLICITING AND PEDDLING.
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to
soliciting and peddling contained in this Chapter shall comply with the following directions:
If an occupant of a residence wishes to refuse solicitation or peddling, the refusal shall be given by placing
a printed sign, upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the desire to not permit
solicitation or peddling at the residence.
The sign is recommended to be approximately 3 inches by 4 inches in size on a weatherproof card with
letters to be at least one-third inch in height with the message: “NO SOLICITORS INVITED.”
No such sign shall be considered defective because it does not meet the specific directions of this Section
so long as a person approaching the residence is reasonably apprised of the occupant’s desire to not be
approached by solicitors or peddlers. A sign displayed at a residence exclusively for purposes provided by
this Section shall be exempt from any Village regulation or requirement concerning signage regulations.
§115.04 DUTY OF ALL SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS.
(A) It shall be the duty of every solicitor and peddler going onto any premises in the Village to first
examine if a notice, as provided in Section 115.03, is displayed. If such a notice is displayed then
the solicitor or peddler shall immediately and peacefully depart the premises and shall not make
any effort to engage an occupant in communication.
(B) Any solicitor or peddler who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall
immediately depart from the premises when requested to do so by any occupant.
(C) No person who engages in solicitation or peddling shall use any plan, scheme, or ruse, or make any
statement which indicates that the purpose of the solicitation is other than to obtain orders or to
make sales of goods or services.
(D) No person who engages in solicitation or peddling shall misrepresent the rights of a buyer to rescind
or cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
(E) It shall be the duty of every commercial solicitor and peddler to display the name of the business
entity represented by the solicitor or peddler in a way that the occupants may reasonably see the
business entity’s name when speaking with the solicitor or peddler.
§115.05 UNINVITED AND UNLAWFUL SOLICITING.
It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell
upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engage in soliciting
in defiance of a notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with Section 115.03 or to otherwise
violate any provision of Section 115.04.
§115.06 PENALTY.
11-115-3 Title XI
(Rev. 3/15)
Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided
shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 and shall be liable for the Village’s cost of
prosecution, including but not limited to attorney’s fees, the Village’s court costs and other costs and incurred
by the Village related thereto. Each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 00-30 passed 9/19/00; Amd. Ord. 14-11 passed 7/21/14, 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XI-Chapt 115-Peddlers and Solicitors-3-15.docx
11-116-1
Title XI
(5/18)
Chapter 116: PROHIBITION ON SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS
UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
116.01. DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise defined in this Chapter, for purposes of determining whether a tobacco or
alternative nicotine product is subject to this Chapter, the definitions and usages in the Illinois
Prevention of Tobacco Use by Minors and Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products Act, 720
ILCS 675/0.01 et seq., as may be subsequently amended, shall apply.
116.02. SALE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including any person or business establishment required to be
registered pursuant to Chapter of this Code (“Registered Business”), to sell, give, dispense,
furnish, or otherwise distribute or make available any tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product to any person under 21 years of age.
116.03. PURCHASE BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use false or altered
identification, for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products or alternative nicotine products.
116.04. SIGNAGE PROHIBITING SALES OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21
YEARS OF AGE.
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every
Registered Business at or near every display of tobacco products or alternative nicotine products
and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products or alternative nicotine
products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
“The sale of tobacco products or alternative nicotine products to persons under 21
years of age is prohibited by law.”
Posted signs shall be plainly visible and shall measure at least eight and one-half inches in height
by 11 inches in length. Letters on posted signs shall be at least three-quarters of an inch in height.
116.06. PENALTY.
The general penalty provisions in Section 10.99 of this Code shall apply for any violations of this
Chapter.
13-130-1 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
§130.01 Definitions
§130.02 Intent
§130.03 Knowledge
§130.04 Recklessness
§130.05 Negligence
§130.06 Attempt
§130.99 Penalty
§130.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed
to them respectively.
ACT. The taking of action or a failure or omission to take action. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §2-2)
ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §2-3)
CONDUCT An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §2-4)
OFFENSE. A violation of a penal statute of this Village or state. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §2-12)
§130.02 INTENT.
A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a result or engage in conduct
described by the section defining the offense, when his conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish
that result or engage in that conduct. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §4-4)
§130.03 KNOWLEDGE.
(A) A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
(1) The nature or attendant circumstances of his conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he is consciously aware that his conduct is of such nature or that such
circumstances exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that the fact exists.
(2) The result of his conduct, described by the section defining the offense, when he is consciously
aware that such result is practically certain to be caused by his conduct.
(B) Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully, within the meaning of
a statute using the latter term, unless the section clearly requires another meaning.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §4-5)
§130.04 RECKLESSNESS.
A person is reckless or acts recklessly, when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk
13-130-2 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
that circumstances exist or that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense; and
such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would
exercise in the situation. An act performed recklessly is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a
section using the latter term, unless the statute clearly requires another meaning. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §4-6)
§130.05 NEGLIGENCE.
A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when he fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that circumstances exist or a result will follow, described by the statute defining the offense; and such
failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would
exercise in the situation. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §4-7)
§130.06 ATTEMPT.
(A) Elements of the offense. A person commits an attempt when, with intent to commit a specific
offense, he does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
(B) Impossibility. It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that because of a misapprehension
of the circumstances it would have been impossible for the accused to commit the offense attempted.
(C) A person convicted of an attempt may be fined not to exceed the maximum provided for the offense
attempted. If such fine exceeds that set forth in §130.99 below, however, the Village shall
enforce said offense under the provisions of state law. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §8-4) Penalty, see §130.99
§130.99 PENALTY.
Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall
be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of
prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by
the Village thereto. (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XIII-Chapt 130-General Provisions-3-15.docx
13-131-1 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Section
§131.01 Damage of Firefighting Apparatus, Hydrants, or Equipment
§131.02 Trespass to Land
§131.03 Damaging Village property
§131.04 Vandalism
§131.05 Criminal Damage to Property
§131.06 Trespass to Vehicles
§131.10 Definitions
§131.11 Committing Retail Theft
§131.12 Presumptions
§131.13 Detention
§131.14 Affirmative Defense
§131.19 Penalty
§131.01 DAMAGE OF FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS, OR EQUIPMENT.
No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with, destroy, or deface any fire
hydrant, fire hose, fire engine, or other public or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining
to such equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper authorization. (ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, §21-1.1) Penalty, see §130.99
§131.02 TRESPASS TO LAND.
(A) No person shall enter upon the land or into a building other than a residence, or any part thereof,
of another after receiving, prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that an entry
is forbidden, or remain upon the land or in a building other than a residence, of another after
receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart.
(B) A person is deemed to have received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning
of division (A) if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or
written notice forbidding an entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance
to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
(C) This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on
the land with permission of the owner or of his agent having apparent authority to hire workers
on the land and assign them living quarters or a place of accommodation for living thereon, nor
to anyone living on the land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing, or other agreement or
arrangement with the owner or his agent, nor to anyone invited by the migrant worker or other
person so living on the land to visit him at the place he is so living on the land.
(D) A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if he beautifies unoccupied
and abandoned residential or industrial properties located within this Village. For the purpose
of this division, UNOCCUPIED AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL or INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTY means any real estate in which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least
two years, and which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at least one
year. BEAUTIFIES means to landscape, clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on or
to board up windows and doors.
13-131-2 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(E) No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the owner of unoccupied
and abandoned residential and industrial property which that person beautifies pursuant to division
(D) of this section. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §21-3) Penalty, see §130.99
§131.03 DAMAGING VILLAGE PROPERTY.
(A) It shall be unlawful to:
(1) Knowingly damage any Village property without the Village’s consent.
(2) Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage Village property without the village’s
consent.
(3) Knowingly start a fire on Village land without the consent of the Village.
(4) Knowingly deposit on Village land or in a Village building any stink bomb or any offensive-
smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere with the use by the Village of
its land or buildings.
(B) For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value including, but not limited
to real estate, money, commercial instruments, written instruments representing or embodying
rights concerning anything of value, labor, or services, things affixed to or found on land or
part of or affixed to any building, electricity, gas, or water. Penalty, see §130.99
§131.04 VANDALISM.
Acts of vandalism resulting in damage to real or personal property within the Village pose a threat to the
value of property and the welfare of residents. It is in the best interests of the Village that such acts be
prosecuted by the Village as a local offense and that penalties therefore be imposed which are related to
the nature of the act and the type of offender.
Within the corporate limits of the Village no person shall:
(A) Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without his consent; or
(B) Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, bicycle,
aircraft or water craft or any part thereof of another person without his consent.
Penalty, see §130.99
§131.05 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
Any of the following acts are hereby declared to be criminal damage to property and are hereby prohibited.
(A) Knowingly damaging any property of another without his consent; or
(B) Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damaging property of another; or
(C) Knowingly starting a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
13-131-3 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(D) Knowingly injuring a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
(E) Knowingly depositing on the land or in the building of another, without his consent, any stink
bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intending to interfere with the use by
another of the land or building; or
(F) Knowingly damaging the property of another without his consent by defacing, deforming or otherwise
damaging such property by the use of paint or any other similar substance.
Penalty, see §130.99
§131.06 TRESPASS TO VEHICLES.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to knowingly and without authority to enter any vehicle,
aircraft or water craft, or any part thereof, of another without his consent. Penalty, see §130.99 (Ord. 01-11,
passed 2/19/01)
§131.10 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases defined below have the meanings ascribed to them
in those paragraphs unless a contrary meaning is clear from the context.
CONCEAL: To “conceal” merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence,
that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.
FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant’s stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee,
consignee, officer, director, franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator.
PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, the
retail mercantile establishment, and common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside
by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons
of such retail mercantile establishment.
RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed, held,
stored or offered for sale to the public.
UNDER-RING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full
retail value of the merchandise.
§131.11 COMMITTING RETAIL THEFT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit retail theft. A person commits the offense of retail theft
when he knowingly:
(A) Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred,
any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment
with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant
13-131-4 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
(B) Without authority from management, alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking,
indicia of value or other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise
displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and
attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in concert with another at less than full retail
value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise;
or without authority from management, transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container or place in or on
which such merchandise is displayed to any other container or place with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
(C) Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise;
or
(D) Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent
of the merchant given at the time of such removal with the intention of depriving the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
§131.12 PRESUMPTIONS.
If any person conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment, and removes that merchandise
beyond the last known station for receiving payments for merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise, such person shall be presumed
to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with
the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise.
§131.13 DETENTION.
Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain
such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
(A) to request identification, and to verify such identification;
(B) to make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise
and to make reasonable investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;
(C) to inform the Lake County Sheriff’s Office of the detention of the person and surrender that person
to the custody of Police Officer;
(D) in the case of a minor, to inform the Lake County Sheriff’s Office as well as the parents, guardian
or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of the detention and to surrender
custody of such minor to such person.
§131.14 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
A detention as permitted in this Chapter does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it
13-131-5 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
render the merchant liable to the person so detained.
§131.19 PENALTY.
A person convicted of retail theft under this Chapter, without regard to the retail value of the merchandise
taken, shall be fined by the Lake County Circuit Court in accordance with Section 10.99 of this Code.
(Ord. 00-36, passed 10/16/00; Amd. Ord. 12-06, passed 03/19/12, 15-01 passed 3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XIII-Chapt 131-Offenses Pertaining to Property-3-15.docx
13-132-1 Title XIII
Revised 3/15)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
§132.01 Disorderly Conduct
§132.02 Curfew
§132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
(A) Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach
of the peace;
(B) Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of
any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or
explosive is concealed in such place;
(C) Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer, or public employee a report to
the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there
is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed;
(D) Enters upon the property of another, and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into
a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it; or
(E) Transmits in any manner to the Police Department or Fire Department or any privately owned
and operated ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-
ambulance, or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no
reasonable ground for believing that such assistance is required.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §26-1) Penalty, see §130.99
§132.02 CURFEW.
(A) It is unlawful for a person less than 18 years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly,
building, place, street, or highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised
by a parent, legal guardian, or other responsible companion at least 18 years of age approved
by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the
laws of the state or this code or other ordinances of the Village authorize a person less than 18
years of age to perform:
(1) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
(2) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
(3) Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day.
(B) It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to knowingly permit a person in his
custody or control to violate division (A) above.
13-132-2 Title XIII
Revised 3/15)
(C) A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a petty offense
and shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 and shall be responsible for
the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other
costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 555, §1) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed
3/16/15)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XIII-Chapt 132-Offenses Against Public Order-3-15.docx
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
133.01 Resisting or Obstructing a Peace Officer or Correctional Institution Employee
133.02 Refusing to Aid an Officer
133.03 Tampering with Public Notice
§133.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER OR CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.
(A) No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to the person to be a
peace officer or correctional institution employee of any authorized act within his official capacity.
(B) For purposes of this section, the term CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE shall mean
any person employed to supervise and control inmates incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm,
reformatory, prison, jail, house of correction, police detention area, half-way house, or other
institution or place for the incarceration or custody of persons under sentence for offenses or
awaiting trial or sentence for offenses, under arrest for an offense, a violation of probation, a
violation of parole, or a violation of mandatory supervised release, or awaiting a bail setting hearing
or preliminary hearing.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 133.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to aid a person known by him to be
a police officer in:
(A) Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
(B) Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 133.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
No person shall knowingly and without lawful authority alter, destroy, deface, remove, or conceal any
public notice posted according to law, during the time for which the notice was to remain posted. (ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9) Penalty, see § 130.99
_____________________________________________________________________________________
13-133-1 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
§134.01 Public Indecency
§134.02 Obscenity
§134.03 Harmful Material
§134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
(A) Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public
place commits a public indecency:
(1) An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-12; or
(2) A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the
person.
(B) PUBLIC PLACE. For purposes of this Section means any place where the conduct may reasonably
be expected to be viewed by others.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-9) Penalty, see § 130.99
§134.02 OBSCENITY.
(A) Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or
content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the nature or content thereof, he:
(1) Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver, or provide any obscene writing,
picture, record, or other representation or embodiment of the obscene;
(2) Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that
portion thereof which makes it obscene;
(3) Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
(4) Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his body for gain;
(5) Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to disseminate it
in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
(6) Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him to be
obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
(B) Obscene defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
(1) The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that,
taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest;
______________________________________________________________________________
13-134-1 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
(2) The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it
depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic
sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
(3) Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
(C) Interpretation of evidence.
(1) Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults except that it shall be judged with
reference to children or other especially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character
of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or
directed to such an audience.
(2) Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or
publicity indicate that material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient
appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
(3) In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall be admissible to show:
(a) The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it was
directed;
(b) What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a special
audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have on the behavior of such
people;
(c) The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits of the material, or absence
thereof;
(d) The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this state;
(e) Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of the
material;
(f) Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
(D) Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement, or possession of a mold, engraved
plate, or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the
possession of more than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent
to disseminate.
(E) Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:
(1) Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than children under 18 years of
age;
(2) Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special justification for possession
of such material.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20) Penalty, see § 130.99
______________________________________________________________________________
13-134-2 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
§134.03 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
(A) Elements of the offense. No person, with knowledge that a person is a child (that is, a person under
18 years of age), or who fails to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a child,
shall knowingly distribute to, send, or cause to be sent to, or exhibit to, or offer to distribute or
exhibit any harmful material to a child.
(B) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(1) HARMFUL. Material is harmful if, to the average person, applying contemporary standards,
its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is to prurient interest, that is a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of
candor in description or representation of such matters, and is material the redeeming social
importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
(2) MATERIAL. Any writing, picture, record, or other representation or embodiment.
(3) DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration.
(4) KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or recklessly failing
to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the contents thereof.
(C) Interpretation of evidence.
(1) The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be judged with reference to
average children of the same general age of the child to whom the material was offered,
distributed, sent, or exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the
circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for specially
susceptible groups, in which case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with
reference to its intended or probable recipient group.
(2) In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate the material is being commercially exploited
for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the
material and can justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is
in fact substantially less than its prurient appeal.
(D) Affirmative defenses.
(1) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any library operated by an
accredited institution of higher education from circulating harmful material to any person
under 18 years of age, provided such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or
educational purpose, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a violation
of this section that the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific or
educational purposes.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing to his child any harmful
material.
______________________________________________________________________________
13-134-3 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
(3) Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and acted in reliance upon any of the
following documents as proof of the age of a child, shall be a defense to any criminal
prosecution under this section: a document issued by the federal government or any state,
county, or Village government or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to,
a motor vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective
Service Act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.
(4) In the event an advertisement of harmful material as defined in this section culminates in the
sale or distribution of harmful material to a child, under circumstances where there was no
personal confrontation of the child by the defendant, his employees, or agents, as where the
order or request for harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, or similar means of
communication, and delivery of the harmful material to the child was by mail, freight, or
similar means of transport, it shall be a defense in any prosecution for a violation of this
section that the advertisement contained the following statement, or a statement substantially
similar thereto, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he was not under
18 years of age and that the purchaser falsely stated that he was not under 18 years of age:
“NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to purchase the matter herein
advertised. Any person under 18 years of age who falsely states that he is not under 18 years
of age for the purpose of obtaining the material advertised herein, is guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor under the laws of the state of Illinois and a violation of § 134.03 of the Village
Code of Ordinances.”
(E) Child falsifying age. No person under 18 years of age shall falsely state, either orally or in writing,
that he is not under the age of 18 years, or present or offer to any person any evidence of age and
identity which is false or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21) Penalty, see § 130.99
_____________________________________________________________________________
13-134-4 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 135: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
§135.01 Definitions
§135.02 Gambling
§135.03 Keeping a Gambling Place
§135.04 Seizure of Gambling Devices and Gambling Funds
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.
GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine, or other machines or device for
the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill, or upon the action of which
money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet, won, or lost; or any mechanism, furniture,
fixture, equipment, or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A
GAMBLING DEVICE does not include the following, as more specifically defined in ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, § 28-2 (a)(1) through (a)(4):
(1) Coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical devices.
(2) Vending machines.
(3) Crane games.
(4) Redemption machines.
LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance
among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to win such prizes, whether
such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale, or some other name.
POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees by any
instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token, or other device that any particular number, character,
ticket, or certificate shall in the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the
purchaser or holder to receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2)
§ 135.02 GAMBLING.
(A) A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the Village, he:
(1) Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, unless excepted in division
(B);
(2) Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political nomination,
appointment, or election;
(3) Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or lease of,
manufactures, or distributes any gambling device;
(4) Contracts to have or give himself or another the option to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or
sell, at a future time, any grain or other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of
any company, as described in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1 (a)(4);
_____________________________________________________________________________________
13-135-1 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
(5) Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or apparatus by means of which bets or
wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or knowingly possesses any money which
he has received in the courses of a bet or wager;
(6) Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political nomination,
appointment, or election;
(7) Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell, or transfers any ticket or share for any
lottery;
(8) Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell, or knowingly possesses or
transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document, or other similar device;
(9) Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip,
record, document or similar device, except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games,
and raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other
state or foreign government;
(10) Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such activity related to lotteries,
bingo games, and raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois
or any other state; or
(11) Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or changes in betting odds by
telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains
equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information; except that nothing in this
division prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of
sporting events or contests.
(B) Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted of gambling:
(1) Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance including without
limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or health or accident insurance;
(2) Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual contestants in any bona fide contest
for the determination of skill, speed, strength, or endurance or to the owners of animals or
vehicles entered in such contest;
(3) Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
(4) Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of essential parts therefor and the
assembly thereof, for transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside
this state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law;
(5) The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.;
(6) Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et
seq.;
(7) Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor intended to be used in the
operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling activity or enterprise. For the purpose of
this division, an ANTIQUE SLOT MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;
_____________________________________________________________________________________
13-135-2 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
(8) Raffles when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.;
(9) Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.; and
(10) Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.; and
(11) Gambling games conducted on river boats when authorized under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1
et seq.
(C) Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under division (A) of this section, circumstantial
evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any criminal prosecution.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 135.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
(A) For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate, vehicle, boat, or any other
property whatsoever used for the purposes of gambling. No person shall knowingly permit any
premises or property owned or occupied by him or under his control to be used as a gambling place.
(B) When any premises is determined by the circuit court to be a gambling place:
(1) The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be proceeded against as
such; and
(2) The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a violation of any section of this
chapter shall be held liable for and may be sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be
recovered and any unsatisfied fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 135.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
(A) Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or every device used
unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device and shall be subject to seizure,
confiscation, and destruction by Village authorities. As used in this section, a
GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot machine and includes any machine or device constructed
for the reception of money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause someone
to return on chance to the player thereof money, property, or a right to receive money or property.
With the exception of any device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use, no
gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed unless an individual with a property interest in the
device knows of the unlawful use thereof.
(B) Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to the county wherein the seizure
occurs. Any money or other thing of value integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and
forfeited as contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a),(b))
____________________________________________________________________________________
13-135-3 Title XIII
(Rev. 05/12)
13-136-1 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Litter
§136.01 Definitions
§136.02 Dumping or Depositing of Litter Prohibited; Exemptions
§136.03 Dumping or Depositing Litter from Motor Vehicle Prohibited
§136.04 Accumulation of Litter Prohibited
§136.05 Presumption of Violation by Operator Throwing Litter from Motor Vehicle
§136.06 Receptacles Required in Public Areas
§136.07 Power of Court to Order Removal of Litter
LITTER
§136.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of §§136.01 through 136.07 the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them respectively.
LITTER. Any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER may include, but is not
limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings, or other lawn or garden waste;
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging construction material,
abandoned vehicle, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §4-100, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil,
carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to injure any
person or create a traffic hazard; or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been
discarded, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of improperly. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, §3)
MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in Chapter 70 of this Code of Ordinances.
§136.02 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
(A) No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause, or permit the dumping, depositing,
dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of litter upon any public or private property
in this Village, or upon or into any river, lake, pond, or other stream or body of water in this Village
unless:
(1) The property has been designated by the Village or any of its agencies for the disposal
of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in accordance with the applicable
rules and regulations of the state Pollution Control Board;
(2) The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by the owner or tenant
in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of litter;
(3) The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property or has first obtained
the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the
personal direction of the owner or tenant and does not create a public health or safety
hazard, a public nuisance, or a fire hazard;
(4) The person is acting pursuant to special cleanup days established by the Board of Trustees;
and/or
13-136-2 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(5) The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation where health and
safety is threatened, and removes and properly disposes of any litter when the emergency
situation no longer exists.
(B) Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more
than $500.00 and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited
to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, §§4 and 8) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
§136.03 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, or otherwise dispose of litter from any motor
vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or private property or upon or into any
river, lake, pond, stream, or body of water in this Village except as permitted under §136.02
(A)(1) through (5). Nor shall any person transport, by any means, garbage or refuse from any
dwelling, residence, place of business, farm, or other site to and deposit the material in, around,
or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
(B) Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more
than $500.00 and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited
to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. (ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 105, §§5 and 8) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
§136.04 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the person charged is
the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance or in such a
manner that the litter may be blown or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real
property of another person.
(B) Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more
than $500.00 and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited
to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. (ILCS
Ch. 415, Act 105, §§6 and 8) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
§136.05 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM
MOTOR VEHICLE.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle not carrying passengers
for hire, the presumption is created that the operator of that motor vehicle has violated §136.03, but that
presumption may be rebutted. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, §9)
§136.06 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.
(A) In order to assist the public in complying with this chapter, the owner or person in control of
any property which is held out to the public as a place for assemblage, the transaction of
business, recreation, or as a public way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for
the deposit of litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the
numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.
13-136-3 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(B) For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to commercially operated
parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business parking lots, car
washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas, industrial parking lots, boat moorage
and fueling stations, piers, beaches and bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in movies,
and shopping malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE,
RECREATION, OR AS A PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to any property that
is publicly owned or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this division
for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS
but excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.
(C) If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in this Section, the owner or person in
control of the property shall be fined $100 for violating this Section. If the owner or person in
control of the property has placed litter receptacles on his property but the number or size of the
receptacles has proved inadequate to meet the needs of the numbers of people coming on or using
his property as indicated by the condition and appearance of that property, and the owner or person
in control has failed to provide sufficient or adequate receptacles within 10 days after being
made aware of that fact by written notice from the police, he shall be fined $25.00 for each receptacle
not so provided and maintained and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution,
including but not limited to attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred
by the Village thereto.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, §10) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
§136.07 POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.
The penalties prescribed in this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of any penalties, rights,
remedies, duties, or liabilities which may be otherwise imposed or conferred by a court. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act
105, §8)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XIII-Chapt 136-Offenses Against Public Health, Safety-3-15.docx
13-137-1 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
§137.01 Unlawful Use of Weapons
§137.02 Exemptions
§137.03 Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm Ammunition
§137.04 Defacing Identification Marks of Firearms
§137.05 Confiscation and Disposition of Weapons
Air Rifles
§137.10 Definitions
§137.11 Selling, Renting, or Transferring to Children; Prohibition
§137.12 Carrying or Discharging on Public Streets
§137.13 Permissive Possession
§137.14 Permissive Sales
§137.15 Seizure and Removal
DEADLY WEAPONS
§137.01 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
(A) No person shall knowingly:
(1) Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry any bludgeon, black-jack, slung-shot,
sand- club, sand-bag, metal knuckles, throwing star, or any knife, commonly referred
to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure
applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle of the knife, or a ballistic knife,
which is a device that propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil
spring, elastic material or compressed gas;
(2) Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against another, a dagger, dirk,
billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun or
taser, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;
(3) Carry on or about his person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun projector or bomb or any
object containing noxious liquid gas or substance, other than an object containing a
non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance designed solely for personal defense carried
by a person 18 years of age or older;
(4) Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person, except when on his
land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any pistol, revolver, stun gun, taser,
or other firearm;
(5) Set a spring gun;
(6) Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun or taser or other deadly weapon in any place
which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any public gathering held pursu13-
137-2 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
ant to a license issued by any governmental body or any public gathering at which an
admission is charged, excluding a place where a showing, demonstration, or lecture
involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted;
(7) Carry or possess on or about his person on any public street, alley, or other public
lands within this Village, except when an invitee thereon or therein for the purpose of display
of the weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or except when on his land or in
his own abode or fixed place of business, any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser, or other
firearm; or
(8) Sell, manufacture, or purchase any explosive bullet. EXPLOSIVE BULLET shall mean
the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an explosive
charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or an animal.
CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed at the front thereof
and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the propellant contained in the tube between
the projectile and the cap; or
(9) Discharge any firearm within the Village boundaries or outside the boundaries of the
Village so that the discharged ammunition passes through the Village boundaries.
(Ord. passed 3-18-96)
(B) A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A), means:
(1) Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as batteries, and which
fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire and which, upon hitting a human,
can send out a current capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a manner
as to render him incapable of normal functioning; or
(2) Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as batteries, and which,
upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human, can send out a current
capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to render him incapable
of normal functioning.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §24-1) Penalty, see §130.99
§137.02 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) §§137.01(A)(3), (4), and (7) do not apply to or affect any of the following:
(1) Peace officers or any person summoned by a peace officer to assist in making arrests
or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting the officer.
(2) Wardens, superintendents, and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails, and other institutions
for the detention of persons accused or convicted of an offense, while in the performance
of their official duty, or while commuting between their homes and place of
employment.
(3) Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United States or the Illinois
National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps, while in the performance
of their official duty.
13-137-3 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(4) Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to perform police functions or
guards of armored car companies while actually engaged in the performance of the duties
of their employment or commuting between their homes and places of employment;
watchmen while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment.
(5) Persons licensed as private security contractors, private detectives or private alarm
contractors or employed by an agency certified by the Department of Professional Regulation
if their duties include the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 225, Act 445, §§1 et seq., while actually engaged in the performance of the duties
of their employment or commuting between their homes and places of employment, provided
that the commuting is accomplished within one hour from departure from home
or place of employment, as the case may be. Persons exempted under this division shall
be required to have completed a course of study in firearms handling and training approved
and supervised by the Department of Professional Regulation as prescribed by
ILCS Ch. 225, Act 445, §28 prior to becoming eligible for this exemption. The Department
of Professional Regulation shall provide suitable documentation demonstrating
the successful completion of the prescribed firearms training. Such documentation
shall be carried at all times when such persons are in possession of a concealable
weapon.
(6) Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial operation as a security
guard for the protection of persons employed and private property related to that
commercial or industrial operation while actually engaged in the performance of
their duty or traveling between sites or properties belonging to the employer, and
who, as a security guard, is a member of a security force of at least five persons registered
with the Department of Professional Regulation; provided, that the security guard
has successfully completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the state
Department of Professional Regulation consisting of not less than 40 hours of training
which shall include theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the handling of
weapons. A person shall be considered to be in compliance with this section who has
completed the required 20 hours of training for a security officer and 20 hours of required
firearm training and who has been issued a firearm authorization card by the
state Department of Professional Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm authorization
cards issued under the provisions of this section shall be the same as for
those cards issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 446, §§1 et seq. Such
firearm authorization card shall be carried by the security guard at all times when he is
in possession of a concealable weapon.
(7) Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative Investigating Commission authorized
by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in §137.01 (A) (3) and (4) while
on duty in the course of any investigation for the Commission.
(8) Persons employed by a financial institution for the protection of other employees and
property related to that financial institution, while actually engaged in the performance
of their duties, commuting between their homes and places of employment, or
traveling between sites or properties owned or operated by the financial institution, provided
that any person so employed has successfully completed a course of study, approved
by and supervised by the state Department of Professional Regulation, consisting
of not less than 40 hours of training which includes theory of law enforcement, liability
for acts, and the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible
13-137-4 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
for this exemption who has completed the required 20 hours of training for a security
officer and 20 hours of required firearm training and who has been issued a firearm
authorization card by the state Department of Professional Regulation. Conditions for
renewal of firearm authorization cards issued under the provisions of this section
shall be the same as for those issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 446,
§§1 et seq. Such firearm authorization card shall be carried by the person so trained at
all times when such person is in possession of a concealable weapon. For purposes
of this division, FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, or company providing armored car services.
(9) Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored car while actually
engaged in the performance of his duties.
(10) Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to ILCS Ch. 20, Act
2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.
(11) Investigators of the Office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor authorized by
the board of governors of the Office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor
to carry weapons pursuant to ILCS Ch. 725, Act 210, §§1 et seq.
(12) Special investigators appointed by a State’s Attorney under ILCS Ch. 55. Act 5, §3-9005.
(13) Manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to persons authorized under (A)(1)
through (12) of this section to possess those weapons.
(B) Section 137.01(A)(4) and (7) do not apply to or affect any of the following:
(1) Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of practicing shooting
at targets upon established target ranges, whether public or private, or patrons of
the ranges while the members or patrons are using their firearms on those target ranges;
(2) Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading with the special permission
of the Governor;
(3) Licensed hunters, trappers, or fishermen while engaged in hunting, trapping, or fishing;
(4) Transportation of weapons broken down in a nonfunctioning state or not immediately
accessible.
(C) §137.01(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase, possession, or carrying of a black-jack or slungshot
by a police officer.
(D) §137.01(A)(6) does not apply to any owner, manager, or authorized employee of any place
specified in that division or to any law enforcement officer.
(E) §§137.01(A)(4) and (A)(7) do not apply to members of any club or organization organized for
the purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public or
private, while using their firearms on those target ranges.
(F) §§137.01(A)(7) and 137.03(A)(8) do not apply to:
13-137-5 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(1) Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United States or the Illinois
National Guard, while in the performance of their official duty.
(2) Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military ordinance.
(3) Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or specializing in the development
of ammunition or explosive ordnance.
(4) Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or specializing in the development
of ammunition or explosive ordnance.
(5) Commerce, preparation, assembly, or possession of explosive bullets by manufacturers
of ammunition licensed by the federal government, in connection with the supply
of those organizations and persons exempted by division (F)(1) above, or like
organizations and persons outside this state, or the transportation of explosive bullets
to any organization or person exempted in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle
owned or leased by an exempted manufacturer.
(G) An information or indictment based upon a violation of any provision of this subchapter need
not negative any exemptions contained in this subchapter. The defendant shall have the burden
of proving such an exemption.
(H) Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or affect the transportation, carrying, or possession
of any pistol or revolver, stun gun, taser, or other firearm consigned to a common carrier
operating under license with the state or the federal government where such transportation, carrying,
or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which the common carrier is
engaged. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or affect the transportation, carrying,
or possession of any pistol, revolver, stun gun, taser, or other firearm not the subject
of and regulated by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §24-1(a)(7) or division (C) of this section above,
which is unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping box, or other container
by the possessor of a valid firearm owner’s identification card.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §24-2)
§137.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or firearm ammunition when:
(A) He is under 18 years of age and has in his possession any firearm of a size which may be concealed
upon the person;
(B) He is under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense
or adjudged delinquent, and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession;
(C) He has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this or any other jurisdiction and has
any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession;
(D) He is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession;
(E) He has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past five years and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his possession; or
13-137-6 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(F) He is mentally retarded and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession.
(G) He has in his possession any explosive bullet. For the purposes of this section, EXPLOSIVE
BULLET means the projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an
explosive charge which will explode upon contract with the flesh of a human of an animal. CARTRIDGE
means a tubular metal case having a projectile fixed at the front thereof and a cap or
primer at the rear end thereof with the propellant contained in the tube between the projectile and
the cap.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §24-3.1) Penalty, see §130.99
§137.04 DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF FIREARMS.
(A) No person shall change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the maker, model, manufacturer’s
number, or other mark of identification of any firearm.
(B) Possession of any firearm upon which any such mark shall have been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated shall be prima facie evidence that the possessor has changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated the same.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §24-5) Penalty, see §130.99
§137.05 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed by the offender, any weapon
seized may be confiscated by the trial court for further disposition consistent with state law.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §24-6)
AIR RIFLES
§137.10 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of §§137.10 et seq., the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.
AIR RIFLE Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B.B. gun, pellet gun, or any implement that
is not a firearm, which impels a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or other hard materials with
a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
DEALER. Any person, copartnership, association, or corporation engaged in the business of selling at retail
or renting any of the articles included in the definition of AIR RIFLE.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, §1)
§137.11 SELLING, RENTING, OR TRANSFERRING TO CHILDREN; PROHIBITION.
(A) It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise transfer an air rifle to any person
under the age of 13 years where the dealer knows or has cause to believe the person to be
under 13 years of age or where the dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the
13-137-7 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
age of the person and the person is under 13 years of age.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend, or otherwise transfer any air rifle to any person
under 13 years of age except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward, or
adult instructor and pupil exists between the person and the person under 13 years of age, or
where the person stands in loco parentis to the person under 13 years of age.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, §2) Penalty, see §130.99
§137.12 CARRYING OR DISCHARGING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person under 13 years of age to carry any air rifle on the public streets,
roads, highways, or public lands within this Village, unless the person under 13 years of age
carries the rifle unloaded.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or across any street, sidewalk,
road, highway, or public land or any public place except on a safely constructed target range. (ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 535, §3)
(C) Any person convicted of violating this Section shall pay a fine not to exceed $50.00 and shall be
responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to attorney fees, court
costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto. (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
§137.13 PERMISSIVE POSSESSION.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, it is lawful for any person under 13 years of age to have in
his possession any air rifle if it is:
(A) Kept within his house of residence or other private enclosure;
(B) Used by the person under 13 years of age and he is a duly enrolled member of any club, team,
or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining as part of its facilities or having
written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and
instruction of a responsible adult, and then only if the air rifle is actually being used in connection
with the activities of the club, team, or society under the supervision of a responsible
adult; or
(C) Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances when the air rifle is
fired, discharged, or operated in a manner as not to endanger persons or property and then only
if it is used in a manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space
outside the limits of such grounds or residence.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, §4)
§137.14 PERMISSIVE SALES.
The provisions of §§137.10 through 137.14 do not prohibit sales of air rifles:
(A) By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
(B) To be shipped out of the state;
13-137-8 Title XIII
(Rev. 3/15)
(C) To be used at a target range operated in accordance with ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, §4 or by members
of the Armed Services of the United States or veterans’ organizations.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, §5)
§137.15 SEIZURE AND REMOVAL.
Any police officer shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any air
rifle sold or used in any manner in violation of this chapter. (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, §6)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XIII-Chapt 137-Weapons-3-15.docx
Title XIII
(Rev. 10/19)
13-138-1
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
§138.01 Possession of Cannabis
§138.02 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
§138.03 Public Use of Cannabis
§138.04 Penalty
§138.01 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for anyone under 21 years of age to knowingly possess any amount of Cannabis,
or any substance containing or identified as including any part of the plant Cannabis sativa, except
where authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
(B) Except if otherwise authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, it shall be unlawful for anyone
21 years of age or older and a resident of the State of Illinois to knowingly possess more than:
(1) 30 grams of cannabis flower;
(2) 500 milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-infused product; and
(3) 5 grams of cannabis concentrate;
The possession limits above are to be considered cumulative.
(C) Except if otherwise authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, it shall be unlawful for anyone
21 years of age or older and not a resident of the State of Illinois to knowingly possess more than:
(1) 15 grams of cannabis flower;
(2) 250 milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-infused product;
(3) 2.5 grams of cannabis concentrate; and
The possession limits above are to be considered cumulative.
§138.02 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(A) For the purposes of this Section, drug paraphernalia shall be defined as any equipment, product,
or material used in the preparation, measurement, packaging, or introduction of Cannabis, intoxicating
compounds, or other controlled substances into the human body. Controlled substances are
defined as any substance described in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, specifically 720 ILCS
570/102.
(B) Except if otherwise authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, it shall be unlawful to
knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it to prepare, measure,
ingest, smoke, inject, inhale, or otherwise introduce Cannabis, intoxicating compounds, or other
unauthorized controlled substances into the human body.
(C) All drug paraphernalia unlawfully possessed is subject to forfeiture.
Title XIII
(Rev. 10/19)
13-138-2
§138.03 PUBLIC USE OF CANNABIS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use cannabis in or about any public place or places. As used in this
section, “public place” means any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be observed by others.
“Public place” shall include all parts of buildings owned in whole or part, or leased, by the Village.
§138.04 PENALTY.
Whoever violates any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00
for each offense and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to
attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expense incurred by the Village thereto.
(Ord. 03-5, passed 1/20/03; Amd. Ord. 19-19 passed 10/24/19, 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
15-150-1 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
§150.01 Administration
§150.02 Building Permits and Fees
§150.03 Building Regulations Adopted
§150.04 Schedule of Building Fees and Charges
§150.99 Penalties
§150.01 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Deer Park Building Regulations. The regulations set forth in this Chapter shall be known as the “Deer
Park Building Regulations.”
(B) Referenced Standards and Codes. The standards and codes referenced in this Chapter shall be considered
part of the Deer Park Building Regulations to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where
differences occur between provisions of the Deer Park Building Regulations and referenced standards
and codes, the provisions of the Deer Park Building Regulations shall control.
(C) Code Application. The provisions of the Deer Park Building Regulations shall apply to all matters
relating to the construction, repair, replacement and/or removal of all structures, including but not limited
to, signs, swimming pools, and fences.
(D) Building Department. The Building Department is hereby created and the person in charge thereof shall
be known as the Building Inspector. That person may be an employee of the Village or may be an
independent contractor providing services to the Village through a contract between the Village and the
person or their firm.
(E) Building Inspector; Zoning Officer. The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Village President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The President, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, may remove the Building Inspector from office at any time. The Building Inspector
shall act as the Zoning Officer of the Village.
(F) Duties of Building Inspector. The duties of the Building Inspector shall include:
(1) The enforcement of all ordinances and codes of the Village relating to the construction,
repair, alteration, addition, and removal of all buildings and structures, swimming pools, fences,
and signs.
(2) The enforcement of all zoning and land use ordinances of the Village, and for this purpose,
the Building Inspector shall act as the Zoning Officer of the Village.
(3) Provision of technical assistance to the Village Board, Plan Commission, and Zoning Board
of Appeals on matters of this Code and zoning matters.
(4) The conducting of inspections to insure compliance with the Deer Park Building Regulations.
15-150-2 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(5) The receiving and processing of building permit applications.
(6) The issuance of building permits for the construction, repair, alteration, addition, or removal
of all buildings and structures, swimming pools, fences and signs.
(7) The issuance of occupancy certificates.
(8) The conducting of inspections of existing buildings to insure compliance with applicable
provisions of the Deer Park Building Regulations.
(9) The conducting of inspections as provided for in the business license regulations.
(10) The issuance of stop work orders as provided for in this Chapter and/or as necessary to
enforce the other provisions of this Code.
(11) The issuance of building permits for the construction, expansion, improvements to or any work
related to private sewage disposal systems as provided for in Chapter 51 of this Code.
(12) The initiation or conducting of inspections of and enforcement related to private sewage disposal
systems as provided in Chapter 51 of this Code.
(13) Coordination with Lake County for the enforcement and implementation of the Lake County
regulations and ordinances related to private sewage disposal systems.
(G) Stop Work Orders. Stop Work Orders may be issued by the Building Inspector with respect to any
construction or work when violations of the Deer Park Building Regulations or the Deer Park Municipal
Code occur. Work shall not be continued until written permission for such resumption is issued by the
Building Inspector and a Stop Work Order fee, if any, has been paid to the Village by the person or
entity to whom the Stop Work Order was issued. If the Stop Work Order is an oral order, such oral
order will be followed by the issuance of a written Stop Work Order setting forth the terms, conditions,
provisions, and restrictions of the oral order, which written Stop Work Order shall be issued and posted
on the affected site or sites within 72 hours of issuance of the oral order, or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Any person who violates a Stop Work Order shall be in violation of the Deer Park
Municipal Code and subject to revocation of their permit and other Village remedies provided therein.
(H) Appeals. Any person who wishes to appeal any Order, decision, or the interpretation by the
Building Inspector of the Deer Park Building Regulations as established from time to time in this Chapter
shall, within 45 days of the issuance of such Order, decision, and/or interpretation, file a written appeal
with the Village of Deer Park Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall hold a public hearing on such appeal
and may affirm, overrule, or modify the decision of the Building Inspector.
(I) Violation; Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of the Deer Park Building Regulations shall
be subject to the penalties as set forth in Section 150.99 of this Chapter.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013, 16-15. passed 11/21/16)
§150.02 BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES.
(A) Required Permits.
15-150-3 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(1) A building permit is required:
(a) For the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition or restoration of
any building or structure or its service equipment.
(b) For the erection or alteration of any sign as provided for in Chapter 157.
(c) For the construction, alteration, or addition to any fence.
(d) For the construction or replacement of any culvert or driveway.
(e) For the construction of any accessory building, structure, or any work in conjunction
with accessory uses to include swimming pools, outdoor hot tubs and whirlpools,
detached buildings, garages, car ports, sheds, decks, patios, satellite antennae, radio
towers, landscape terraces, ponds and similar improvements.
(2) A building permit is not required for ordinary repairs and/or maintenance of any of the
improvements described in subsection (A)(1) of this Section.
(3) For all properties served by private well and septic systems (also known as private sewage
disposal systems or Individual Septic Disposal Systems) must present a Lake County Health
Department permit at the time of submitting a building permit application.
(B) Certificate of Occupancy.
(1) A Certificate of Occupancy is required prior to occupying or using any premises, or
any portion thereof, for which a building permit has been issued. A Certificate of
Occupancy shall only be issued for a premises, or any portion thereof, after inspection
and approval thereof by the Building Inspector, including but not limited to, an
inspection of any work performed on such premises. When a private sewage disposal
system has been constructed, changed in any way or, in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, otherwise impacted by the work, Lake County must determine if the private
sewage disposal system is satisfactory under the county’s regulations prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(2) A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued in the discretion of the Building
Officer when a premises is substantially completed, all life safety and sanitary requirements are
complete, and the premises are fit for the purpose constructed.
(3) Minor construction items, final grading and landscaping, and other site improvements may be
completed under the terms of a Temporary Occupancy Certificate which shall specify a date by
which such completion must occur and on which the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall
expire. Following completion of these items, a final Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued.
Failure to complete the items set forth on the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy by its date of
expiration shall mean that continued occupancy of the premises is unlawful.
15-150-4 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(4) Road and performance bonds shall not be returned until a final Certificate of Occupancy has
been issued.
(5) If it is determined by the Building Inspector that an increase in the performance bond is necessary
prior to issuance of a Temporary Occupancy Certificate, the Building Inspector shall
determine the amount of that increase subject to approval by the Village Boards. The permittee
shall be required to post the additional amount with the Village prior to obtaining the
Temporary Occupancy Certificate.
(6) A fee of $100.00, or 5% of the basic building permit fee, whichever is greater, shall be
required for obtaining a Temporary Occupancy Certificate.
(7) Prior to occupancy, the permittee shall obtain an “unexecuted Certificate of Occupancy” from
the Building Inspector which shall be filed by the permittee with the applicable local assessor’s
office for execution. The permittee shall provide to the Village a copy of the receipt of filing
with the applicable local assessor’s office.
(8) It shall be unlawful to occupy a building, or any portion thereof, for which a building permit has
been issued prior to obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy.
(9) No Certificate of Occupancy may be issued until the permittee has furnished proof of compliance
with all provisions of Chapter 51 of this Code regarding private sewage disposal systems.
(C) Permit Application and Process.
(1) Applications for building permits shall be made to the Building Inspector on application
forms provided by the Village Administrator. The completed application form shall be submitted
to the Village together with any submittals required by the Building Inspector, including but not
limited to the following documents, where applicable:
(a) Three (3) copies of plans and specifications detailing all work proposed to be done,
signed and sealed by an architect registered to practice in Illinois.
(b) Three (3) copies of the site plan showing existing and proposed topography, location of
all existing and proposed improvements, location of all drainage and stormwater
structures, ponds, channels, swales, lakes, wetland, location of all utilities, and the
location of all well and septic systems on, or proposed to be constructed on, the
property or within at least 75 feet of all boundaries of the property.
(c) The information required in Chapter 51 of this Code when a private sewage disposal
system is involved.
(d) Three (3) copies of the plat of survey with the legal description of the parcel, showing
the lot dimensions, total area, easements, and all building setback lines required by the
Village Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 158 of the Deer Park Municipal Code.
(e) A $500.00 nonrefundable fee shall be required to be paid to the Village at the time
application is submitted to the Village for new building construction. A $100.00
15-150-5 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
nonrefundable fee shall be required to be paid to the Village at the time application is
submitted to the Village for all other construction in excess of $10,000 estimated cost.
(2) The permit application and subsequent additional submittals shall be reviewed by the Building
Inspector after the Village’s receipt of the application, all required submittals, and all related
fees to be paid to the Village.
(3) Following notification to the applicant of permit approval, the applicant shall be required to pay
all applicable fees to the Village within three (3) months of said notification to the applicant of
permit approval or the application shall become null and void. Any deposits received by the
Village in connection with such application shall first be used to reimburse the Village for any
costs incurred by the Village in connection with processing the application.
(4) Prior to permit review and issuance, where the construction of an Individual Septic Disposal
System (“ISD”) (also referred to as a private sewage disposal system) is included, the Building
Inspector must receive an ISD plan stamped with the approval of the Lake County Health
Department.
(5) After payment of all required fees to the Village, and after the Village’s approval of the
application and all required submittals, the Building Inspector shall issue the permit. The permit
placard is to be placed on the premises in a conspicuous exterior location protected from the
weather. It is to remain in place while work covered by the permit is performed on the property
until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
(6) The work covered by the permit must commence within six (6) months of the Village’s
issuance of the respective permit and must be completed within twenty-four (24) months of
issuance. The permit may be extended for an additional twelve (12) months with the approval of
the Board of Trustees and the payment to the Village of a $100.00 renewal fee.
(D) Building Permit Fees and Other Charges. The building permit fees and other charges shall be established
from time to time by the Board of Trustees, which shall be as set forth in Section 150.04 of this Code.
(E) Deposits, Bonds, and Contributions:
(1) Minimum Deposits for Professional Fees and Expenses incurred by the Village relative to
applications for permits:
(a) A $75.00 deposit shall be required for all applications for permit where construction
costs are estimated to be less than or equal to $10,000.
(b) A $250.00 deposit shall be required for all applications for permit where construction
costs are estimated to exceed $10,000.
(c) A $1,000.00 deposit shall be required for all applications for permit where construction
costs are estimated to exceed $100,000.
(d) A $5,000.00 deposit shall be required for all applications for permit where construction
costs are estimated to exceed $1,000,000.
15-150-6 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(e) A $7,500.00 deposit shall be required for all applications for permit where construction
costs are estimated to exceed $2,000,000.
(f) A $10,000.00 deposit shall be required for all applications for permit where construction
costs are estimated to exceed $5,000,000.
(2) Bonds:
(a) A $500.00 performance bond shall be required for all permits where construction costs
are estimated to be in excess of $10,000. This cash bond shall be returned to whomever
posted said bond upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy and/or a final inspection
approval by the Village. This performance bond shall be forfeited to the Village if,
within one (1) year from the date of the issuance of a building permit, construction is
not complete in accordance with approved building plans and Village ordinances and/or
a final inspection approving the work performed on the premises has not been obtained
from the Building Inspector within that same period. The Building Inspector shall have
authority to extend the completion date for construction to six (6) months from the date
of the building permit without requiring the forfeiture of said bond.
(b) A $1,000.00 performance bond shall be required for all permits where construction
costs are estimated to be in excess of $100,000. This cash bond shall be returned to
whomever posted said bond upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy and/or a final
inspection approval by the Village. This performance bond shall be forfeited to the
Village if, within one (1) year from the date of the issuance of a building permit,
construction is not complete in accordance with approved building plans and Village
ordinances and/or a final inspection approving the work performed on the premises has
not been obtained from the Building Inspector within that same period. The Building
Inspector shall have authority to extend the completion date for construction to six (6)
months from the date of the building permit without requiring the forfeiture of said
bond.
(c) A $3,000.00 performance bond shall be required for all permits where construction
costs are estimated to be in excess of $500,000. This cash bond shall be returned to
whomever posted said bond upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy and/or a final
inspection approval by the Village. This performance bond shall be forfeited to the
Village if, within one (1) year from the date of the issuance of a building permit,
construction is not complete in accordance with approved building plans and Village
ordinances and/or a final inspection approving the work performed on the premises has
not been obtained from the Building Inspector within that same period. The Building
Inspector shall have authority to extend the completion date for construction to six (6)
months from the date of the building permit without requiring the forfeiture of said
bond.
(d) A $5,000.00 performance bond shall be required for all permits where construction
costs are estimated to be in excess of $1,000,000. This cash bond shall be returned to
whomever posted said bond upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy and/or a final
inspection approval by the Village. This performance bond shall be forfeited to the
Village if, within one (1) year from the date of the issuance of a building permit,
15-150-7 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
construction is not complete in accordance with approved building plans and Village
ordinances and/or a final inspection approving the work performed on the premises has
not been obtained from the Building Inspector within that same period. The Building
Inspector shall have authority to extend the completion date for construction to six (6)
months from the date of the building permit without requiring the forfeiture of said
bond.
(e) A $1,000.00 performance bond shall be required for all permits where construction
costs are estimated to be in excess of $25,000 or where the Building Inspector
determines that work in the Village right-of-way or damage to the Village right-of-way
is possible. Village right-of-way shall include all dedicated rights-of-way including
drainage ways, ditches, swales, culverts, curbs and gutters and other drainage structures.
This cash bond shall be returned to whomever posted said bond upon issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy and/or final inspection approval by the Village. This bond
shall be forfeited to the Village if restoration of any damage to the right-of-way is not
completed by the permittee to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village Administrator,
or his designee, within one (1) year from the date of the Certificate of Occupancy, or
less if mandated by the Village.
(3) A $750.00 road b on d shall be required for all permits where construction costs are in excess
of $25,000 or where the Building Inspector determines that work in the Village right-of-way
or damage to the Village right-of-way is possible. This shall include all dedicated rights-of- way
including drainage ways, ditches, swales, culverts, curbs and gutters and other drainage
structures. This cash bond shall be returned to whomever posted said bond upon issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy and/or final inspection approval by the Village. This bond shall be
forfeited to the Village if restoration of any damage to the right-of-way is not completed by
the permittee to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village Administrator, or his designee, within
the specific time period requested by the Village.
(4) For required land dedication for park sites, school sites, fire/rescue sites and library sites, or
cash c on t r ib ut i on s in lieu thereof, refer to Sections 155.60.00 through 155.60.22 of the
Subdivision Regulations.
(F) Zoning Amendment, Special Use, Planned Development, and Variation Fees:
(1) Each application for an amendment, special use or variation filed by or on behalf of the
owner or owners of property affected shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable filing
fee and one or more deposit(s) into an escrow held by the Village as required by Chapter
38 of this Code, “Reimbursement for Professional Fees and Other Expenses,” of Title III,
“Administration.”
(2) For an application requiring consideration under more than one of the above categories, a filing
fee shall be required, equivalent to the sum of the applicable categories.
(Amd. Ord. 13-01 passed 01/21/13, 13-25 passed 10/21/2013, 15-05 passed 5/1/15, 16-15. passed 11/21/16)
§150.03 BUILDING REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
(A) Building Codes:
15-150-8 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(1) Adoption of Building Codes:
(a) The International Building Code 2012, which shall be referred to in this Village Code
as the “Deer Park Building Code,” a copy of which was on file in the office of the
Village Clerk for inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days
prior to adoption thereof, be and is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
title, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this Code.
(b) The 2012 International Residential Code, which shall be referred to in this Village
Code as the “Deer Park Residential Building Code,” a copy of which was on file in the
office of the Village Clerk for inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty
(30) days prior to adoption thereof, be and is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this title, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this Code.
(2) Amendments and Additions to Building Codes: The following amendments and/or additions to
the Deer Park Building Code and/or the Deer Park Residential Building Code are hereby adopted
and made part of this title and shall prevail and govern over any related provisions of said codes:
(a) Foundations.
(i) The minimum footing dimension shall be eight inches (8”) by eighteen inches
(18”). The minimum wall dimension shall be eight inches (8”) supporting
frame construction, ten inches (10”) supporting brick veneer or masonry
construction. All walls over nine feet (9’) shall be minimum ten inches (10”).
(ii) Where approved by the Building Inspector, trench foundations are permitted;
such foundations shall be minimum ten-inch (10”) flaring to eighteen inches
(18”), 48-inch deep installations for additional of 500 square feet or less.
(b) Frame Construction:
(i) Roof sheathing shall be minimum one-half inch CDX where supported on 16-
inch centers and 5/8-inch CDX where supported on 24-inch centers.
(ii) All floor joists shall be minimum two inches (2”) by eight inches (8”).
(c) Driveways/Culverts:
(i) No person shall construct a driveway or driveway approach within the public
right-of-way without having first obtained a permit from the Village Building
Department.
(ii) Residential Driveway Approaches: A single-family residential property shall be
limited to one curb opening of twenty-four (24) feet in width per lot except for
circular drives as specifically approved by the Building Department. A
15-150-9 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
residential property may be allowed two driveway openings which shall be a
maximum of sixteen feet (16) each, if under the facts and circumstances, it is
deemed necessary, at the discretion of the Building Department.
(iii) Legal, Non-Conforming Residential Driveway Approaches: A single-family
residential property with a setback of less than fifty (50) feet from the property
line to the front structure is considered a legal, non-conforming for the purpose
of this section. A legal, non-conforming single-family residential property shall
be limited to one curb opening of thirty (30) feet in width per lot except for
circular drives as specifically approved by the Building Department. A
residential property may be allowed two driveway openings each of which shall
be a maximum of eighteen (18) feet each, if under the facts and circumstances,
it is deemed necessary, at the discretion of the Building Department.
(iv) New construction driveway entrances over a drainage ditch must be constructed
with a minimum 12-inch reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) culvert with concrete
flared end sections and a gravel base.
(v) An existing corrugated metal pipe (CMP) driveway culvert may be replaced
with a minimum 12-inch corrugated metal pipe (CMP) culvert with metal flared
end sections, and a gravel base.
(vi) An existing reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) driveway culvert or plastic
driveway culvert may be replaced with a minimum 12-inch reinforced concrete
pipe (RCP) culvert with concrete flared end sections, or other approved material
by Village Engineer, and a gravel base.
(vii) All deliveries and travel to the building site must be via the driveway. Future
maintenance and replacement of the subject culvert shall be the responsibility of
the property owner.
(viii) Prohibition: The placement of obstacles such as boulders, concrete, railroad ties,
trees, shrubs, landscaping materials and other similar items that inhibit the flow
of water and/or maintenance of the driveway culvert and drainage ditch are
prohibited in the Village right-of-way.
(Amd.15-05 passed 5/18/15, Ord 19-15 passed 7/25/19)
(d) Construction Refuse: The permittee and the owner of each lot on which a new structure
is being constructed, or on other construction sites as may be deemed necessary by the
Building Inspector, shall provide a trash dumpster on site. The site must be kept in a
clean and orderly manner and the dumpster kept in such a manner so as to avoid the
blowing of construction debris around the area.
(e) Temporary Sanitary Facility: The permittee and the owner of each lot on which a new
structure is being constructed, or on other construction sites as may be deemed necessary
by the Building Inspector, shall provide a temporary toilet facility on site. The facility
shall be kept in a sanitary and orderly manner.
15-150-10 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(f) Accessory Buildings/Uses:
(i) It shall be unlawful to build any garage, shed or other accessory building prior
to construction of the main building.
(ii) No accessory building or use may be occupied or used prior to the completion
and occupancy of the main building.
(iii) No accessory building may be used for residential purposes.
(g) Point of Discharge.
(i) The point of discharge (i.e., the release at or above grade) of any sump
pump drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious surface,
or drain not connected to a septic system or to a sprinkler system which
channels, collects or conveys water related to any structure or improvement
shall be set back at a minimum of not less than fifteen-feet (15’) from any
property line of the lot or parcel on which the structure or improvement is
located unless an alternative point of discharge is otherwise approved in writing
by the Village Engineer.
(ii) Any connection, and the manner of such connection, of any conduit, pipe,
impervious surface, or drain connected directly to a storm sewer within a
public right of way (or within a right-of-way offered for public dedication) or
within a recorded drainage easement shall be approved in advance in writing by
the Village Engineer.
(iii) Every sump drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious
surface, or drain not connected to a septic system or to a sprinkler system which
temporarily, occasionally, periodically, or permanently channels, collects or
conveys unpolluted water related to any structure or improvement shall be
connected to a storm sewer which is within a public right of way (or within
a right-of-way offered for public dedication) or within a recorded drainage
easement if such a storm sewer exists within seventy-five feet (75’) of such
improvement or structure, such connection shall be approved in advance by the
Village Engineer.
(3) Amendments and Additions to Deer Park Building Code: The following amendments and/or
additions to the Deer Park Building Code (i.e., the 2012 International Building Code) are hereby
adopted and made part of this title and shall prevail and govern over any related provisions of
said codes:
(a) Section 101.1 Insert: “Village of Deer Park.”
(b) A new section, Section 105.8, Unique Construction, is hereby added, which shall read
as follows:
105.8 Unique Construction. When a project has unique features, unusual construction
sequences or out of the ordinary construction techniques, the Building Department shall
15-150-11 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
have the authority to require additional documentation to determine compliance with
this Village Code. The Building Inspector may also add fees to the building permit for
the additional inspections that are expected to be necessary beyond those normally
requested by the building inspector or to cover the cost of specialized inspections or
inspections conducted by persons, firms, or corporations otherwise engaged by the
Village or testing agencies.
(c) A new section, Section 107.2.5.2, Compliance with Site Plan, is hereby added, which
shall read as follows:
107.2.5.2 Compliance with Site Plan: It shall be the responsibility of the
builder/developer to submit to the Village of Deer Park a spot survey prepared by a
Registered Land Surveyor after the foundation is installed. This survey shall be at a
scale of not less than one inch equal to thirty feet (1”=30’). The survey shall indicate
the elevation above sea level of the top of the foundation wall and the top of the curb
and sidewalk at lot lines extended relative to a United States Geological Survey
benchmark. It shall show the location of the foundation on site with the dimensions
indicated from all lot lines. No construction will be allowed to proceed except for
underground water and sewer, and related items until the spot survey is approved by
the Building and Zoning Departments. In the event that such plat is not filed within
fifteen (15) days after such foundation is completed, all further work shall cease until
such plat is filed; if further work has been completed, no occupancy certificate shall be
issued until such plat is filed.
(d) Section 109.1 Payment of Fees: The following shall be added:
“Schedule of Building Permit Fees and Charges” shall be as set forth from time to time
in Section 150.04 of this Chapter.
(e) Section 113, Board of Appeals: The following new Section 113.0, “Means of Appeal,”
is hereby added to Section 113, and shall read as follows:
“113.0, Means of Appeal: See Section 150.01 H of this Chapter.”
(f) Section 114.4 Violation Penalties: The following language is hereby added:
“The penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of
this Chapter.”
(g) Section 406.3.4, Separation: This Section is amended to change all references to “½
inch” gypsum board to “5/8-inch” gypsum board.
(h) A new Section 406.3.6, Gas Curbs, is hereby added and shall read as follows:
“406.3.6 Gas Curbs: Minimum 4-inch high gas curbs shall be provided in and around
the entire garage floor area in all attached garages. The pitch from rear to front of any
garage floor must not be less than .05 percent.”
15-150-12 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(i) Table 601, Fire-Resistance Rating Requirements for Building Elements (Hours): The
following provision relative to tenant separations, shall be added to Table 601:
“Tenant Separations: All structures utilized as, constructed for the purpose of, and/or
converted to a multi-tenant dwelling shall be constructed and maintained in such a
manner and with materials that shall provide a minimum of a one-hour fire-resistance
separation (vertically and horizontally) between each individual dwelling unit.”
(j) Section 901.6, Supervisory Service: The following is hereby added:
“All water f low switches, valve supervision, trouble signals, and fire alarm systems
shall transmit alarms to a location approved by the Building Code Official.”
(k) Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1 are
hereby deleted in their entirety and in lieu thereof the following is hereby added to
Section 903:
903.2.1 Instal lat ion of Automatic Fire Sprinklers. All groups shall require the
installation of automatic fire sprinklers.
Exception 1: Detached structures which comply with all the following shall not
require automatic fire sprinklers.
1. Having less than 1,000 square feet in area;
2. Consisting of a maximum of a single story;
3. Not containing a space or room used as a dwelling unit or sleeping room;
4. Not a High Hazard;
5. Not containing or having a basement or basements; and
6. Having a minimum separation from other buildings of at least 20 feet.
Exception 2: Real estate trailers and construction trailers utilized during development of
property when approved by the Building Code Official.
903.2.2 Warehouse and Storage Buildings. Unknown specifications use and occupancy
for new warehouse or factory buildings (Use groups S or F) with a ceiling roof height
of 25 feet or greater to be protected with ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) fire
sprinkler system or a hydraulically calculated system for class IV commodities with
rack storage calculated to the greatest storage height.
903.2.3 Expansion of Buildings Other Than Single Family Detached Dwelling. When a
building, other than a single family detached dwelling, having an interior of less than
3,000 square feet of gross floor area as of February 5, 2007, is expanded at any time to
a size of 3,000 square feet of gross floor area or more, then an automatic fire suppression
system shall be provided for the entire building that meets the appropriate NFPA
Standard indicated in the above sections. Any building addition to an existing building
which would be required by this Fire Code to have a fire sprinkler system regardless
of the square footage of said building addition shall have fire sprinklers installed.
This requirement shall apply regardless of building separation, fire rated assemblies
within the building, or type of construction of the building.
15-150-13 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
903.2.4 Other Requirements for Existing Buildings to Install Sprinklers. Any existing
building over 3,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be required to have installed
and maintain in good working condition an approved automatic fire sprinkler system
meeting the standards of NFPA 13 and all requirements of this Chapter whenever one
of the following occurs: a change of occupancy to a hazard classification (per NFPA
13) that exceeds the class of hazard of the prior occupancy or the entire gross floor area
of the building is included in and the subject of a permit.
903.2.4.1 Whenever a residential structure is converted to a retail or commercial use it
shall be protected by and shall be required to have installed and maintain in good
working condition an approved automatic fire suppression system that meets the
standards of NFPA 13D, with the exception that approved CPVC plastic piping shall be
permitted to be utilized in basement installations irregardless of the type of construction.
That system shall include protection within any attached garage. The sprinkler system
shall be monitored with a fire alarm system that meets all the provisions of this Fire
Code.
(l) Sections 903.4 through 903.4.3 are hereby deleted, and in lieu thereof, the following is
hereby added:
903.4 Control Valves and Monitoring. All new and existing system fire suppression
control valves shall be electronically monitored with the alarm transmitted to the
appropriate Dispatch Center in accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All
new multi-occupant structures without common areas shall have the automatic fire
suppression system designed to provide separate zone control valves and flow switches
for each occupancy as well as main flow alarm initiation devices and control valves.
All new multi-story structures shall have the automatic fire suppression system designed
to provide separate zone control valves and flow switches for each story as well as main
flow alarm initiation devices and control valves. All new control valves, including
required zone valves shall be installed three to five feet in height from the floor.
903.4.1 System Monitoring. All new and existing fire suppression, detection, and alarm
systems shall be monitored with the alarm being transmitted to the appropriate Dispatch
Center in accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All such new connections
shall be made by wireless transmission compatible with the Village's wireless alarm
network, unless, because of exceptional circumstances, prior written approval of a
telephonic connection is granted by the appropriate Fire Chief.
903.4.2 Evacuation Alarms. All fire suppression systems shall be equipped so that,
upon activation, an audible evacuation alarm shall sound that is heard throughout the
structure. In multi-occupancy structures with a common fire suppression system each
unit shall be equipped so that, upon activation, an audible evacuation signal shall sound
that is heard throughout each unit.
903.4.3 Flow Alarm Signals. A combination horn and white strobe light unit in an
approved weatherproof housing shall be installed above each fire department connection
for each automatic sprinkler system. In new multi-occupancy structures without
common areas a single common fire alarm system shall serve the entire structure with
15-150-14 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
an amber strobe that shall be installed at an approved exterior location for each tenant
space. These devices shall be designed to activate only when the water flow device is
activated. All other initiating devices installed for each unit in a multi- occupancy
structure without common areas shall not activate the exterior signals and shall be
compatible with the common system.
(m) Section 903, Automatic Sprinkler Systems, shall be also be amended by the addition of
the following new sections, which shall read as follows:
903.6 Floor plans. When any building has multiple risers on any floor, a floor layout
for the sprinkler system showing all sprinkler zones shall be provided at the main
sprinkler riser.
903.7 Sprinkler system design criteria. Sprinkler hydraulic designs for NFPA 13 and
NFPA 13R systems shall be designed with a minimum of a five (5) pound difference
between the sprinkler system design including hose requirements and the available
water supply. The five (5) pound safety factor shall be applied to the water flow test
after any adjustments for a seasonal low.
903.8 Sprinkler valve/fire pump room. Any fire pump installed shall be enclosed within
a room meeting the following requirements. Every multi-occupant structure that does
not have common areas shall be provided with a sprinkler room that meets the following
minimum standards:
903.8.1 Label. The room shall be provided with a separate street address and label on
the exterior access door stating “SPRINKLER ROOM”
903.8.2 Door swing. The exterior access door shall swing out.
903.8.3 Room size. The interior dimension of the room shall be minimally thirty (30)
square feet with any dimension not being less than four (4) feet for any residential
structure and minimally fifty (50) square feet with any dimension not being less than
five (5) feet in any commercial structure.
903.8.4 Exterior access. An approved sidewalk or paved area shall be provided leading
from a common way to the entrance of the sprinkler room.
903.8.5 Lighting. The interior shall be provided with adequate illumination and
emergency lighting. The exterior area adjacent to the sprinkler room door shall be
provided with adequate illumination.
903.8.6 Electrical service. A separate approved electrical service panel shall be provided
within the room.
903.8.7 Other equipment or storage prohibited. Every sprinkler room shall contain only
approved fire protection equipment or mechanical equipment specified in this Section.
No other mechanical equipment or storage will be allowed.
903.8.8 Protection from climate. Every residential sprinkler room shall be insulated
according to the prescriptive requirements of the International Energy Conservation
Code for residential occupancies and provided with a heater that is designed to maintain
the temperature of the entire room above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. Every commercial
15-150-15 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
sprinkler room shall be insulated according to the Building Code and provided with a
heater that is designed to maintain the temperature of the entire room above 60 degrees
Fahrenheit. A low temperature alarm device shall be connected to the fire alarm system
that initiates a supervisory signal when the temperature reaches forty degrees
Fahrenheit.
903.8.9 Alarm panel. Fire Alarm Control Panel shall be located within this room. It
shall be mounted on the wall with the top of the panel no higher than six (6) feet above
the floor of the room. It shall be clearly accessible with no obstructions nearer than
eighteen inches (18”) from any edge of the panel. The panel shall be mounted in a
manner that protects it from water damage. A manual pull station shall be mounted
next to the alarm panel.
903.8.10 System drains and drain valves. All portions of the sprinkler system shall
drain into the drain located in the sprinkler room or directly outside. Any drain that
terminates outside shall not cause water to collect within five (5) feet of electrical
equipment, discharge within five feet of electrical equipment, or cause other hazardous
conditions to mechanical equipment or public or private areas. All drain valves for
common systems including the dry system drain for the common attic area shall be
located in the sprinkler room.
903.8.11 Floor drain required. A sanitary floor drain shall be installed in the room
sufficiently sized to meet the flow rate of any device, including the backflow device.
Floor drains serving backflow devices shall be sized in accordance with the discharge
rates of the manufacturer’s flow charts of such devices. The following table shall be
used to determine the floor drain size:
Drain Size Flow Rate GPM
4” 88
6” 264
8” 575
10” 1050
12” 1700
8, 10 and 12 inch drains shall discharge directly
to the exterior and not into the sanitary sewer
system
903.8.12 Interior walls. All interior walls within a sprinkler room shall use water
resistant gypsum backing board.
903.8.13 Fire pump test header. Provide an outside test header on all fire pump
installations. An OS&Y control valve shall be provided on all fire pump test headers.
(n) Section 905.3, Required Installations, is hereby amended by the addition of the
following paragraph:
All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The supply riser
shall be hydraulically designed to supply 2½” hose drops. The riser system shall be
equipped with a separate control valve and flow switch. The standpipe shall be a 2½”
gated connection with a 1½” reducer and all locations shall be approved by the Fire
15-150-16 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
Code Official. All standpipe and sprinkler risers shall have separate control valves and
flow switches per floor.
(o) Section 905.3.1, Height, shall be deleted and the following shall be inserted in lieu
thereof, except for the exceptions in Section 905.3.1, which shall remain:
905.3.1 Height. Class I standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings or
structures (1) in all newly constructed buildings so that all areas in excess of 120 feet
from the nearest point of entry to the building shall be covered by a standpipe; (2) in all
areas of existing structures which have been remodeled or added to in such a manner
that those areas are located in excess of 120 feet from the nearest point of entry to the
building; (3) in all newly constructed buildings or structures two (2) or more stories in
height or more than one (1) story below the highest level of fire department vehicle
access so that all areas on those floors are within 120 feet of a standpipe; and (4) in all
buildings or structures more than two (2) stories in height or more than one (1) story
below the highest level of fire department vehicle access which have been remodeled or
added to in such a manner so that those areas are located in excess of 120 feet from the
nearest standpipe. The standpipes shall be provided with a 2½” to 1½” reducer and cap
with no fire hose. There shall be an approved fire department connection at grade and
hose connections located at each floor level.
Exceptions 1 through 5 shall remain
(p) Section 1101.1, Scope, shall be amended by the addition of the following:
When there is a conflict between this Chapter and the Illinois Accessibility Code, the
stricter of the two codes shall apply.
(q) Section 1612, Flood Loads, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(r) Section 1805, Damp proofing and Waterproofing, shall be amended by the addition of
a new Section 1805.0, Footings and Foundations, which shall read as follows:
Section 1805.0, Footings and Foundations. All references to wood footings and
foundations are hereby deleted from Section 1805. The use of wood footings and
foundations is prohibited.
(s) Section 2901.1, Scope: All references to the International Plumbing Code shall be
deleted, and in lieu thereof, the current edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code shall be
inserted therefor, and the following paragraph shall also be added to Section 2901.1:
The Village Building Inspector shall require and enforce compliance with the provisions
of the current “Illinois Plumbing Code Law,” 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/1 et
seq., as presently in force and as the same may be hereafter amended or modified
from time to time, which has been adopted by the Village as the Deer Park Plumbing
Code, and the same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the
standard for the purposes of this Building Code. In the event of any conflict(s) between
the provisions of the Deer Park Building Code and the current edition of the Illinois
Plumbing Code, the strictest standard shall apply.
15-150-17 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(t) Chapter 29, Plumbing Systems, is hereby deleted in its entirety, except for Section
2901.1, Scope, thereof, as amended, which shall remain in full force and effect.
(u) Section 3002.4, Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher, shall be deleted in
its entirety, and the following substituted therefor:
3002.4 Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher. One elevator to be used
in all new buildings shall be sized for stretcher use by the fire department. Minimum
size to be 2500 pounds with a clear inside dimension to accommodate a 24-inch x 84-
inch stretcher with not less than 5 inch radius corners in the horizontal, open position.
Such elevator shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical
services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches high and shall be
placed inside of both sides of the elevator’s hoist way doorframe.
(v) All elevators shall comply with the Illinois OSFM rules for elevators and with those
regulations set forth in Section 150.03(I), Elevator and Escalator Standards, of this
Village Code, as amended from time to time.
(w) Section 3301, General, shall be amended by the addition of a new Section 3301.3, Mud
and Debris Control, which shall read as follows:
3301.3 Mud and debris control. The permittee shall be responsible for keeping the
construction site and surrounding area substantially free from damage and of mud
and/or debris, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Mud and/or debris left on streets by contractors or material suppliers must
be cleaned and/or removed at least at the end of each day, and more often if the
accumulation of mud and/or debris is sufficient to cause a hazard.
(b) All debris must be placed in a dumpster at the end of each day or any confined
area such as a garage, etc.
(c) Crossing landscaped areas, improved parkways, and/or adjacent properties
with a vehicle is prohibited.
A failure to comply with the requirements of this Section shall subject the permittee,
his contractor(s), subcontractor(s), and material supplier(s) to daily fines as set forth in
Section 150.99 of this Chapter, but may also result in the suspension of the related
building permit(s).
(x) Section 3412.2, “Compliance,” Insert “July, 2004.”
(y) Chapter 35, Referenced Standards: References to the following standards are hereby
deleted:
All references to the International Existing Building Code shall be deleted.
All references to the International Plumbing Code shall be deleted.
15-150-18 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
All references to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be deleted.
(z) The following appendices are hereby adopted: C, F, H-105 and H-106, and I. All other
appendices are not adopted.
(4) Amendments and Additions to the Deer Park Residential Building Code: The following
amendments and/or additions to the Deer Park Residential Building Code (i.e., 2012 International
Residential Code) are hereby adopted and made part of this title and shall prevail and
govern over any related provisions of said codes:
(a) Section R101.1 Insert, “Village of Deer Park.”
(b) A new section, Section R105.10, Unique Construction, is hereby added, which shall
read as follows:
R105.10 Unique Construction. When a project has unique features, unusual construction
sequences or out of the ordinary construction techniques, the Building Department shall
have the authority to require additional documentation to determine compliance with
this Village Code. The Building Inspector may also add fees to the building permit for
the additional inspections that are expected to be necessary beyond those normally
requested by the building inspector or to cover the cost of specialized inspections or
inspections conducted by persons, firms, or corporations otherwise engaged by the
Village or testing agencies.
(c) Section R108.1, Payment of Fees: The following shall be added:
“Schedule of Building Permit Fees and Charges” shall be as set forth in Section 150.04
of this Chapter.
(d) Section R112, “Board of Appeals”
Subsections R112.1 through 112.4, inclusive, are hereby deleted, and the following is
hereby inserted in lieu thereof:
“R112.1, Means of Appeal: See Section 150.01 H of this Chapter.”
(e) Section R113.4, “Violation Penalties:” The following language is hereby added:
“The penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of
this Chapter.”
(f) The following information shall be inserted in Table 301.2(1):
Ground Snow Load ---------------------- 25 pounds per square foot
Wind Speed ------------------------------ 3 second 90 normal 75 miles per hour
Seismic Condition ----------------------- B
Subject to Damage from Weathering -- SEVERE
Line Depth ------------------------------- 42 inches
15-150-19 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
Termite ----------------------------------- MODERATE to HEAVY (termite shields
required)
Decay ------------------------------------ SLIGHT to MODERATE
Winter Design Temperature ----------- -4 degrees Fahrenheit
Ice Shield Underlayment -------------- Yes
Flood Hazard --------------------------- See Chapter 152, Watershed Development
Ordinance
Air Freezing Index --------------------- 2000
Mean Annual Temp ------------------- 50 degrees Fahrenheit
(g) Section R309.1, “Floor Surface:” The existing language of Section R309.1 is hereby
deleted, and the following is hereby added in lieu thereof:
“R309.1, Floor Surface:
All garage floors shall be concrete.
Curb: A four (4) inch high concrete curb shall be provided at the wall between the
garage and residence.”
(h) A new Section R309.6, “Free-Standing or Detached Garages,” is hereby added, which
new Section shall read as follows:
“R309.6, Free Standing or Detached Garages: Garages of slab and grade beam
construction without footings and permanent foundation walls may be permitted if said
garage is separated from the main house or building by no less than ten (10) feet of
open space. Said garage shall not be permitted any connection to the main house or
building unless a complete footing and foundation system is provided to a depth of no
less than forty-two (42) inches below grade.”
(i) Section R313.1, “Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems,” is hereby deleted in
its entirety and the following is hereby inserted in lieu thereof:
“R313.1, “Townhouse and Two-Family Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems:” An
automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses and twofamily
dwellings.
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when
additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses and two-family dwellings that
do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.”
(j) Section R313.1.1, “Design and Installation,” is hereby deleted in its entirety and the
following is hereby inserted in lieu thereof:
“R313.1.1, Design and Installation: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for
townhouses and two-family dwellings shall be designed and installed in accordance
with Section P2904.”
(k) Section R313.2, “One and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems,” is hereby
modified by the following addition:
15-150-20 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
“Notwithstanding anything contained in Section R313.2 to the contrary, an automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required in any one-family detached
dwellings.
(l) Section R313.2.1, “Design and Installation,” is hereby deleted in its entirety and the
following is hereby inserted in lieu thereof:
“R313.2.1, Design and Installation: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for onefamily
dwellings shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section P2904 or
NFPA 13D.”
(m) Section 401.3, “Drainage,” is hereby amended by the addition of a new Section
R401.3.1, “Gutters and Downspouts,” which new section shall read as follows:
“R401.3.1, Gutters and Downspouts. All dwelling shall have gutters and downspouts.
All gutters and downspouts shall be designed and installed so as to discharge the water
a minimum of not less than fifteen (15) feet from the property line.”
(n) In Section R403, “Footings,” all references to wood footings and foundations are
deleted. The use of wood footings and wood foundations shall be and is hereby
prohibited.
(o) Section R406.1, “Concrete and Masonry Foundation Dampproofing:” The following
shall be and is hereby added:
“See Section 611 of the Fire Code for additional requirements.”
(p) A new Subsection R408.8, “Concrete Slush Coats in Crawl Spaces,” is hereby added
which shall read as follows:
R408.8, Concrete Slush Coats in Crawl Spaces: All crawl spaces shall have a minimum
of two (2) inch slush coat installed in all residential crawl spaces. A base course shall
be installed in accordance with Subsection 506.2.2.
(q) The requirements for waterproofing contained in Section R406.3.2, “Below-Grade
Moisture Barrier,” of the IRC 2012 shall apply to any structure in which the lowest
level of habitable or storage space is one foot (1’) or less above the high water elevation
of any body of water within 200 feet (200’) of the structure, if ground water is found
on the lot which is one foot (1’) or less from the lowest level of habitable or storage
space, or if in the opinion of the Building Code Official, water, severe soil or other
conditions indicate that waterproofing techniques should be employed.
(r) A new Section R501.4, “Open Web Trusses,” is hereby added, which shall read as
follows:
R501.4, Open Web Trusses: The use of open web wood floor trusses is not allowed
unless drywalled on the bottom side with a minimum of one layer of 5/8-inch drywall
or any one-hour fire rated assembly.
15-150-21 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(s) A new Section M1601.1.3, “Forced Air Duct Systems,” shall be added and shall read as
follows:
“M1601.1.3, Forced Air Duct Systems: In residential buildings, all supply and return
forced air systems shall be ducted.”
(t) Section G2414.1, “General,” shall be amended by the addition of the following
language:
“All gas piping shall be schedule 40 steel pipe.”
(u) Chapter 25, “Plumbing Administration,” Chapter 26, “General Plumbing
Requirements,” Chapter 27, “Plumbing Fixtures,” Chapter 28, “Water Heaters,” Chapter
29, “Water Supply and Distribution Systems,” Chapter 30, “Sanitary Drainage,” Chapter
31, “Vents,” and Chapter 32, “Traps,” shall be and are hereby deleted, and in lieu
thereof, reference shall be made to the current Illinois Plumbing Code Law, 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/1, et seq., as presently in force or as the same may be
hereafter amended or modified.
(v) Chapter 33, “Storm Drainage,” Chapter 34, “General Requirements,” Chapter 35,
“Electrical Definitions,” Chapter 36, “Services,” Chapter 37, “Branch Circuit and Feeder
Requirements,” Chapter 38, “Wiring Methods,” Chapter 39, “Power and Lighting
Distribution,” Chapter 40, “Devices and Luminaires,” and Chapter 41, “Appliance
Installation,” shall be and are hereby deleted, in in lieu thereof, the 2011 Edition of
the National Electrical Code NFPA 70 with the amendments listed in Section 150.03(B)
shall be applicable.
(w) Chapter 44, Referenced Standards: Chapter 44 shall be and is hereby amended as
follows:
All references to the International Plumbing Code in the Referenced Standards are
hereby deleted.
All references to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code in the Referenced
Standards are hereby deleted.
(x) The following Appendices A, B, C, F, G, J, and K are hereby adopted.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013)
(B) Electrical Code:
The National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, which shall be referred to in this Village Code as the “Deer
Park Electrical Code,” a copy of which was on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection
and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to adoption thereof, be and is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this title as the rules and regulations governing the installation,
alteration, and use of electrical equipment and wiring in the Village; and it shall be unlawful for any
person to install or alter, or cause to be installed or altered, any electrical equipment or wiring in violation
of or without complying with those rules and regulations, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
15-150-22 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
penalties, conditions and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth below:
(1) All electrical wiring is to be installed using thin wall metal conduit pipe, IMC or heavy wall
pipe.
(2) The minimum electric service for a new residence shall be 200 amperes and shall be buried
underground.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013)
(C) Mechanical Code:
The International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, which shall be referred to in this Village Code as the
“Deer Park Mechanical Code,” a copy of which was on file in the office of the Village Clerk for
inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to adoption thereof, be and is
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this title, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth below:
(1) The provisions of the Deer Park Residential Code Part 5, Chapter 12 shall also apply.
(2) In residential buildings, all supply and return forced air systems shall be ducted.
(3) All gas piping shall be schedule 40 steel pipe.
(4) Section 101.1, “Title:” Insert “Village of Deer Park.”
(5) Section 106.5.2, “Fee Schedule,” shall be deleted in its entirety and the following shall be
inserted in lieu thereof:
“106.5.2, Fee Schedule: See Section 150.04 of this Village Code.
(6) Section 106.5.3, “Fee Refunds,” shall be deleted in its entirety and the following shall be
inserted in lieu thereof:
“106.5.3, Fee Refunds: See Section 150.04 of this Village Code.
(7) Section 108.4, “Violation Penalties,” shall be deleted in its entirety and the following shall be
inserted in lieu thereof:
Section 108.4, Violation Penalties: Penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set
forth in Section 150.99 of this Chapter.
(8) Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: The following language shall be added:
Penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of this Chapter.
15-150-23 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(9) Section 109, “Means of Appeal,” is hereby amended by the deletion of Subsections 109.1
through 109.7, inclusive, in their entirety, and in lieu thereof, the following shall be added:
See Section 150.01 H.
(10) Section 603.1, “General,” is hereby amended by the addition of the following:
“In residential buildings, all supply and return forced air systems shall be ducted.”
(11) Chapter 15, “Referenced Standards,” is hereby amended by the deletion of all references to
the International Plumbing Code.
(12) Appendix A, Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs, is hereby adopted.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013)
(D) Fuel Gas Code:
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, which shall be referred to in this Village Code as the
“Deer Park Fuel Gas Code,” a copy of which was on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for inspection
and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to adoption thereof, be and is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this title, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth below:
(1) Section 101.1, “Title:” Insert “Village of Deer Park.”
(2) Section 106.6.2, “Fee Schedule:” Section 106.6.2 shall be and is hereby deleted in its
entirety and the following shall be inserted in lieu thereof.
“106.6.2, Fee Schedule: See Section 150.04 of this Village Code.
(3) Section 106.6.3 “Fee Refunds:” Section 106.6.3 shall be and is hereby deleted in its entirety and
the following shall be inserted in lieu thereof.
“106.6.3, Fee Refunds: See Section 150.04 of this Village Code.
(4) Section 108.4, “Violation Penalties:” The following language shall be added:
Penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of this Chapter.
(5) Section 108.5, “Stop Work Orders:” The following language shall be added:
Penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of this Chapter.
(6) Section 109, “Means of Appeal,” is hereby amended by the deletion of Subsections 109.1
through 109.7, inclusive, in their entirety, and in lieu thereof, the following shall be added:
See Section 150.01 H.
15-150-24 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(7) Chapter 8, “Referenced Standards,” is hereby amended by the deletion of all references to the
International Plumbing Code.
(8) Appendices A, B and C are hereby adopted.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013)
(E) Plumbing Code:
The Illinois State Plumbing Code, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be referred to in this
Village Code as the “Village of Deer Park Plumbing Code,” a copy of which was on file in the Office
of the Village Clerk for inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to
adoption thereof, be and is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this title, and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes as set forth below:
(1) Above ground water piping shall be Type L rigid copper pipe.
(2) Below ground water piping shall be Type K copper tubing. Underground pipe joints are to be
avoided. Below ground interior waste piping is to be minimum four-inch (4”) diameter.
(3) Below ground interior waste piping is to be minimum four-inch (4”) diameter.
(4) Below ground vent piping is to be minimum two-inch (2”) diameter.
(5) Exposed piping at fixture connection is to be chrome plated metal pipe.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013)
(F) Accessibility Code:
The 1997 Illinois Accessibility Code shall be referred to in this Village Code as the “Village of
Deer Park Accessibility Code,” a copy of which was on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for
inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to adoption thereof, be and is
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this title, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this Code.
(G) Fire Code:
The 2012 International Fire Code, shall be referred to in this Village Code as the “Village of Deer Park
Fire Code,” a copy of which was on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for inspection and/or
copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to adoption thereof, be and is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this title, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this Code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth below:
(1) Section 101.1, “Title:” Insert the “Village of Deer Park.”
15-150-25 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(2) A new Section 105.8, “Unique Construction,” is hereby added, which new Section shall read
as follows:
Section 105.8 Unique Construction. When a project has unique features, unusual construction
sequences or out of the ordinary construction techniques, the Building Department shall have
the authority to require additional documentation to determine code compliance. The Building
Department may also add additional fees to the building permit based on the additional
inspections required or to cover the cost of specialized inspections or outside inspection or
testing agencies.
(3) Subsections 108.1 through 108.3, inclusive, are hereby deleted, and the following is hereby
inserted in lieu thereof:
“Section 108.1, Means of Appeal: See Section 150.01 H of this Chapter.”
(4) Section 109.4, “Violation Penalties:” The following language shall be added:
Penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of this Chapter.
(5) Section 111.4, “Failure to Comply:” The following language shall be added:
Penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of this Chapter.
(6) Section 202, “Definitions:” The definition of “Fire Code Official” shall be deleted, and in
lieu thereof the following new definition shall be inserted:
Fire Code Official. The Building Inspector charged with the administration and enforcement
of this Chapter, or his duly authorized representative.
(7) Section 305, “Ignition Sources,” shall be amended by the addition of the following new sections:
305.1.1 Fuel burning appliances located in garages. Any fuel-burning appliance located in a
garage area of any occupancy mounted less than six feet above the floor shall be enclosed
with a one-hour fire rated enclosure with makeup air taken from the exterior, not the garage
area.
Exception: Any fuel-burning appliance that is American Gas Association certified, with a safe,
sealed combustion chamber (no open flame) designed with an intermittent ignition device and
make-up air taken from the exterior not the garage.
305.5 Portable Heaters. Portable heaters shall be designed and located so that they cannot be
easily overturned, and heaters shall be designed to shut off if overturned. The Fire Code Official
may prohibit the use of portable heaters in occupancies or situations in which such use or
operation would present an undue danger to the life or property of others.
(8) Section 404, “Fire Safety and Evacuation Plans,” shall be amended by the addition of the
following new section:
15-150-26 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
404.6 Pre-Plan Drawings. To assist the fire department develop pre-plans for fire emergencies,
all new development, except single-family detached dwelling, is required to present as-built
drawings prior to occupancy certification. Drawings shall indicate a full site plan and a complete
interior floor plan. Where practical the drawings shall be in an electronic computer aided drawing
format, but in all cases in an approved format.
(9) Subsection 503.2.1, “Dimensions,” shall be deleted in its entirety and the following shall be
inserted in lieu thereof:
503.2.1, Dimensions: Fire Apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not
less than 20 feet (6096 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with Section
503.6 and 503.7.12, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 15 feet.
(10) Section 503, “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” shall be amended by the addition of the following
new subsections:
503.7 Fire Lanes. Approved fire lanes shall be provided for every new development for fire
apparatus access to all facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings except single-family
detached dwellings hereafter constructed or occupied within the jurisdiction.
503.7.1 Existing Fire Lanes. Fire lanes for all existing facilities, buildings, or portions of
buildings except single-family detached dwellings shall be maintained as originally approved
and shall be considered compliant with this code. Exception: At any time that the surface area
of an existing fire lane or parking area is removed or replaced the fire lanes within the parking
area only shall be designed to meet this code. Any required change made to the design of an
existing parking area to meet this code shall not require any increase or alteration of the
boundaries or limits of the existing area as defined by curbs, buildings, portions of buildings,
and edge of pavement, but shall be applicable only to marking and signage as may be required
by this code.
503.7.2 Access to Fire Protection Features. Fire lanes shall provide direct access to all sprinkler
rooms and fire department connections by fire apparatus. A clear width of four feet (4') shall be
provided that allows no parking directly in front of the fire department connection.
503.7.3 Number of Fire Lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided on at least one side of any facility or
building and on as many sides of the facility or building as necessary to reach every portion of
the first floor of the building that extends further than one hundred and fifty feet (150') from
the exterior wall adjacent to any fire lane. All multi-occupancy structures, other than
residential structures less than three stories in height, shall provide fire lanes along the two
longest sides of the structure.
503.7.4 Alternative Approval. The appropriate Fire Chief may allow for the required number or
arrangement of fire lanes to be varied where an approved alternate means of access is provided
or where existing conditions do not allow compliance.
503.7.5 Widths. Fire lanes shall be a minimum solid width, measured edge of pavement to edge
of pavement, where used as follows:
15-150-27 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
503.7.5.1 Emergency Vehicles Only. When utilized as a fire apparatus access road dedicated for
the use of emergency vehicles only with no parking allowed the minimum width shall be twenty
feet (20').
503.7.5.2 Common Driveway - No Parking. When utilized as a fire apparatus access road and a
common driveway when no parking is allowed the minimum width shall be twenty-four feet
(24').
503.7.5.3 Parking Aisles. When serving as a fire apparatus access road and as an aisle
adjacent to or between parking stalls that allow vehicles to move in two directions the minimum
width shall be twenty-four feet (24'), from edge of stripe to edge of stripe or edge of stripe to
edge of pavement. When serving as a fire apparatus access road and as an aisle adjacent to or
between parking stalls that allow vehicles to move in one direction the minimum width shall be
eighteen feet (18'), from edge of stripe to edge of stripe or edge of stripe to edge of pavement.
503.7.5.4 Multi-Occupancy Structures. All multi-occupancy structures, other than residential
structures less than three stories in height, shall provide fire lanes along the two longest sides of
the structure that are a minimum width of thirty feet (30').
503.7.5.5 Ingress and Egress. When utilized as those portions of the driveway that provide
ingress and egress for vehicles to the facility or building or those areas used for parking of
vehicles at the facility or building the minimum width shall be thirty feet (30').
503.7.5.6 Existing Usage. Where existing parking lot usage restricts full lane width, the
appropriate Fire Chief may permit the existing condition to remain.
503.7.6 Vertical Clearance. All fire lanes shall have a vertical clearance of not less than
fifteen feet (15').
503.7.7 Construction Standard. Fire lanes shall be constructed to a structural index of IBR 3.0
or greater and shall be provided with an all-weather surface (example concrete or asphalt).
All fire lanes shall be pitched in such a manner as to allow the runoff of water and eliminate the
potential of standing water. The appropriate Fire Chief may allow for the construction
standard of fire lanes to be varied where an approved alternate means is provided or where
conditions do not allow compliance. All fire lanes shall be a level-driving surface. No fire
lane shall be allowed to have speed bumps, gates, ramps or other obstructions to a smooth
continuous path of travel without permission from the appropriate Fire Chief.
503.7.8 Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain this surface
in a usable condition at all times, including the removal of snow.
503.7.9 Marking and Signage. All fire lanes shall be clearly marked to indicate their location.
503.7.9.1 Curbs. All associated curbs, on top and side of curbs, or pavement areas shall be
painted bright yellow or in an approved manner that defines the limits of the fire lane.
503.7.9.2 Signs. Those portions of the fire lane that restrict parking shall be provided with
reflective twelve (12) inch by eighteen (18) inch signs stating “No Parking - Fire Lane” that are
15-150-28 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
posted every fifty feet (50'). Those portions of the fire lane that restrict access to emergency
vehicles shall be provided with reflective signs stating "Emergency Vehicles Only" that
are posted on both sides of the lane at each end. All required signs shall be mounted in
an approved manner on posts or on a surface of the building with the bottom height of the sign
portion no less than seven (7') feet from the ground. All required signs shall be red lettering on
a white background and meet all specifications listed in the “Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices” (2003 edition). All signs that are located adjacent to pedestrian walks and are mounted
on posts are required to be an approved safety design.
503.7.9.3 Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the
painted curbs and signs in proper condition at all times.
503.7.10 Obstructions. All portions, from ingress to egress of any required fire lane, shall
allow for continuous movement of fire apparatus that are not obstructed by curb, portion of
the building, or other barrier or obstruction including any mechanical attachments to the
structure.
503.7.11 Turning Radius. Any turns in the fire lane shall provide the required width and turning
radii no less than twelve (12) feet. No portion of a required fire lane may dead-end in excess of
one hundred and fifty feet (150'). The appropriate Fire Chief may allow for the turning radius
or the length of a dead-end to be varied where an approved alternate is provided or where
existing conditions do not allow compliance.
503.7.12 Gates and Barricades. Any secured gates or barricades allowed, whether required or
not, shall allow for fire apparatus passage through a gate with a clear opening of not less than
fourteen feet (14'). All secured gates shall allow access to fire apparatus by means of an approved
Knox product or traffic preemption device.
(11) Section 506.1, “Where Required,” is hereby deleted in its entirety, and in lieu thereof, the
following is hereby inserted:
506.1 Where required. Every structure equipped with any fire detection, suppression, or
alarm system shall have a supervised entry system (Knox Box 4400 Series), approved by the
Fire Code Official, at a height of five feet (5') above grade level in a location approved by the
Fire Code Official. Larger sized Knox products may be required by the Fire Code Official
where the occupancy exceeds 40,000 square feet or has other hazards or conditions that warrant
the product in the opinion of the appropriate Fire Chief. Additional Knox boxes may be required
for any structure that exceeds 300 feet of travel distance around the exterior of the structure. Key
boxes shall contain two sets of keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or the
exterior of the structure, and to locked mechanical, electrical, and elevator control rooms, and
other areas as directed by the Fire Code Official. All exterior doors that access areas common to
the overall structure for each structure are required to have hardware that will allow exterior
access into the building with use of a single master key whenever possible. The exterior doors
that access an individual retail or commercial occupant are required to have hardware that will
allow exterior access into the occupancy with use of a single master key whenever possible that
is different than the common key.
(12) Section 506.2, “Key Box Maintenance,” is hereby deleted in its entirety, and in lieu thereof,
the following is hereby inserted:
15-150-29 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
506.2 Key lock box maintenance. The owner(s), occupant(s), and/or operator(s) of any building
shall immediately notify the Fire Code Official and provide the new key when a lock is changed
or re-keyed. The key to such lock shall be secured in the key lock box. The users shall be
responsible for the proper installation and maintenance of such key lock boxes, at their
expense, and shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless any elected officials, officers,
employees, and agents of the Village of Deer Park or any fire protection district from any
liability with respect to such key lock boxes.
(13) Section 507.1, “Required water supply,” is hereby amended by the addition of the following
new subsections:
507.1.1 General. All water distribution facilities including piping, fittings, hydrants, valves,
devices, well pumps, and other needful appurtenances shall be subject to approval of the Fire
Code Official and shall be installed according to the standards herein adopted. A water supply
system shall be capable of supplying the hydrants prior to the construction of structures. It shall
be unlawful to erect, alter, use or occupy any structure that has been deemed to have inadequate
water supply.
507.1.2 Water supply demand changes. Area water supplies shall be studied whenever additional
demands will be placed on the water supply by new construction, change in use, or changes in
hazard or contents. Standard fire flow calculation methods will be used to make determinations.
Upon determination by the Fire Code Official that inadequate water supplies exist, the Fire Code
Official shall reject any applicable plans and provide the property owner, the water utility, and
the Building Inspector with a memorandum listing said deficiencies.
507.1.3 Rural water supply requirements (Dry Hydrants). In any subdivision/development,
where an adequate water distribution system is not provided, the Fire Code Official shall require
the subdivider, developer, builder and/or the owner to modify storm water control within the
development. It shall conform to the standard of NFPA 1142. The pond must be a minimum
depth of five (5) feet and provide a minimum supply of available water to be determined by the
Fire Code Official. (See Appendix B for additional rural water supply requirements).
(14) Section 507.3, “Fire flow,” is hereby amended by the addition of the following new subsections:
507.3.1 Minimum flow requirements. Each fire hydrant shall be provided with an adequate water
supply so as to develop a minimum individual supply of not less than one thousand (1,000)
gallons per minute (gpm) flow with not less than 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure for
a municipal public water supply system.
507.3.2 Appendix B, “Fire Flow for Requirements Buildings” is hereby adopted.
(15) Section 507.5, “Fire hydrant systems,” is hereby amended as follows:
(a) Section 507.5.1, “Where Required,” and its exceptions are hereby deleted in their
entirety, and in lieu thereof, the following new Section 507.5.1 is hereby inserted:
507.5.1 Where required. The maximum hydrant spacing shall not exceed three hundred
(300) feet between hydrants and from the furthest point of any building or structure as
15-150-30 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
measured by an approved access route around the exterior of the facility or building
unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official. Where the configuration of lots,
distances between buildings and lot lines or public utility easements, accessibility to
buildings for fire suppression requirements dictate, the Fire Code Official shall increase
or decrease hydrant spacing and appropriate supply mains as deemed necessary.
(b) The following new subsections are hereby added:
507.5.1.2, IFC Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, is hereby adopted.
507.5.1.3, General. Additional fire hydrants shall be located within one hundred (100)
feet of any Fire Department Connection (FDC). Hydrants shall not be installed on
a water main less than eight (8) inches in diameter. Dead end water mains shall not to
exceed one hundred (100) feet. It is recommended that a looped water main system be
required for each structure or group of structures.
(c) The following new subsections are hereby added:
507.5.7 Identification. All fire hydrants public or private shall be marked with a number,
hydrant flag and painted a color approved by the Fire Code Official. Dry fire hydrants
shall be provided with signs as provided in Appendix B of this Code.
507.5.8 Apartment and cluster type housing. In areas where apartment buildings,
town/row houses, condominium buildings, or other types of cluster-type housing are
located, the area along the roadway within seven and one-half feet on either side of the
yellow or "NO PARKING" signs shall be installed (or both).
507.5.9 Unauthorized use. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any device such
as a fire hydrant, drafting hydrant, dry hydrant, or other water supply appurtenances
designed for fire suppression operations without the express permission of the Fire
Code Official.
507.5.10.1 Dry hydrants. In any subdivision or development, where a water distribution
system is not provided or is not available, the Fire Code Official may require the
owner to modify storm water control devices, so as to provide a pond with a minimum
depth of five (5) feet and to install a dry hydrant that conforms to the standard
of NFPA 1142 and with a suction pipe from the middle of the pond. The developer shall
provide the fire protection district with an engineered drawing indicating the minimum
required volume of water and complete “Fifty-year Drought Study” certification of
the required water supply. The dry hydrant shall be installed on the right of way of a
street proposed to be installed within the subdivision/development and shall meet the
standards established by the fire protection district. Where a pond is not practical, a
tank system with adequate water storage capacity will be required.
It shall be unlawful to erect any structure in any subdivision or development prior
to completion of any required water supply equipment as required by this Ordinance.
507.10.2 Additional hydrants. Where the configuration of lots, distance between
buildings and lot lines or public utility easements, accessibility to building or fire
15-150-31 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
suppression requirements dictate, the Fire Code Official shall require additional
hydrants as deemed necessary.
507.10.3 Required flow. The total gallons per minute, which dry hydrants shall be
required to produce, shall be determined by the structure being served by the hydrant.
In no case shall the hydrant produce less than 1,000 gallons per minute.
507.10.4 Location approval. The precise location of and specifications for dry
hydrant(s) shall be subject to the review and approval by the Fire Code Official prior
to the installation of the system.
507.10.5 Additional review. The dry hydrant plan submitted for review may be subject
to review by an outside engineer or code consultant. The submitted party will incur all
associated costs.
507.10.6 Unlawful use. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any device such as
drafting pits, dry hydrants or other water supply appurtenances designed for firefighting
operations without the express permission of the Village and the Fire Code Official.
507.10.7 Maintenance. All dry hydrants shall be maintained free from obstructions.
The access to any area surrounding the dry hydrant shall be properly cleared of
obstacles, which may hide or impede the use of the dry hydrant. Furthermore, the
hydrant shall be maintained in working order at all times, capable of delivering the
minimum required flow. Responsibility of maintaining, repairing, replacing and/or
dredging all hydrants within a subdivision shall be the responsibility of the appropriate
homeowner’s association. In the absence of a homeowners association, each dry hydrant
will be addressed on an individual basis.
507.10.8 Signs. The Fire Code Official shall require the property owner or his agent
to install “No Parking – Fire Hydrant,” or other signs as needed.
(16) A new Section 611, “Parking Structures,” shall be and is hereby added, which new Section
shall read as follows:
611 Parking Structures:
611.1 General. All parking structures, whether above or below grade, or whether
attached or separated from any other structure, shall meet the following standards:
611.1.1 Suppression system. All Open-parking and below-grade parking structures
shall be provided with a dry automatic fire suppression system meeting the standards of
NFPA 13.
611.1.2 Area Limitation and construction type. Any underground parking structure
shall be limited in area to 40,000 square feet per level without 4-hour firewall
separation. Any underground parking structure shall require Type I construction.
611.1.3 Standpipes. A dry Class I standpipe system shall be provided in any parking
structure. All piping shall be corrosion resistant. Each standpipe connection shall be
15-150-32 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
placed in an approved standardized location with each connection being no greater than
250 feet from another connection.
611.1.4 Ventilation fans. An approved PPV fan shall be provided in a clearly labeled
cabinet or closet.
611.1.5 Corrosion resistant piping. All piping (sprinkler, standpipe, drainage, electrical
conduit) shall be corrosion-resistant.
611.1.6 Mechanical above-grade. No sprinkler, alarm, mechanical, electrical rooms or
equipment shall be located below-grade.
611.1.7 Elevators. All elevator cars should be sized to allow access by a cot 24 inches
by 84 inches. All other requirements of Deer Park Municipal code for Elevators (3-2-
5) shall be followed. Additional ingress/egress doors or stairs or elevators may be
required beyond what the minimum standards of the code require.
611.1.8 Emergency call system. An approved Emergency Assistance Call system shall
be required.
611.1.9 Signs. Reflective “street signs” shall be provided near each ingress/egress point
in the structure to indicate which street or streets the ingress/egress point is adjacent.
611.1.10 Haz-Mat equipment. Spill kit cabinets and approved supplies shall be
provided to mitigate fuel leaks.
611.1.11 Storage closets. All below-grade parking structures shall provide a closet on
each level for each fire area of 40,000 square feet at one approved ingress/egress
point with an interior dimension of 50 square feet with any dimension not less than
five feet that shall be used to store equipment and supplies essential to fire protection
or emergency management.
(17) Section 901.6, “Inspection, Testing and Maintenance,” is hereby amended by the addition of
the following language:
All water flow switches, valve supervision, trouble signals, fire alarm systems shall transmit an
alarm to a location approved by the Building Code Official.
(18) Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10, inclusive, are hereby deleted in their entirety and in lieu
thereof, the following new Sections shall be inserted therefor:
903.2.1 All groups shall require the installation of automatic fire sprinklers.
Exception 1: Detached structures which comply with all the following, do not require automatic
fire sprinklers.
1. Having less than 1,000 square feet in area
2. Consisting of a maximum of a single story
3. Not containing a space or room used as a dwelling unit or sleeping room
15-150-33 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
4. Not a High Hazard
5. Not containing or used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage
6. Not containing or having a basement or basements
7. Having a minimum separation from other buildings of at least 20 feet
Exception 2: Real estate sales trailers and construction trailers utilized during development of
property when approved by the Building Code Official.
903.2.2 Warehouse and factory buildings (Use groups S or F) with a ceiling roof height of 25
feet or greater to be protected with ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) fire sprinkler
system or a hydraulically calculated system for class IV commodities with rack storage
calculated to the greatest storage height.
903.2.3 Expansion of Buildings Other Than Single Family Detached Dwelling. When a building,
other than a single family detached dwelling, having an interior of less than 3,000 square
feet of gross floor area as of February 5, 2007, is expanded at any time to a size of 3,000 square
feet of gross floor area or more, then an automatic fire suppression system shall be provided
for the entire building that meets the appropriate NFPA Standard indicated in the above
sections. This requirement shall apply regardless of building separation, fire rated assemblies
within the building, or type of construction of the building.
903.2.4 Other Requirements for Existing Buildings to Install Sprinklers. Any existing building
over 3,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be required to install an approved automatic fire
sprinkler system meeting the standards of NFPA 13 and all requirements of this Chapter
whenever one of the following occurs: a change of occupancy to a hazard the entire gross floor
area of the building is included in a permit.
903.2.4.1 Whenever a residential structure is converted to a retail or commercial use it shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire suppression system that meets the standards of NFPA
13D that is hereby modified to allow approved CPVC plastic piping in basement installations
irregardless of type of construction. That system shall include protection within any attached
garage. The sprinkler system shall be monitored with a fire alarm system that meets all the
provisions of this Fire Code.
(19) Sections 903.4 through 903.4.3, inclusive, are hereby deleted in their entirety, and in lieu
thereof, the following new Sections are hereby added:
903.4 Control Valves and Monitoring. All new and existing system fire suppression control
valves shall be electronically monitored with the alarm transmitted to the appropriate Dispatch
Center in accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All new multi-occupant structures
without common areas shall have the automatic fire suppression system designed to provide
separate zone control valves and flow switches for each occupancy as well as main flow alarm
initiation devices and control valves. All new multi-story structures shall have the automatic fire
suppression system designed to provide separate zone control valves and flow switches for
each story as well as main flow alarm initiation devices and control valves. All new control
valves, including required zone valves shall be installed three to five feet in height from the floor.
903.4.1 System Monitoring. All new and existing fire suppression, detection, and alarm systems
shall be monitored with the alarm being transmitted to the appropriate Dispatch Center in
15-150-34 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
accordance with NFPA 72C for remote stations. All such new connections shall be made by
wireless transmission compatible with the Village's wireless alarm network, unless, because of
exceptional circumstances, prior written approval of a telephonic connection is granted by the
appropriate Fire Chief.
903.4.2 Evacuation Alarms. All fire suppression systems shall be equipped so that, upon
activation, an evacuation alarm shall sound that is heard throughout the structure. In multioccupancy
structures with a common suppression system each unit shall be equipped so that,
upon activation, an evacuation signal shall sound that is heard throughout each unit.
903.4.3 Flow Alarm Signals. A combination horn and white strobe light unit in an approved
weatherproof housing shall be installed above each fire department connection for each
automatic sprinkler system. In new multi-occupancy structures without common areas a single
common fire alarm system shall serve the entire structure with an amber strobe that shall be
installed at an approved exterior location for each tenant space. These devices shall be designed
to activate only when the water flow device is activated. All other initiating devices installed for
each unit in a multi-occupancy structure without common areas shall not activate the exterior
signals and shall be compatible with the common system.
(20) A new Section 903.7, “Floor Plans,” is hereby added, which new Section shall read as
follows:
Section 903.7 Floor plans. When any building has multiple risers on any floor, a floor layout for
the sprinkler system showing all sprinkler zones shall be provided at the main sprinkler riser.
(21) A new Section 903.8, “Sprinkler System Design Criteria,” is hereby added, which new
Section shall read as follows:
903.8, Sprinkler system design criteria. Sprinkler hydraulic designs for NFPA 13 factor shall be
applied to the water flow and NFPA 13R systems shall be designed with a minimum of a five
(5) pound difference between the sprinkler system design including hose requirements and
the available water supply. The five (5) pound safety test after any adjustments for a seasonal
low.
(22) A new Section 903.9, “Fire Pump Room,” is hereby added, which new Section shall read as
follows:
903.9.1, Sprinkler valve/fire pump room. Any fire pump installed shall be enclosed within a
room meeting the following requirements. Every multi-occupant structure that does not have
common areas shall be provided with a sprinkler room that meets the following minimum
standards:
903.9.2, Label. The room shall be provided with a separate street address and label on the
exterior access door stating “SPRINKLER ROOM”
903.9.3, Door swing. The exterior access door shall swing out.
15-150-35 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
903.9.4, Room size. The interior dimension of the room shall be minimally 30 square feet with
any dimension not being less than four feet for any residential structure and minimally 50 square
feet with any dimension not being less than five feet in any commercial structure.
903.9.5, Exterior access. An approved sidewalk or paved area shall be provided leading
from a common way to the entrance of the sprinkler room.
903.9.6, Lighting. The interior shall be provided with adequate illumination and emergency
lighting. The exterior area adjacent to the sprinkler room door shall be provided with adequate
illumination.
903.9.7, Electrical service. A separate approved electrical service panel shall be provided within
the room.
903.9.8, Other equipment or storage prohibited. Every sprinkler room shall contain only
approved fire protection equipment or mechanical equipment specified in this Section. No other
mechanical equipment or storage will be allowed.
903.9.9, Protection from climate. Every residential sprinkler room shall be insulated according
to the prescriptive requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code for residential
occupancies and provided with a heater that is designed to maintain the temperature of the entire
room above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. Every commercial sprinkler room shall be insulated
according to the Building Code and provided with a heater that is designed to maintain the
temperature of the entire room above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. A low temperature alarm device
shall be connected to the fire alarm system that initiates a supervisory signal when the
temperature reaches forty degrees Fahrenheit.
903.9.10, Alarm panel. Fire Alarm Control Panel shall be located within this room. It shall be
mounted on the wall with the top of the panel no higher than six (6) feet above the floor of the
room. It shall be clearly accessible with no obstructions nearer than eighteen inches from any
edge of the panel. The panel shall be mounted in a manner that protects it from water damage.
A manual pull station shall be mounted next to the alarm panel.
903.9.11, System drains and drain valves. All portions of the sprinkler system shall drain
into the drain located in the sprinkler room or directly outside. Any drain that terminates
outside shall not cause water to collect within five feet of electrical equipment, discharge
within five (5) feet of electrical equipment, or cause other hazardous conditions to mechanical
equipment or public or private areas. All drain valves for common systems including the dry
system drain for the common attic area shall be located in the sprinkler room.
903.9.12, Floor drain required. A sanitary floor drain shall be installed in the room sufficiently
sized to meet the flow rate of any device, including the backflow device. Floor drains serving
backflow devices shall be sized in accordance with the discharge rates of the manufacturer’s
flow charts of such devices. The following Table shall be used to determine the floor drain size:
15-150-36 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
Drain Size Flow Rate GPM
4” 88
6” 264
8” 575
10” 1050
12” 1700
8, 10 and 12 inch drains shall discharge directly
to the exterior and not into the sanitary sewer system.
903.9.13, Interior walls. All interior walls within a sprinkler room shall use water resistant
gypsum backing board.
903.9.14, Fire pump test header: An outside test header shall be provided on all fire pump
installations. An OS&Y control valve shall be provided on all fire pump test headers.
(23) Section 905.3, “Required Installations,” shall be amended by the addition of the following
language:
All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The supply riser shall be
hydraulically designed to supply 2½” hose drops. The riser system shall be equipped with a
separate control valve and flow switch.
The standpipe shall be a 2½” gated connection with a 1½” reducer and all locations shall be
approved by the Fire Code Official. All standpipe and sprinkler risers shall have separate control
valves and flow switches per floor.
(24) Section 905.3.1, “Height,” shall be deleted, except for Exceptions 1 through 5, inclusive, and
in lieu thereof, the following is hereby added:
905.3.1 Height. Class I standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings or structures
(1) in all newly constructed buildings so that all areas in excess of 120 feet from the nearest
point of entry to the building shall be covered by a standpipe; (2) in all areas of existing structures
which have been remodeled or added to in such a manner that those areas are located in excess
of 120 feet from the nearest point of entry to the building; (3) in all newly constructed buildings
or structures two (2) or more stories in height or more than one (1) story below the highest
level of fire department vehicle access so that all areas on those floors are within 120 feet of a
standpipe; and (4) in all buildings or structures more than two (2) stories in height or more than
one (1) story below the highest level of fire department vehicle access which have been
remodeled or added to in such a manner so that those areas are located in excess of 120
feet from the nearest standpipe. The standpipes shall be provided with a 2½” to 1½” reducer
and cap with no fire hose. There shall be an approved fire department connection at grade and
hose connections located at each floor level.
Exceptions 1 through 5 shall remain
(25) Section 1006.3, “Emergency Power for Illumination:” Section 1006.3 is hereby amended by the
addition of a new item which shall be as follows:
“6. Toilet Rooms”
15-150-37 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(26) Section 5307, “Compressed Gases Not Otherwise Regulated,” is hereby amended by the
addition of a new subsection 5307, which new subsection shall read as follows:
5307.3 Compressed gases that are used in soda-dispensing systems. All new and existing
stationary carbon dioxide gas tanks of any size that are inside a structure and are part of a
soda-dispensing system shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Section
5307.3.1 through 5307.3.4
Exception: Portable tanks regulated under DOTn standards having an internal volume of 30
cubic feet (0.855 cubic meters) or less and are removed off-site for refill.
5307.3.1 Pressure relief devices. Pressure relief devices shall be arranged to discharge upward
and unobstructed to the open air in such a manner as to prevent any impingement of escaping
gas upon the container, adjacent structures or personnel.
5307.3.2 Leak detection. An approved leak detection device shall be installed following
manufacturers recommendation that is monitored by a fire alarm system as a supervisory signal.
This device shall be maintained and or replaced as recommended by the manufacturer.
5307.3.3 Leak alarms. The fire alarm system shall provide an approved interior audible signal
that is unique from a fire evacuation signal and interior and exterior blue strobes that shall signal
upon detection of a leak. The interior visual device shall be mounted near the tank or directly
above a door leading to an enclosed space containing a tank. The exterior strobe shall be in an
approved weatherproof housing and mounted directly above the fill valve.
5307.3.4 Marking. Approved signage shall be placed near the tank at an approved location
warning occupants of asphyxiation hazard. A warning sign meeting the standards of NFPA704
shall be mounted on the exterior of the structure directly beneath the blue strobe.
(27) Section 5601.1.3, “Fireworks,” is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following shall be
inserted in lieu thereof:
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, advertisement, handling, and
use of fireworks are prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. The use of fireworks for display as permitted in Section 5608.
2. The retail sale of approved consumer novelties shall be permitted, but only to person
18 years of age or older. Such sales shall be permitted only in buildings equipped
with approved automatic sprinkler systems. The display of consumer novelties in a
building shall be separated from all exit doors by a minimum distance of 20 feet or as
approved in advance in writing by the Fire Code Official. The sale of consumer novelties
shall not be permitted at any building or on any property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases are sold or dispensed.
(28) Section 5602, “Definitions,” is hereby amended as follows:
15-150-38 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(a) A new definition, “Consumer Novelties,” shall be inserted in alphabetical order, which
new definition shall read as follows:
CONSUMER NOVELTIES. Consumer novelties shall mean: (i) snakes, glow worm
pellets, smoke devices, trick noisemakers (known as party poppers), toy booby traps,
snappers, trick matches, cigarette loads, auto burglar alarms, toy pistols, toy canes, toy
guns, and other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of
explosive compound are used, provided they are constructed so that the hand cannot
come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and (ii) toy pistol paper
or plastic caps which contain less than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture.
(b) The definition “Fireworks, 1.4G” is hereby deleted, and the following definition is
hereby inserted in lieu thereof:
Fireworks, 1.4G. (formerly known as class C, common fireworks.) Small fireworks
devices, including handheld wire sparklers, containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic
composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion.
Such 1.4G fireworks that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and
labeling regulations of the DOT for fireworks, UN 0336, and the U.S. consumer product
safety commission as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR: parts 1500 and 1507 are not
explosive materials for the purpose of this code.
(29) Section 5608, “Fireworks Display,” is hereby amended as follows:
(a) Section 5608.1, “General,” is hereby amended by the addition of the following new
subsection which shall read as follows:
5608.1.1 Indoor displays prohibited. The use of any type of fireworks, novelties, or
display or pyrotechnic special effects in theatrical or group entertainment shall be
prohibited within a structure of any use group.
(b) Subsection 5608.2.1, “Outdoor Fireworks Displays,” shall be deleted in its entirety, and
a new Subsection 5608.2.1 shall be inserted in lieu thereof, which new Subsection shall
read as follows:
5608.2.1 Outdoor Fireworks Displays. In addition to the requirements of section 403,
permit applications for outdoor fireworks displays using division 1.3G fireworks shall
include a diagram of the location at which the display will be conducted, including the
site from which fireworks will be discharged; the location of buildings, highways,
overhead obstructions, and utilities; and the lines behind which the audience will be
restrained. All outdoor fireworks displays shall be electronically fired from an approved
electronic firing unit.
(c) Section 5608.8, “Fireworks Display Supervision,” shall be amended by the addition
of the following new subsection 5608.8.1 which shall read as follows:
15-150-39 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
5608.8.1 Display site restricted. No spectators or spectator parking areas shall be located
within the display site. No vehicles shall be parked within the discharge area following
the start of connection of the first circuit to the electronic firing unit.
(d) A new Section 5608.11, “Display and Sale Prohibited,” is hereby added, which new
Section shall read as follows:
5608.11 Display and sale prohibited. It shall be unlawful to display, sell, store, or
advertise for sale any division 1.4G or 1.3G fireworks within the Village.
(30) Chapter 80, “Referenced Standards,” is hereby amended by the deletion of all references to
the International Plumbing Code
(31) The following appendices are hereby adopted: B, C, D, E, F, G, and H. All other appendices are
not adopted.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013)
(H) Energy Conservation Code:
The International Code Council International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, which shall be
referred to in this Village Code as the “Deer Park Energy Conservation Code,” a copy of which was on
file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30)
days prior to adoption thereof, be and is hereby adopted by reference, except for such deletions or
substitutions of sections as hereinafter provided, and the following additions and/or amendments to the
Deer Park Energy Conservation Code shall also be and are hereby adopted and approved:
(1) Section C101.1 is hereby revised to read as follows:
C101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Deer Park Energy Conservation Code,
hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
(2) Section C108.4 is hereby revised by the addition of the following:
“The penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be as set forth in Section 150.99 of this
Chapter.”
(3) Sections C109.1 through C109.3, inclusive, are hereby deleted and the following shall be
inserted in lieu therof:
See Section 150.01 H of this Chapter.
(Amd. Ord. 2013-25, passed 10/21/2013)
(I) Elevator and Escalator Standards:
The installation, repair, or modification of elevators, escalators, and other conveyances after the
effective date of this Section shall be in accordance with the following standards, which standards are
hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “Deer Park Elevator and Escalator Standards,” and which
regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and at least one (1) copy of each
15-150-40 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
of said standards has been on file and available for public inspection and/or copying in the office of
the Village Clerk for at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption thereof:
(1) Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44-07) and Performance-
Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07);
(2) Guide for inspection of Elevators, Escalators, and Moving Walks (ASME A17.2-2004);
(3) Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-2005). Only upgrades
required by application of the Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators must be
completed no later than January 1, 2015 (see Public Act 096-0054, Section 35(h)). With
respect to ASME A17.3-2005, “Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators,” upgrades
required by Section 35(h) must be completed no later than January 1, 2015.
(4) Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2005);
(5) Standard for the qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2007);
(6) Automated People Mover Standard (ASCE 21-05), Part 1, 2006;
(7) Automated People Mover Standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21.2-08), Parts 2, 3, and 4, 2008
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME); Three Park Avenue, New York, New York
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), 1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Reston, VA 20191-
4400
(8) The following records shall be maintained by the Building Permit Coordinator of the
Village:
(a) Copies of all inspection reports;
(b) Copies of all permit applications;
(c) Copies of all permits issued;
(d) Maintain a record of the number of Certificates of Operation issued; and
(e) Copies of all variances/exceptions issued.
(9) The owner of all conveyances in the Village shall be required to register with and pay the
associated fee to the Office of the State Fire Marshal (“OSFM”) and such conveyances shall
be put out-of-service and the names of the owners of those conveyances that fail to register shall
be reported to the OSFM within thirty (30) days of determination that the conveyance is not
registered.
(10) No conveyance covered by this Section shall be erected, constructed, installed, or altered
within buildings or structures within this State unless a permit has been obtained from the
Village before the work is commenced.
(11) The Village shall keep all permits it issues on file for a period of not less than two (2) years from
the date of issuance. Where any material alteration is made, the device shall confirm to
applicable requirements in ASME A17.1, ASME A18.1, or ASCE 21.
15-150-41 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(12) No permit required under this Section shall be issued except to a person, firm, or corporation
holding a current elevator contractor’s license, duly issued pursuant to the Elevator Safety and
Regulation Act (225 ILCS 312) (“the Act”), except that a permit to alter a conveyance may
be issued to an entity exempted from licensure under subsection (a) of Section 40 of the Act.
(13) A copy of the permit shall be kept at the construction site at all times while the work is in
progress.
(J) Property Maintenance Code:
The ICC International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, which shall be referred to herein as
the “Deer Park Property Maintenance Code,” a copy of which was on file in the office of the Village
Clerk for inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to adoption hereof,
be and is hereby adopted by reference, except for such deletions or substitutions of sections as hereinafter
provided. Copies of the Property Maintenance Code are on file in the office of the Village Clerk for
public use and inspection, and the following additions and/or amendments to the Deer Park Property
Maintenance Code shall also be and are hereby adopted and approved.
(1) Section 101.1, “Title,” Insert: “Village of Deer Park.”
(2) Section 102.3 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted, and in lieu
thereof, a new Section 102.3 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
Section 102.3 Application Of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or
changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the
Deer Park Building Code, the Deer Park Residential Building Code, the Deer Park Plumbing
Code, the Deer Park Mechanical Code and the Deer Park Electrical Code. Wherever this
Code refers to the International Building Code, such reference shall be construed to mean the
Deer Park Building Code. Wherever this Code refers to the International Residential Code, such
reference shall be construed to mean the Deer Park Residential Code. Wherever this Code refers
to the International Fire Code, such reference shall be construed to mean the Deer Park Fire
Code. Wherever this Code refers to the Illinois State Plumbing Code, such reference shall be
construed to mean the Deer Park Plumbing Code. Wherever this code refers to the
International Mechanical Code, such reference shall be construed to mean the Deer Park
Mechanical Code. Wherever this Code refers to the National Electrical Code, such reference
shall be construed to mean the Deer Park Electrical Code. Wherever this Code refers to
the International Zoning Code, such reference shall be construed to mean the Deer Park
Zoning Regulations. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside
any provision(s) of the Deer Park Zoning Regulations.
(3) The title of Section 103 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted, and
in lieu thereof, the following title of Section 103 shall be as follows:
Section 103. Building Department:
(4) Section 103.1 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted, and in lieu
thereof, a new Section 103.1 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
15-150-42 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
Section 103.1 General. The Village has previously created the Building Department. The
Village employee or independent contractor in charge of said department, or his or her designee,
shall be known as the “Code Official” or “Building Inspector.”
(5) Section 103.5 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted in its entirety
and in lieu thereof, the following new Section 103.5 is hereby inserted, which new Section shall
read as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in Section 150.04 (“Schedule of Building
Fees and Charges”) of the Village of Deer Park Municipal Code.
(6) Section 106.3 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted and in lieu
thereof, a new Section 106.3 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
Section 106.3. Prosecution of Violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation
or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a civil infraction, and
the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied
with, the Code Official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order of direction
made pursuant thereto. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation shall be
responsible for any costs of prosecution incurred by the Village, including but not limited to the
Village’s attorney fees, court costs, costs of abatement, expert witness costs, and any other costs
and expenses incurred in any proceeding brought at law or in equity.
(7) Section 106.4 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted, and in lieu
thereof, a new Section 106.4 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
Section 106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of Chapter 150,
“Building Regulations,” of Title XV, “Land Usage,” of this Code or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Inspector, or any
officer or employee of the Village duly authorized by the Village Administrator, or his or her
designee, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, and/or any
person who shall fail to maintain a building or structure in compliance with Chapter 150,
“Building Regulations,” of Title XV, “Land Usage,” of this Code shall be guilty of a petty
offense, punishable by a fine as specified from time to time in Section 150.99, “Penalties,” of
this Chapter 150, “Building Regulations,” of the Deer Park Municipal Code. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(8) Section 111, “Means of Appeal,” is hereby deleted, and in lieu thereof, the following is
hereby inserted:
111, Means of Appeal: See Section 150.01 H of this Chapter.
(9) Section 3 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is deleted and in lieu thereof, a new
Section 302.3 is hereby adopted, which shall read as follows:
15-150-43 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
302.3 Sidewalks, Driveways and Right-of-Way Maintenance
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a
proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. No driveway shall be
installed or maintained within any street or right-of -way which shall significantly interfere
with or impede existing drainage. The owner of the property served by a driveway shall be
responsible for the maintenance of such driveway and the structures appurtenant thereto and
any culvert repairs shall be approved by the Village engineer and require a building permit.
It shall be the duty of owners of lots abutting rights-of-way to maintain the lawn and landscaping
on the rights-of-way up to the street surface, including mowing and weed control; to maintain
ditches in a vegetated, neat, and mowed condition; and culverts clear of sediment and
obstructions.
(Ord. 15-05 passed 5/18/15, Amd. Ord. 19-03 passed 3/14/19)
(10) Section 302.4 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is deleted, and in lieu thereof, a
new Section 302.4 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
302.4 Weeds and Other Nuisance Vegetation.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner(s) and occupant(s) of any premises in the Village
and their respective agents to permit weeds or other nuisance vegetation to remain on
such premises in violation of this Section A, in violation of any other provisions of
the Deer Park Municipal Code, or in violation of any other ordinance of this Village.
The owner(s), occupant(s), and their respective agent(s) of any real estate within the
corporate limits of the Village shall be responsible for and shall cause the cutting and,
where directed by the Village, the trimming of trees and bushes when required by this
Section, and the abatement of nuisance vegetation as required by this Section in a
manner approved by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee. The abatement of
weeds and other nuisance vegetation shall include but not be limited to proper cutting
of such nuisance vegetation, the removal of the stumps of any such nuisance trees and
the removal and disposal of all such nuisance vegetation in a manner approved by
the Village Administrator, or his or her designee.
B. Abatement by Village: The officers, employees, and agents of the Village are hereby
authorized to enter upon private property to inspect such property and the vegetation
thereon for violations of this Chapter, taking samples to be tested to determine whether
said vegetation is, in fact, dead, diseased or infected, and/or for the purpose of abating
any and all such violations.
C. Costs As A Lien: The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may cause the
cutting and/or removal of nuisance vegetation as defined in this Section, and/or the
trimming of trees and bushes, when the owner(s) of real estate refuse or neglect to cut,
trim, and/or remove them after a written notice and request for cutting, trimming, and/or
removal has been mailed to such person(s) by regular U.S. mail, postage prepaid, not
less than ten (10) days in advance and the Village may then collect from such person(s)
the reasonable cost thereof, provided, however, notwithstanding the foregoing
requirement for written notice, no such prior written notice and request pursuant to this
15-150-44 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
Section shall be required if the person(s) responsible for such condition have been
mailed a notice and request relative to a similar condition by the Village within the prior
twelve (12) months. Such cost(s) shall not be a lien on the underlying parcel unless a
notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately
preceding the removal activities. Such notice must also be delivered or sent after the
removal activities have been performed and said notice must: (1) include a copy of
this Section and include copies of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7 and 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-15, which statute is applicable to all such liens; (2)
identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and (3) describe the removal
activity.
D. For purposes of this Section, “weeds” shall include the following: burdock, ragweed
(giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common milk
weed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter, wild lettuce,
curled dock, smart weeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild hemp, buckthorn,
goldenrod, yellow and white sweet clover, and all other weeds and non-native species
of a like kind, which shall be kept to a maximum height of eight inches (8”) on all
property within the Village.
E. For purposes of this Section, “nuisance vegetation” shall include the following:
unmanaged ground cover and/or bushes, including non-native prairie species as
buckthorn, goldenrod, yellow and white sweet clover, which shall be kept to a
maximum height of eight inches (8”) on all property within the Village.
F. For the purposes of this Section, the term “nuisance vegetation” shall mean weeds
as defined above, unmanaged groundcover and/or bushes as described above, grass
exceeding a maximum height of eight inches (8”), and/or any tree or other plant in
violation of or the maintenance of which is in violation of this Section, in violation of
any other provisions of this Village Code, or any other ordinance of the Village, and/or
which is determined by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, to be dead,
diseased or infected, or to otherwise be a potential hazard or threat to the public health
and safety.
G. For purposes of this Section, in the event that it is determined by the Village
Administrator, or his or her designee, that vegetation is, in fact, dead, diseased or
infested, or otherwise constitutes nuisance vegetation as defined herein, said vegetation
shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a type of public nuisance for the
purposes of this Section.
H. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to
any vegetation on Village-owned open space, park(s), or preserve(s), or to any
vegetation on the unimproved portion of any right-of-way maintained by the Village.
(11) Section 302.8, “Motor Vehicles,” is hereby deleted in its entirety, and in lieu thereof, the
following new Section 302.8 shall be inserted, which shall read as follows:
302.8, Motor Vehicle: See Chapter 90 of this Code for requirements.
15-150-45 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(12) Section 304.14 is hereby deleted, and in lieu thereof, a new Section 304.14 is hereby adopted,
which shall provide as follows:
304.14. Insect Screens. During the period from May 15 to October 15, every door, window and
other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging
door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains
or insect repellent fans, are employed.
(13) Section 602.2 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted, and in lieu thereof,
a new Section 602.2 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
Section 602.2 Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities
capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65 degrees F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms based on a winter outdoor design temperature of -4 degrees F. Cooking
appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this Section.
(14) Section 602.3 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted, and in lieu thereof,
a new Section 602.3 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets
one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October
15 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below -4 degrees F., maintenance of the minimum
room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity.
(15) Section 602.4 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted, and in lieu thereof,
a new Section 602.4 is hereby adopted, which shall provide as follows:
Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with
heat during the period from October 15th to May 15th to maintain a temperature of not less
than 65 degrees F. during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
15-150-46 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(16) The referenced standard in Chapter 8 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code, titled
EC-09 ICC Electrical Code, under the heading “ICC” set forth on page 27 of the ICC
International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby deleted and the following referenced
standard is inserted in lieu thereof:
Village Of Deer Park Electrical Code
(17) The referenced standard in Chapter 8 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code, titled
IBC-09 International Building Code, under the heading “ICC” set forth on page 27 of the ICC
International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby deleted and the following referenced
standard is inserted in lieu thereof:
Village Of Deer Park Building Code
(18) The referenced standard in Chapter 8 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code, titled
IFC-09 International Fire Code, under the heading “ICC” set forth on page 27 of the ICC
International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby deleted and the following referenced
standard is inserted in lieu thereof:
Village Of Deer Park Fire Code
(19) The referenced standard in Chapter 8 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code, titled
IMC-09 International Mechanical Code, under the heading “ICC” set forth on page 27 of the
ICC International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby deleted and the following
referenced standard is inserted in lieu thereof:
Village Of Deer Park Mechanical Code
(20) The referenced standard in Chapter 8 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code, titled
IPC-09 International Plumbing Code, under the heading “ICC” set forth on page 27 of the
ICC International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby deleted and the following
referenced standard is inserted in lieu thereof:
Village Of Deer Park Plumbing Code
(21) The referenced standard in Chapter 8 of the Deer Park Property Maintenance Code, titled
IZC-09 International Zoning Code, under the heading “ICC” set forth on page 27 of the ICC
International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby deleted and the following referenced
standard is inserted in lieu thereof:
Village of Deer Park Zoning Regulations
(22) Exposure of Sewage: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged untreated sewage,
the effluent from any septic tank, disposal field or mechanical treatment plant or any industrial
or business wastewater directly or indirectly to any stream, ditch, drainage, system, drainage
pipe, storm water sewer, ground surface, or abandoned well or maintain or operate an individual
sewage disposal system in such manner that it becomes offensive, dangerous or prejudicial to
the public health.
15-150-47 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(23) All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an
approved private sewage disposal system.
(Amd. Ord. 13-25 passed 10/21/2013, 16- 15 passed 11/21/16)
§150.04 SCHEDULE OF BUILDING FEES AND CHARGES.
(A) For all new construction, the building permit fee is $12.00 per each $1,000.00 of scaled construction
cost.
(B) The scaled cost of construction per square feet shall be determined as follows:
(1) Residential Living Area $100.00
(2) Basement $ 15.00
(3) Garage $ 40.00
(4) Business/Mercantile/Industrial $100.00
(5) Warehouse $ 70.00
(6) Swimming Pools $ 60.00
(C) Additions and Alterations: Where the cost of construction is known, the fee shall be $12.00 per
$1,000.00 construction cost. Where construction cost is not established, the scaled construction costs
and fees applicable to new construction shall apply.
(D) Additional Fees: In addition to payment to the Village of those fees set forth in Subsections (A), (B), and
(C) above, a permittee is also required to pay to the Village those charges set forth below prior to the
Village’s issuance of the applicable permit or approval:
(1) Air Conditioning:
New Residence, Additions, and Major Alterations, Per
Unit
$75.00
Commercial, Business, and Industrial, Per 3,000 square
feet
$125.00
Residential Replacement $75.00
Commercial Replacement $115.00
(2) Antenna/Tower/ Dish $115.00*
(3) Awning - Commercial $150.00*
(4) Certificate of Occupancy, Commercial $.10/sq. ft.
15-150-48 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(5) Certificate of Occupancy; Residential
New Residence $125.00
Miscellaneous Residence (e.g., an addition) $75.00
(6) Deck
$12.00 per $1,000 of
scaled construction
cost, or a minimum
fee of $150.00
(7) Demolition $100.00
(8) Drainage/Drain Tile $115.00*
(9) Driveway $75.00
(10) Driveway with Culvert $115.00*
(11) Electrical
New Residence, Additions, and Major Alterations, Per
Unit
$125.00
Commercial, Business, and Industrial, Per 3,000 square
feet
$125.00
Residential Minor Alterations $75.00
Commercial Minor Alterations $125.00*
(12) Elevator, Escalator, or Other Similar Conveyance
Inspection for New Construction, Modernization, and/or
Modification
$200.00 per unit
Review of Architectural Plans or Final Shop Drawings for
New Construction, Modernizations, and/or Modifications
$200.00 per unit
Safety Code Inspection $85.00 per unit
Certificate of Compliance $15.00 per unit
15-150-49 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(13) Fence
$20.00 per 100 lineal
feet, with a minimum
fee of $100.00
(14) Fire Alarm – Commercial
$125.00 plus LZFD
fees
(15) Fire Alarm – Residential
$75.00 plus LZFD
fees
(16) Fire Sprinkler – Commercial
$125.00 plus LZFD
fees
(17) Fire Sprinkler – Residential
$75.00 plus LZFD
fees
(18) Fireplace $115.00*
(19) Foundation Permit $115.00*
(20) Furnace $115.00*
(21) Gazebo $150.00
(22) Generator $115.00*
(23) Heating
New Residence, Additions, and Major Alterations, Per
Unit
$125.00
Commercial, Business, and Industrial, Per 3,000 square
feet
$125.00
Residential Minor Alterations $75.00*
Commercial Minor Alterations $125.00*
(24) Hood & Duct $125.00
(25) Inspections
15-150-50 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
Site Inspection $60.00
Reinspection $60.00
Extra, Non-Scheduled Inspection $60.00
(26) Miscellaneous Other $75.00
(27) Operational Permits $75.00
(28) Patio $100.00
(29) Pergola $150.00
(30) Plumbing
New Residence, Additions, and Major Alterations, Per
Unit
$125.00
Commercial, Business, and Industrial, Per 3,000 square
feet
$125.00
Residential Minor Alterations $75.00*
Commercial Minor Alterations $125.00
(31) Porch
$12.00 per $1,000 of
scaled construction
cost, or a minimum
fee of $150.00
(32) Roofing
Re-roofing – Commercial
$115 subject to
number of inspections
required
Re-Roofing – Add a layer $85.00
Re-Roofing – Tear off $115.00*
15-150-51 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
(33) Retaining Wall $115.00*
(34) Applicable fees as required by Lake County
See Village Code,
§51
(35) Service Walks/Sidewalk/Stoop $115.00*
(36) Shed $150.00
(37) Siding $115.00*
(38) Sign Fees See §157.20
(39) Solar System - Commercial $660.00*
(40) Solar System - Residential $390.00
(41) Sprinkler, Lawn $100.00
(42) Swimming Pool
$12.00 per $1,000.00
of scaled construction
cost or a minimum
fee of $300.00
(43)
Temporary Structure for Special Event (see Chapter
97.04(L)
$100.00*
(44) Tennis Courts $300.00
(45) Water Heater $75.00*
(46) Well $75.00*
(47) Window/Door replacement no open change $75.00
(48) Window/Door replacement change opening size $100.00
(49)
Zoning–Filing Fee(s) and Deposits to be Paid with
Application(s) for Zoning Amendment(s), Special Use(s),
Planned Unit Development(s), and/or Variation(s)
See Chapter 38,
Reimbursement for
Professional Fees and
Other Expenses
15-150-52 Title IV
(Rev. 7/19)
Footnote: * Represents a fixed fee to include plan review and inspections. Additional required inspections will
increase the fee accordingly to the fee schedule for inspections.
(E) A fee surcharge of fifty percent (50%) of total building permit fees, but not less than $200, shall be
collected if construction or alterations are started before a required permit is issued.
(F) An administrative fee shall be assessed on all permits, where the scaled cost of construction or the
construction project value is in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The administrative fee shall
be calculated by multiplying the scaled cost of construction or construction project value multiplied by
.001, but such administrative fee shall not in any event be less than $30.00. Such administrative fee
shall be collected from the permit applicant prior to issuance of each building permit. Reimbursement to
the Village and/or payment for all professional fees and other expenses incurred by the Village relative
to the review, processing, and/or approval of any building permit and/or applications and/or plans for
any such building permits and for any and all plan review(s) shall be required pursuant to Chapter 38,
“Reimbursement for Professional Fees and Other Expenses,” of Title III, “Administration,” of this Code,
and said Chapter 38 shall be applicable to all such applications, requests, and/or inquiries.
(Amd. Ord. 13-01 passed 01/21/13, 13-25 passed 10/21/2013, 14-20 passed 12/15/14, Ord. 16-15. passed 11/21/16, 19-03 passed
3/14/19)
§150.99 PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate any provision of Chapter 150, “Building Regulations,” or who shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Inspector, or in violation of the
provisions of a permit, certificate, or stop order issued under the provisions of this Chapter, shall be guilty
of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per day and not
more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) per day, and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost
of prosecution, including but not limited to the Village’s attorney fees, court costs, expert witness costs,
and other costs and expenses incurred by the Village related thereto. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Amd. Ord. 11-05 passed 04/18/11, 11-10 passed 06/20/11, 13-25 passed 10/21/2013, 19-03 passed 3/14/19)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XV-Chapt 150-Building Code 7-19.docx
_______________________________________________________________________________________
Title XV
15-151-1 (Rev. 04/19)
CHAPTER 151: FENCES
Section
§151.01 Definitions
§151.02 Purpose and Intent
§151.03 Fences in Public Right-of-Way
§151.04 Barbed Wire; Electrically Charged Fences
§151.05 Maintenance of Fences
§151.06 Obstructions to Line of Sight
§151.07 Residential Fence Diagrams
§151.08 Fence Materials Permitted
§151.09 Fence Materials Not Permitted
§151.10 Fence Permit Required
§151.11 Residential Height Regulations
§151.12 Nonresidential Height Regulations
§151.13 Density Regulations
§151.14 Compliance
§151.15 Variations
§151.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
BARBED WIRE. A strand or strands of wire or similar material with barbs or other sharp objects spaced at
regular intervals along the strand or strands of wire.
FENCE. Any structure, from whatever material, serving as an enclosure, barrier, boundary or separation.
GARDEN FENCE. Any fence designed for the protection of vegetation.
LANDSCAPING SCREENING. Planted earth berm, densely planted evergreens, shrubs or trees or any
combination thereof.
REPAIR. Any fence requiring fifty (50) percent or more repair of the entire fence shall not be restored unless
said fence conforms to all regulations of this Chapter. In the event such damage to the fence is less than fifty
(50) percent of the entire fence, the repairs or reconstruction shall be made within one hundred and twenty
(120) days from the date of the damage and the repairs are diligently completed. For purposes of calculating
the fifty (50) percent or more of restoration, the amounts utilized towards repairs to the fence undertaken over
the previous thirty (30) month period shall apply and count toward the fifty (50) percent threshold described
above.
§151.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
This Chapter is intended to regulate the construction, placement and maintenance of fences as required or
allowed in this Chapter. Fences will be allowed as permitted which are not detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of the Village, and in addition do not diminish the rights of citizens to sufficient air, light and safety of
travel and access throughout the Village. The provisions in this Chapter are not applicable to any land owned
by the Village.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
Title XV
15-151-2 (Rev. 04/19)
§151.03 FENCES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
No fence shall be erected or maintained on any public right-of-way except those fences erected for the purpose
of insuring the public safety by a governmental body having proper authority.
§151.04 BARBED WIRE; ELECTRICALLY CHARGED FENCES.
The use of barbed wire or electrically charged fences is prohibited.
§151.05 MAINTENANCE OF FENCES.
All fences shall be maintained in good repair. Fences shall be kept upright. Any fence broken, damaged, or
missing rails, posts, or other components shall be promptly repaired or replaced. Additionally, fences shall not
block or hinder natural drainage or water flow. (see definition for REPAIR in section 151.01 herein)
§151.06 OBSTRUCTIONS TO LINE OF SIGHT.
In no event shall any wall, fence or other structure, landscape screening or other planting be placed or
maintained in a location relative to a public or private street, alley or other means of ingress such that the sight
of oncoming vehicular or pedestrian traffic is impaired for users of such means of ingress and egress. All fences
shall be constructed pursuant to this Code. Line of site provisions can be found in Section 158.18, Visibility;
Vision Triangles and Section 151.07 Residential Fence Diagram.
§151.07 Residential Fence Diagram
Residential Typical Standard Lot
_______________________________________________________________________________________
Title XV
15-151-3 (Rev. 04/19)
Residential Corner Lot
§151.08 FENCE MATERIALS PERMITTED.
Fences shall be constructed from the following materials: wood, aluminum, wrought iron, or vinyl. All fences
shall be rigid. In no case shall fences be constructed of more than one material. See Section 151.07 Residential
Fence Diagram No mixture of fencing materials shall be permitted except as follows:
(A) Masonry support columns used in connection with wrought iron fencing shall not exceed thirty (30)
inches by thirty (30) inches.
(B) Residential dog runs constructed in accordance with Section 151.11(E) may be constructed of chain
link or similar material as approved by the Building and Zoning Official.
(C) Garden fences, provided they do not exceed four (4) feet in height, are fifty (50) percent open, do not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet and are set back at least eight (8) feet from the front building
line, for the purpose of growing plants, that are cultivated.
§151.09 FENCE MATERIALS NOT PERMITTED.
(A) Barbed wire, razor wire, other sharp or hazardous materials are not allowed for use on any type of fence.
No aboveground electrically charged fences are permitted.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
Title XV
15-151-4 (Rev. 04/19)
(B) No fence or part thereof that is of the form, shape or structure of a chain link, or mesh like, or wire fabric,
made of any material (including, but not limited to, metal or plastic).
§151.10 FENCE PERMIT REQUIRED.
Before any fence is erected within the Village a Village fence permit must be issued except for a garden fence.
§151.11 RESIDENTIAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS. See Section 151.07 Residential Fence Diagram
(A) Front yards shall not be permitted except for: picket or split rail fences which shall not exceed three (3)
feet in height, are fifty (50) percent open and comply with the provisions of this Code.
(B) Rear and side yard fences of up to four (4) feet high shall be permitted in rear and side yards provided
they extend no further forward on the lot than eight (8) feet to the rear of the front of the residence and
do not extend pass property lot line.
(C) Any such fences shall be located and constructed so they do not interfere or conflict with the use of any
utility easements or installations existing or planned to be installed in such easements.
(D) Fences in corner side yards or along the portion of a rear yard that is bounded by a side lot line fronting
a public street shall be limited to a maximum of three (3) feet high.
(E) Exceptions: Dog runs under two hundred (200) square feet placed against the rear of a residential
structure shall be permitted provided their height does not exceed seven (7) feet.
§151.12 NONRESIDENTIAL HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
(A) Front Yard Fences: No fence shall be erected or maintained in a front yard of any nonresidential
zoning district lot adjoining a public street in any zoning district to a height greater than four (4) feet.
(B) Side and Rear Yard Fences: No fence shall be erected or maintained in a side or rear yard of any
nonresidential zoning district to a height greater than six (6) feet.
(C) Exceptions. Fences surrounding antennas or towers shall be permitted so long as their height is six (6)
feet in accordance with Section158.32 of this Code and screened with densely planted evergreens.
§151.13 DENSITY REGULATIONS.
(A) Solid fences are prohibited in all residential zoning districts.
(B) In all residential zoning districts, no fence shall have support posts, pickets or columns greater than six
(6) inches in width, diameter or as required in Section 151.08(A).
(C) All fences in residential zoning districts shall have posts, pickets, or columns spaced so that the
minimum spacing is at least as wide as the width of the widest post, picket, or column used in the fence
and shall be at least fifty (50) percent open on any elevation.
(D) The finished side of all fences shall face the adjoining property. The finished side is the side which is
the smooth side or the side not containing the structural supports.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
Title XV
15-151-5 (Rev. 04/19)
§151.14 COMPLIANCE
All fencing must comply with the regulations of this Chapter 151 within three (3) years from December 21,
2017 of this amended Chapter unless the property owner has previously received a variance/special use permit
from the Village for said fence. Any fence that needs at least fifty (50) percent repair on December 21, 2017
compliance date must come into full compliance with this Chapter 151 at the time of said repair.
§151.15 VARIATIONS
Any fence that does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall be required to obtain a variation and
meet all the requirements outlined in Sections 158.51 and 158.54 as applicable, of this Code.
§151.65 VILLAGE OWED PROPERTY.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any fencing located on property owned by the Village.
CHAPTER 152: WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
§152.01 Adoption of Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance
§152.02 Army Corps of Engineers Permit
§152.03 Administration
§152.04 Substitution
§152.01 ADOPTION OF LAKE COUNTY WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE.
The Village hereby adopts the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance, as most recently
amended by the County of Lake on June 11, 2013 and as found in its own compilation, which shall be in
full force and effect within the Village of Deer Park corporate limits; and as may be amended from time
to time and all regulations promulgated thereto. The Village alone, and not the County of Lake, shall be
responsible to enforce the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance in full within the portions
lying in Cook County.
In addition to Appendix C of the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance, the Village adopts and
reaffirms its prior adoption of the updated Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study for the
Cook County portion of the Village prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008 as follows:
COMMUNITY COMMUNITY
MEMBER
DATE OF
CURRENT
EFFECTIVE
MAP
COOK COUNTY
PANEL
NUMBER
EFFECTIVE FIS
STUDY DATE
DEER PARK 171028 August 19, 2008 17031C0038 August 19, 2008
August 19, 2008 17031C0039 August 19, 2008
August 19, 2008 17031C0043 August 19, 2008
§152.02 ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS PERMIT.
For those developments which had been granted permits prior to January 1, 2001 by the Army Corps of
Engineers, the conditions and requirements of those Army Corps of Engineers permits shall be satisfied.
Should those developments which had been granted permits prior to January 1, 2001 be amended in such
a way so as to impact wetlands, the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance shall apply.
§152.03 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Stormwater - The Village shall administer the Stormwater provisions of the Lake County
Watershed Development Ordinance within its jurisdictional boundaries because the Village is a
certified community for enforcement under Article III of said Ordinance. The Village shall be
responsible to administer the Stormwater and Regulatory Floodplain and Floodway provisions of
the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance lying within the Cook County portions of the
Village of Deer Park jurisdictional boundaries.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
15-152-1 Title XV
(Rev. 08/13)
(B) Wetlands - Lake County and not the Village shall administer the Isolated Wetlands provisions of
the Lake County Watershed Development Ordinance within the Lake County portions of the
Village of Deer Park jurisdictional boundaries because the Village is not a certified community for
enforcement.
§152.04 SUBSTITUTION.
If the Watershed Development Ordinance is repealed, overturned or otherwise ceases to be valid, the
Village shall continue to enforce the terms of the Ordinance immediately prior to its repeal or overturning
until the Board of Trustees shall adopt a replacement ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9-17-01) (Am. Ord. 08-10, passed 7-23-08) (Am. Ord. 12-20, passed 09-17-12)
(Am. Ord. 13-22, passed 08-19-13)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
15-152-2 Title XV
(Rev. 08/13)
15-153-1 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER 153: PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Section
General Provisions
§153.01 Purpose
§153.02 Definitions
Standards
§153.15 Minimum Standards
§153.16 Density and Lot Coverages
§153.17 Rand Road Landscaping Guidelines
Administration and Enforcement
§153.25 Procedures for Planned Development
§153.25 Building Review Board
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§153.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for planned developments which are characterized by:
(A) A maximum choice in the types of environments available to the public, by allowing a
development that would not be possible under the strict application of other sections of this
chapter;
(B) Permanent preservation of common open space and, in residential areas, recreation areas and
facilities;
(C) A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic and geologic features;
(D) A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities, which results in better
development and design, the construction of aesthetic amenities and revenue benefiting the Village;
(E) An efficient use of the land, resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, and other
facilities;
(F) A lack of negative impacts on the surrounding properties; and
(G) Land uses and site design which promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and
welfare.
(‘77 Code, § 20.01)
§153.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
15-153-2 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
BODIES OF WATER. Waters of the United States, waters of the State of Illinois, wetlands as such
areas may be defined under federal, state, county or local law or regulation, and flood-plains.
Excluded: any man-made drainageways and stormwater retention or detention facilities.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the side walk level or its equivalent
established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof
for flat roofs; to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, gambrel and hip roofs;
to the deck line for mansard roofs. Where a building is located upon natural terrace or slope, the
height may be measured from the average ground level at the buildingwall.
BUILDING REVIEW BOARD. Pursuant to Section 153.26 herein.
CLUSTER HOME. A single-family, detached home in a residential subdivision where three or
more residential lots are arranged so as to achieve a flexible design for providing open space and/or
protecting natural areas and features.
COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to the Code of Deer Park.
COMMON OPEN SPACE. Common open space includes land unoccupied by structures,
buildings, streets, vehicular rights-of-way, loading areas, and parking lots; and designed and intended
for the protection, use or enjoyment of residents or the general public, including natural
areas, agricultural lands, and landscaped areas within the developed areas, pedestrian walkways
and bicycle paths not shared with vehicular traffic, and landscaped islands in parking lots. Common
open space may contain structures for recreational use.
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. An ordinance adopted by the Village Board upon completion
of both preliminary and final plan approvals that includes graphics and other support
documentation upon which Village Board approval is based. The development ordinance shall also
specify conditions of approval established by the Village Board, if any.
EXCELLENCE. As it relates to site design, landscaping, screening, buffering and signage shall be
defined as conformance to the spirit and intent of the Comprehensive Plan with the standards of
this chapter and the Village Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 158 of this Code of Ordinances, that
exceeds the minimum quantitative standards that exist in this chapter, the Comprehensive Plan and
the Village Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 158 of this Code of Ordinances.
FOOTCANDLE. A unit of illumination equal to the light flux falling on one square foot of area
one foot away from a light source of one candlepower.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT. A planned development which combines two or more of the
following land uses: cluster home, townhome, residential, business, office/research and office park
development.
NET ACREAGE. The number of acres remaining in a parcel after exclusion of all public rightsof-
way and bodies of water.
PARCEL. Entire land area of the planned development.
UNIFIED CONTROL. The combination of two or more tracts of land wherein each owner has
agreed that his or her tract of land shall be developed as part of a planned development, and shall
be subject to all control applicable to and adopted for the planneddevelopment.
15-153-3 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
USEABLE COMMON OPEN SPACE. Usable common open space is that portion of the common
open space that is available for active or passive recreational use.
(‘77 Code, § 20.02) (Ord. passed 8-17-97) (Am. Ord. 17-04, passed 3-20-17; Ord. 17-19 passed 10-19-17)
STANDARDS
§153.15 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
The planned development must meet the following standards. If there is a conflict between standards set
forth herein and those found elsewhere in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(A) Comprehensive plan. A planned unit development must conform with the intent and spirit of the
proposals of the Village Comprehensive Plan. The Village Comprehensive Plan shall be used as a
guide to evaluate each proposal on its individual merits and its impact on the plan for the entire
development.
(B) Ownership. The planned development shall be under single ownership and/or the unified control of
the petitioner.
(C) Size.
(1) Except for parcels within the PD District, all planned development parcels must be not less
than five (5) acres in area.
(2) All parcels within the PD District shall be processed as planned developments. (Note:
minimum zoning lot size for properties in the PD District is addressed in the table set forth
in Paragraph Z below).
(D) Compatibility. The uses permitted in a planned development must be of a type and so located that
there are no undue detrimental effects upon surrounding properties or planned land uses. Criteria
for determining compatibility with surrounding properties or planned land uses shall be those applied
in § 158.21.
(Am. Ord. 17-04, passed 3/20/17, O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
(E) Need. A clear showing of need should be made, by means of an economic feasibility, land
utilization and marketing study.
(F) Space between buildings. The minimum horizontal distance between buildings shall not be less
than 20 feet, or equal to the height of any adjacent existing free-standing unattached building,
whichever is greater
(G) Building height. In general, buildings shall not exceed 35 feet or two and one-half stories, whichever
is less. Notwithstanding the foregoing, mixed use, office and hotel structures located within
1,500 feet from Rand Road, between Long Grove Road and Lake-Cook Road, in the PD District
shall not exceed 72 feet or six (6) stories in height. In no instance shall non- residential structures
exceeding 35 feet in height be closer than 1,500 feet to Quentin Road.
(H) Building setback. When parking is not provided in the front yard of a lot or building, the building
setback from a publicly dedicated internal road shall not be less than 25 feet and such setback from
all other internal private roads shall be determined on a case by case basis. The building setback
15-153-4 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
from Rand Road, Quentin Road, Long Grove Road, and Lake-Cook Road shall not be less than 100
feet. All building setbacks shall be measured from the nearest edge of the right- of-way for the
adjacent road established at that time.
(I) Parking area setback. The parking area from publicly dedicated internal roads shall be not less than
20 feet; from Rand Road, Quentin Road, Long Grove Road, and Lake-Cook Road shall not be less
than 100 feet. All parking setbacks shall be measured from the nearest edge of the right-of- way
for the adjacent road established at that time.
(J) Parking and loading. Adequate parking and loading spaces shall be provided for any residential
development without structured parking and in no event shall the parking be less than that provided
for in § 158.33. Any multi-family residential units shall have at least 1.9 parking spaces per unit to
be provided in garages or parking structures; at least 0.5 visitor parking bays per each unit shall be
provided for any residential development without structured parking.
(Ord. O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
(1) Screening of Loading Facilities. All loading areas shall be screened from view by the use of
evergreen plant materials or masonry screen walls compatible with the building design. Screen
walls shall be softened with climbing vines or shrubs which provide color and texture. Plantings
shall totally screen at least 75% of any one wall surface within two (2) years of installation.
(K) Underground utilities. All utilities (including electric, telephone, gas and cable) shall be in- stalled
underground.
(L) Utility meters/transformers. Wall-mounted utility meters shall not be mounted on the front
elevation of a building. Wall-mounted utility meters and ground supported transformers shall be
painted to match the nearest building. If visible from residential areas or public rights-of- way,
meters and transformers shall be screened by landscaping equal in height to the tallest meter or
transformer.
(M) Roof-mounted mechanical equipment. All roof-mounted mechanical equipment including, but not
limited to, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning units (HVAC), shall be fully screened from
public view on all sides of the building by the roof structure or parapet walls. The heights of the
walls or structure shall be at least equal to the heights of the tallest rooftop element installed on the
building and shall be designed to blend with and complement the architecture of the building.
Mechanical equipment shall not raise the level of noise as measured from the property line.
(N) Trash receptacles, vehicle storage or storage of materials and containers. Trash receptacles,
vehicle storage or storage of materials and containers shall be located only in a rear or interior side
yard, enclosed by a masonry wall that is compatible with the principal structure and not less than
the height of the containers or vehicles, and, for trash receptacles, provided with gates and
vehicular access for trash deposition and collection. Where visible from residential are- as or public
rights-of-way, landscaping shall be installed surrounding the enclosure to soften its appearance.
For purposes of this chapter, trash receptacles are not considered prohibited outside storage.
Nothing in this division shall be construed as permitting the storage of hazardous or noxious
materials, or as permitting the storage of vehicles or materials for periods exceeding 24 consecutive
hours.
(O) Lighting. Lighting shall be provided as follows:
(1) All exterior lighting fixtures shall not exceed eighteen feet (18’) in height, and shall be
uniform in design throughout the parcel, and shall be so designed and placed as to confine
15-153-5 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
such artificial light levels to the lot which it serves. High-Pressure Sodium lamps in exterior
light fixtures shall be prohibited.
(2) Light spillage in excess of one-half footcandles beyond the lot line shall be prohibited,
except at points of ingress to and egress from the lot.
(3) Maximum to minimum and average to minimum uniformity ratios shall demonstrate that
an even distribution of light will be provided within the parking lot.
(4) Minimum light intensity, levels of one-quarter foot candle shall be provided over all paved
areas at all times when buildings are occupied. Maximum light intensity should be limited
to an average of one and one-quarter footcandles at property lines adjoining non-residential
uses.
(5) Light intensity levels shall be measured one foot at above grade.
(6) For building and ground surfaces the following levels of illumination shall not be
exceeded. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village may consider higher levels of
illumination for certain uses upon evidence provided to it that demonstrates that the level
of light produced from the site will not negatively impact adjacent property or the
countryside rural character of the Village. (Source: Illuminating Engineering Society of
North American, John D. Kaufman, (ed.) IES Lighting Handbook, Reference Volume and
Application Volume, IES, New York, 1981).
(a) Building and Monuments (floodlighted) Footcandles
Light surfaces 5.0
Medium light surfaces 10.0
Medium dark surfaces 15.0
Dark surfaces 20.0
(b) Parking Areas 1.0
(c) Building Entrances and Exits 0.5
Tree replacement. Removal and replacement of trees shall be in compliance with § 95.15 through
§95.25.
(P) Minimum size of plant materials. Trees and shrubs used for landscaping shall conform to the
following minimumstandards:
(1) Evergreen trees: Not less than six feet tall.
(2) Ornamental trees: Not less than eight feet tall.
(3) Shade trees: Not less than three inches in caliper, as measured six inches above grade.
(4) Shrubs: Not less than 24 inches in height, unless used for screening, in which case shrubs
shall not be less than four feet tall.
15-153-6 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
(Q) Minimum density of plant materials in and around parking areas. In and within a distance of 30
feet surrounding parking areas, not less than one tree shall be provided for each two cars. Within
parking area surrounds, not less than one tree located within a concrete curbed and ground covered
and/or shrub planted landscaped island shall be provided for each 15 cars. Evergreen trees or shrubs
shall be provided at the perimeter of all exterior parking areas where re- quired to eliminate
headlight intrusion into adjoining residential properties.
(R) Minimum density of plant materials in perimeter yards not adjacent to parking areas. In front, side
and rear yard areas, not less than one shade tree shall be provided per 20 lineal feet of length.
Foundation plantings shall be provided along the front and side elevations of all buildings and
structures to enhance the pedestrianenvironment.
(S) Useable common open space: Areas of a parcel that are to be included as usable common open
space must be clearly described on the preliminary planned development plan. All improvements
to be made in the common open space by the developer must be shown on the pre- liminary planned
development plan map. These improvements include: site grading, landscaping, playground
equipment, water bodies, walkways, roads, drives, parking areas, bike paths, recreational buildings
and facilities such as clubhouses and swimming pools, and golf courses.
(1) At least 30% of the net area of planned residential subdivisions, and mixed use planned
developments that only include residential uses; and at least 20% of the net area of mixed
use planned developments shall be usable common open space. “Useable” shall be defined
as follows:
(2) Parcel Size: Each parcel of common open space used for active recreation shall be at least
1 0,000 square feet with a minimum width of 125 feet. For trail purposes the minimum
open space width shall be 20 feet.
(3) Parcel Location: Each parcel must be accessible to all the residents it is intended to
serve. The parcels must be linked by sidewalks, bike paths or pedestrian trails.
(4) Water Coverage: Not more than 70% of the land designated as usable open space may be
covered by water on a permanent basis. Open space which is used for water drainage
purposes shall not be considered for active use.
(5) Slope: Not more than 20% of the usable open space may have a finished grade exceeding
10%. Except as specifically reviewed by the Village Plan Commission and approved by
the Board of Trustees, designated common open space reserved under a planned
development shall be held and maintained by a homeowner’s or property owners’
association. All designated common open space and/or recreational facilities shall be
dedicated as open space, and shall be so designated in the development ordinance and
planned development plat.
(Am. Ord. 02-25, passed 12-16-02)
(T) Recreational areas. In residential developments, the designated recreational areas shall be of usable
size and character; must be suitably improved for its intended use; and must equal no less than ten
(10) acres for each 1,000 residents projected to occupy the development or 10% of the gross
developable land area defined herein as the gross parcel area less that area covered by any
permanent body of water whichever is greater.
(U) Construction and maintenance of common areas.
15-153-7 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
(1) The cost of construction of any common open areas or public recreational facilities shall
be included in the letter of credit or other surety required for the public or quasi- public
improvements as more fully described in the Village Subdivision Ordinance, Chapter 155
of this Code of Ordinances. Maintenance of the buildings and grounds, and supervision of
the recreational facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner or homeowners’ or
property owners’ organizations in possession of the common open areas. Deferred
maintenance or supervision inadequate to prevent disturbance of residents and surrounding
property owners is a violation of this chapter.
(2) No portion of a planned development shall be conveyed or dedicated for public use to any
public body until the Plan Commission reviews and the Village Board approves such
conveyance or dedication.
(V) Traffic. Parcels shall share points of ingress and egress which are not less than 500 feet apart; and
not less than 100 feet from Rand Road, Lake-Cook Road, Long-Grove Road and Quentin Road;
and not less than 50 feet from all other public rights-of-way. Internal streets and rights-of- way
shall be no less than 30 feet from public collector rights-of-way and no less than ten feet from a lot
line that abuts an existing or planned residential property.
(W) Streets and rights-of-way. The Plan Commission may recommend, and the Village Board may
approve, a reduction in the required width of pavement and rights-of-way for streets pro- vided the
reduction is determined necessary and appropriate for preservation of major stands of trees or other
natural areas, and public safety or convenience is not compromised.
(X) Minimum residential floor area. Single-family residential units shall have the minimum habitable
ground floor area set forth in § 158.23 (E). One story multi-family residential units shall have a
total habitable ground floor area of not less than 1,000 habitable square feet per unit. Multi-family
residential units having more than one story shall have not less than 750 square feet of habitable
ground floor area per unit and not less than 1,250 square feet of total habitable floor area per unit.
(Ord. O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
(Y) Floor area ratio. For all parcels within the PD District, the following table shall govern floor area
ratio and lot size. The purpose of the standards in the table below is to encourage the aggregation
of smaller lots into larger zoning lots and the preparation of a master plan for such larger area
consistent with the land use and design principles recommended for the “Deer Park Center” area
(PD District) in the Village’s Comprehensive Plan.
Land Use Category Minimum Lot Size PERMITTED FLOOR AREA
RATIO
Retail:
Unified Shopping Center: 10.1 - 20+ acres 0.25 South of Long Grove Road
0.20 North of Long Grove Road
Convenience Retail/Business
Center (more than one business per
zoning lot):***
5 acres 0.15
5.1 - 10 acres 0.20
Free Standing Retail Business (no
more than one building per zoning
lot):
1 - 5 acres 0.10
15-153-8 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
5.1+ acres 0.15
Office/Research 50.1+ acres 0.35 South of Long Grove Road
20.1 - 50 acres 0.30 South of Long Grove Road
0.20 North of Long Grove Road
10.1 - 20 acres 0.25 South of Long Grove Road
0.20 North of Long Grove Road
4.5 - 10 acres 0.20
Mixed Use* (see note below) 50.1+ acres 0.35
20.1 - 50 acres 0.30
10 - 20 acres 0.25
Residential** (see note below)
* The floor area ratio for mixed use planned developments may be increased by 0.10 if the different
uses are integrated into a multi-story building or complex of building planned as a compact,
pedestrian oriented development.
** The amount of gross floor area devoted to residential uses in a mixed use planned development
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total gross floor area of an actual mixed use planned
development proposal. Nursing homes, congregate care, sheltered care and other similar uses shall
be deemed to be residential for purposes of this computation.
*** Shopping and convenience retail/business centers shall not be permitted in the PD District on
less than five (5) acres for properties north of Long GroveRoad.
(Am. Ord. 02-25, passed 12-16-02)
(AA) Architectural Character. To further the design objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, each facade
of a building that faces a public street shall comply with the following architectural guidelines:
(1) All facades of a building that are visible from a public street should be similar in materials,
color and architectural design by featuring design elements similar to a front facade. Long
architectural facades shall incorporate architectural elements, landscape elements or both,
to interrupt the uniformity of the facade.
(Ord. passed 8-17-97; Am. Ord. 99-10, passed 3-15-99)
§153.16 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY.
(A) For all planned developments, the following standards shall govern the determination of
residential density:
(1) Base Density for Properties in the Planned Development District
(a) For residential planned developments that are either not adjacent to a commercial
use or are greater or equal to 5 acres in size, the net density shall be 5.15 dwelling
units per net acre.
(b) For residential planned developments adjacent to a commercial use, less than 5
acres in size, and both adjoining and south of Long Grove Road, the net density
shall be 6.2 dwelling units per net acre.
(2) Residential Density Bonuses
15-153-9 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
To encourage excellence in design the following density bonuses may be totaled to yield
an allowed percentage increase over the maximum base density allowed in Section
153.16(A)(1) above. In no case shall the cumulative density increase exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the permitted base density. The percentage of common open space in the PD tract
should not be reduced below the minimum required by Section 153.15(T) above to
accommodate increased density allowed by this bonus provision.
(a) Landscaped Buffer Yard: One (1%) percent for each twenty feet (20’) in width in
addition to the buffer yard and set back requirements in this Article, not to exceed
three percent (3%).
(b) Landscaping: For excellence in creativity of design, quality and quantity of
landscaping beyond the requirements of this Article a bonus of up to two percent
(2%) will beallowed.
(c) Swimming Pool: One percent (1%) for each outdoor pool and two percent (2%)
for each indoor pool, not to exceed six percent (6%).
(d) Tennis Courts: One percent (1%) for each tennis court, not to exceed two percent
(2%).
(e) Community Center and/or Club Building: Up to five percent (5%) for a community
center and/or club building.
(f) Municipal Facility: Up to five percent (5%) for land donations for a municipal
facility; and up to ten percent (10%) for donations of land and structure(s) for
such facilities.
(g) Open Space: Up to one percent (1%) for each five percent (5%) of additional
common open space above that required by this Section.
(Am. Ord. 02-25, passed 12-16-02)
§153.17 RAND ROAD LANDSCAPING GUIDELINES.
(A) Policy. Lake County has directed a regional effort to improve the character of development along
Rand Road in the Village and neighboring communities. The landscaping guidelines described in
detail in this section are designed to be incorporated into new developments and re- developments
along Rand Road. The Village shall consider the extent to which these guidelines should be
integrated into the landscape and site plans in its review of an application for a Planned
Development. The Village will evaluate landscape and site plans on a case by casebasis.
(B) Intensity of Screening/Buffering
(1) Partially obscure or soften visibility of parking lots landscaping (staggered landscaped
berms or preserved natural vegetation)
(2) Preserve visibility of signage (yet soften effect with complementarylandscaping)
(3) Minimum Landscape Buffering for Buildings: Medium to High for Industrial and Office
(50 - 75% opacity); Low to Medium for Retail (30-50% opacity); Medium for Residential
(50%opacity)
15-153-10 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
(C) Degree and Type of Organization in Landscaping
(1) Generally avoid manicured/”controlled” appearance
(2) Preserve and enhance existing woodlands
(3) Plant random clusters of trees, rather than rows of trees
(4) Group like species only to a degree that would maintain continuity or “make a statement”
(5) Limit formal landscaping to small/tight areas
(D) Vegetation in Landscaping
(1) Cluster varieties of species sizes (canopies interspersed with understories, bushes and
groundcover)
(2) Provide a complementary mix of deciduous and evergreen, while emphasizing deciduous
species
(3) Emphasize hardy native species (limit predominance of non-native or ornamental species)
(4) Incorporate groundcover and/or bushes into landscaping, while limiting predominance of
groundcover and/or bushes
(5) Minimize use of formal hedges for screening
(6) Establish minimum thresholds for seasonal colors:
(a) 20% Species Providing Spring Colors
(b) 20% Species Providing Autumn Colors
(c) Predominance of White Flowering Species in Spring Mix
(d) Predominance of Yellow Coloring in AutumnMix
(e) Preferred Annuals/Perennials: Black Eyed Susans, Stela D’Oros, Sedums, Daisies
(E) Earthen Berms and Other Structures in Landscaping
(1) Emphasize naturalized berms (with plantings throughout contour of berm) over “naked”
or grassedberms
(2) Vary height and setbacks of berms
(3) Maintain swales for positive drainage and appearance
(4) Provide soft massings of landscaping to complement signage and to provide a focal point,
while not impairing visibility of buildings nor impairing traffic safety
(5) Emphasize solid structures (masonry, earthen structures) over semi-transparent structures
(fences)
15-153-11 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
(6) Limit height of retaining walls to below 42 inches where practical
(F) Paths for Bikes/Pedestrians
(1) Integrate pathways into landscaping to soften visibility and preserve pedestrian and/or bike
safety; provide at sizable distance from roadway where practical
(G) Width of Landscaped Yard
(1) Assume ultimate right-of-way in calculation.
(2) For new development, landscaped yard should take into account at least 100-foot building
and parking lot setbacks; with a variance of not more than 50 feet for practical difficulties.
(3) For renovation or expansion of existing businesses, efforts shall be made to incorporate
elements of the preceding landscaping guidelines and setbacks, where practical.
(Ord. 00-14, passed 7-7-00)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§153.25 PROCEDURES FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.
(A) Administration.
(1) Because planned developments are unique and substantially different from conventional
developments, they shall be administered as special uses, in accordance with procedures
set forth in §158.21.
(Ord. O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
(2) Applications shall be delivered to the Village Administrator and shall be accompanied by
the required plans, drawings, documents and other information. Applications, plans, and
other documentation shall be reviewed by the Village Administrator for all submittal
requirements, for pre-application, preliminary or final plan review, before forwarding to
the Commission Chairman, Commission or the Village.
(3) Planned developments shall be controlled by means of development ordinances prepared
by the Village Attorney, and approved by the Village Board subsequent to approval of
preliminary and final plans. The development ordinance shall include graphics and other
support documentation upon which Village Board approval is based. The development
ordinance shall also specify any conditions of approval established by the Village Board.
(4) Ordinances approving preliminary and final plans may provide for exceptions from district
regulations governing use, density, area, bulk, and parking, and the subdivision design
standards, as may be desirable to achieve the objectives of the proposed planned
development, provided such exceptions are consistent with the standards and criteria
contained in this chapter.
(5) If, after approval of the preliminary plan, no application is made for final approval, the
preliminary plans shall be declared null and void after a 2-year time period. If substantial
construction has not been started on any phase of the development within 2 years from the
date of approval of the final plan, the permits shall be declared null and void and the project
15-153-12 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
shall not be initiated unless it is resubmitted and reapproved in the same manner that it was
approved in the first instance. The Village Board, however, may extend the period for
validity of the preliminary plan or for initiating construction under the final plan within its
sole discretion or upon written request by the property owner upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause. The decision whether to grant such an extension shall be made within the
Village Board’s sole discretion.
(B) Pre-application procedure (mandatory).
(1) Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a planned development, the petitioner
shall contact the Village Administrator to arrange an informal meeting with the
Commission Chairperson. The Commission Chairperson may request the presence of the
Village Planning Consultant, the Village Engineer, the Village Attorney or other
consultants to the Village. Costs associated with such consultant appearances at the preapplication
meeting shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(2) The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to discuss the proposed development in
conjunction with Village planning and zoning objectives, as expressed in the
Comprehensive Plan, and as set forth within this chapter.
(3) At or before the pre-application meeting, the petitioner shall provide ten copiesof:
(a) A sketch plan describing the proposed development and surrounding area in
sufficient detail to demonstrate the relationship of the planned development to
adjoining uses, both existing and planned, and to the topography and natural
features of the adjoining land uses. The sketch plan shall include:
1. North arrow, scale, and date of preparation.
2. Name and address of site planner or surveyor who prepared theplan.
3. Proposed land uses, including acreage and percent of the site devoted to
each land use.
4. Proposed layouts of streets, lots, and blocks.
5. Proposed building footprints, and, as appropriate, estimated floor area of
all nonresidential structures and density of residential structures.
6. Location of parking areas, number of spaces to be provided, and method
used to calculate the number of requires spaces.
7. Wetlands, floodplain, and drainage characteristics including topographic
contour lines with a minimum of ten-foot intervals.
8. Major stands of trees and other significant vegetative areas.
9. Location, extent and general type of landscaping to be provided
including any existing features to be retained.
10. Proposed water provider and proposed method of wastewater treatment
and disposal.
11. Any other data reasonably necessary to provide an accurate overview of
15-153-13 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
the proposed development.
(b) A brief written statement that contains a general description of the planned
development, a legal description, a statement of present ownership, a preliminary
implementation schedule, proposed zoning, and municipal and school district
boundaries.
(4) The Commission Chairperson shall review the proposed sketch plan and other
documentation, and shall advise the petitioner as to the compatibility of the planned
development with the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Code (Chapter 158), Subdivision
Regulations (Chapter 155), and the goals and policies for the planning of the Village.
Recommendations relative to a pre-application review are advisory only, and shall not
constitute a waiver from the requirements contained in the Village Code.
(5) The Commission Chairperson may, in his/her discretion, require plans and support
documentation to be revised before acceptance of the preliminary pan for review. This may
require additional meetings between the petitioner and the Commission Chairperson, to
assure that the proposed planned development conforms, to the maximum extent possible,
with the applicable code provisions, goals, and policies of the Village.
(6) When deemed desirable by the Commission Chairperson, Village staff or consultants shall
prepare a written summary report which shall be forwarded to the Commission and Village
Board.
(C) Site development plan preliminary review.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the site development plan is to obtain a recommendation from the
Commission and preliminary approval by the Village Board that all plans and programs
that the petitioner intends to build and follow are acceptable, and that the petitioner can
reasonably proceed with preparation of detailed architecture, engineering, and site and
landscape plans. The site development plan is more developed than the sketch plan required
for pre-application, and is meant to assure the petitioner that final plans will be approved
if they substantially conform to the approved preliminary plan.
(2) Procedure.
(a) A request for preliminary approval which must be signed by the owner of records
of a planned development shall be submitted to the Village Administrator, who
will forward the request to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees will refer
the matter to the Plan Commission for public hearing, report and recommendation.
(b) Be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as required by §158.54 and one or more
deposits, all as required by Chapter 38, “Reimbursement for Professional Fees and
Other Expenses,” of Title III, “Administration”, and said Chapter 38 shall be
applicable to all requests for pre-application review and all requests for
preliminary and/or final planned development approval.
(Am. Ord. 05-09, passed 8-15-05; Am. Ord. 2013-25, passed 10-21-13, O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
(c) Include all information and documentation required by this section, unless
specifically waived in writing, in quantities, formand size specified by theVillage.
(d) Preliminary and final subdivision plans must be filed and processed consecutively,
15-153-14 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
not simultaneously.
(3) Submittals. Subsequent to referral by the Village Board, the petitioner shall file 18 copies
of plans and other supporting documentation, as identified below, with the Village
Administrator. Once all required drawings and information has been received, the Village
Administrator shall distribute the preliminary plan submittal to the Commission. The
petitioner shall deliver copies of all such documents to the other reviewers designated by
the Village Administrator. Required plans and support documentation shall be submitted
no later than 30 calendar days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission,
to assure adequate time for review by staff and members of the Commission, Village staff,
and its consultants. Required submittals shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
(a) Information and documentation required for a site development plan by §158.38,
except as otherwise provided herein.
(b) Plans and surveys at a scale of 100 feet to the inch (1” = 100”), unless the area of
the site is more than 200 acres, in which case said plans and surveys may be
submitted that are 200 feet to the inch (1” = 200’). The following information shall
be provided:
1. Boundary survey: A boundary line survey of the subject site prepared
and certified by a registered land surveyor.
2. Easements: Location, width, and purpose.
3. Streets on and adjacent to the proposed development:
a. Street name, right-of-way width, existing or proposed center line
elevations, pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, andthe
like.
b. Public utilities information, including the location and size of
existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water lines both on the
site and in easements and rights-of-way immediately adjacent to
the site, including gas, electric, telephone and cable; and a
statement from the petitioner’s engineer attesting to the capability
of existing sewer systems to service the proposed development.
4. Other conditions of the parcel: watercourses; flood plains; marshes; rock
outcrop; wooded areas; soils with limitations that may make them
unsuitable for building, road construction and septic fields as defined by
the Soil Conservation Service of Lake County, Illinois; preservable trees
six inches in caliper, as measured 12 inches above grade; houses; barns;
accessory buildings and other significant features on the parcel and their
relationship to adjoining land.
5. Topography: Existing topographic character of the land with contours
shown at intervals no greater than two feet.
6. General directions of the storm water run-off across theproperty.
7. Site Plan: The proposed site plan shall be superimposed upon the
15-153-15 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
topographic map prepared for the site. The proposed site plan shall contain
all the information required at the pre-application stage, as well as the
following:
a. Name and address of the site planner, engineer, architect and
landscape architect
b. Proposed name of the planned development.
c. Proposed water, sanitary and storm sewer systemdesigns.
d. Acres and percent of the planned development devoted to each
land use.
e. Percent of the parcel devoted to streets and publicrights-of-way.
f. Percent of the parcel devoted to usable upon space.
g. Percent of impervious surface.
h. Percent of the parcel devoted to common open space.
i. Off-street parking and service loading areas, including number
and dimensions of parking spaces, drive aisles and loading zones.
j. Configuration and acreage of all land proposed to be dedicated as
common open space and all sites to be conveyed, dedicated, or
reserved for parks, playgrounds, school sites, public buildings,
and similar public and quasi-public uses.
k. Pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation systems. Parkway and
greenbelt system.
l. Location of proposed trash bins and enclosures.
m. Any other data reasonably necessary to provide an accurate
overview of the proposeddevelopment.
8. Grading Plan: The grading plan shall show both existing and proposed
contours and elevations for the entire planned development, and shall
identify all areas proposed for excavation and/or filling of the property.
9. Landscape Plan: The landscape plan shall be superimposed on the grading
plan, and shall include:
a. Any proposed fences, walls, berms, and entrymonuments.
b. Contours for any landscaped berms.
c. One or more sections through the site to illustrate the relationship
between the landscape materials, the land form, proposed
buildings, and nearby residential properties. Locations of all trees
15-153-16 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
and shrubs, keyed into a plant list which identifies species, sizes
and quantities for all proposed plantings.
d. Methods of screening any trash bins and enclosures.
10. Photometric Plan: The plan shall be superimposed in the site plan, and
shall:
a. Identify the location and heights of all light standards.
b. Identify on the site plan all lighting fixture foot candle intensities
on the site of the planned development, and extending ten feet
beyond the proposed property line.
c. Include specifications for proposed lighting, including fixture
cuts, wattage, method of illumination, and color of light standards
and luminaries.
11. Plan Documentation: The proposed site plan shall be accompanied by the
following written and graphic documentation:
a. Statement of present Ownership, including:
- Title Insurance Policy or most recent deed of record.
--
Disclosure of ownership.
--
Letters of authorization.
--
Owners of Beneficial Interest.
- Contract Purchasers.
b. A description of contiguity, when proposed for annexation.
c. Preliminary estimates of fiscal impact to the Village and all other
applicable districts and authorities attributable to the planned
development, including street, wastewater, water, schools, and
parks.
d. A school demographic study.
e. Preliminary implementation schedule, including:
The approximate dates for initiating project construction.
Phasing and anticipated date of completion for each phase.
The area and location of common space that will be provided
with each phase.
The mix of uses proposed for implementation within each phase
of a mixed use planned development.
15-153-17 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
12. Architectural Drawings: Preliminary architectural drawings for all preliminary
buildings shall be submitted which include:
a. Typical elevations for proposed buildings which identify
materials and colors for all elements of the building.
b. Gross floor area for all commercial buildings.
c. The type and number of dwelling units for any residential land
uses.
d. Minimum and maximum habitable floor areas for residential
buildings, excluding garages, basements, porches, andpatios.
e. Proposed building heights.
f. Roof plan for all nonresidential and multi-family structures which
shows the proposed location of all roof-mounted mechanical
equipment.
g. Cross-sections of all nonresidential and multi-family residential
structures which show the relationship of the roof structure and/or
parapet wall to proposed roof mounted equipment.
13. Protective Covenants: If required or desirable, proposed covenants shall
be prepared and submitted which include:
a. Architectural controls for residential dwellings, including:
Minimum floor area, excluding garages, basements, porches, and
patios.
Materials.
Provisions for dedication and maintenance of all open space and
common area.
b. Traffic impact study, prepared by a traffic engineer,which:
Identifies anticipated volumes of traffic to be generated by each
phase of the planned development.
Includes required public roadway improvements and/or traffic
regulation devices needed to insure the proper safety or traffic
circulation to, through, and around the planned development.
A list of all requested exceptions to the applicable Village Codes
Provisions.
Other information determined by the Village Administrator to
be necessary to clearly describe the planneddevelopment.
15-153-18 Title XV
(04/19)
____________________________________________________________________________________
§153.26 BUILDING REVIEW BOARD.
(A) Building Review Board. A Building Review Board is hereby established consisting of five
members: Commission chairman, President and, as the President may appoint, two members of
the Commission, and a Village Trustee.
(B) Major Deviations. Any major deviation from any of the approved final plans or otherwise any
provision of an ordinance approving or amending a planned development shall require an
amendment to such ordinance approved by the Board of Trustees acting with the
recommendation of the Commission.
(C) Minor Deviations. Any minor deviation from an approved final plan, or otherwise any provision
of an ordinance approving or amending a planned development, or architectural and landscape
review for a building(s) for which the owner/developer has not submitted plans, shall require
only an administrative review by the Building Review Board.
(D) Insignificant Deviations. Owner/developer shall have the right to make any insignificant
deviations, as determined by the Administrator, without administrative review or any further
action on behalf of the owner/developer or Village.
(E) Deviations. The Administrator shall determine if a change proposed by an owner/developer shall
be processed as a major deviation, minor deviation or an insignificant deviation.
(F) Appeal. All decisions of the Building Review Board, Commission and Administrator shall be
final and binding. Owner/developer may appeal the rulings of the Building Review Board,
Commission and the Administrator to the Board of Trustees within 30 days after the decision of
the Building Review Board, Commission and/or Administrator.
(‘77 Code, § 20.05) (Ord. passed 3-16-98, Amd. Ord. 2013-25, passed 10/21/13; Amd. Ord. 17-04, passed
3-21-17; Amd. Ord. 17-19, passed 10-19-17)
CHAPTER 154: GRADE ALTERATIONS, EXCAVATION AND FILLING
Section
§154.01 Permit Required
§154.02 Permission Required for Excavation and Filling; Exceptions
§154.03 Application for Permit
§154.04 Conditions for Approval; Hearing
§154.05 Contour and Grade Requirements
§154.06 Top Soil Retention
§154.07 Bond Requirement
§154.08 Fees and Costs
§154.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed nor shall any filling or regrading be performed
under the provisions of this chapter, unless a permit therefor shall have been first obtained as provided
herewith, and no excavation shall be made, no soil shall be removed, no filling shall be done and no
regrading shall be performed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(‘77 Code, § 15.07) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5-18-81) Penalty, see § 10.99
§154.02 PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION AND FILLING; EXCEPTIONS.
No person shall remove or excavate soil or fill existing properties without first having received
permission from the Board of Trustees, except in connection with.
(A) The construction or alteration of a building on such premises and excavation or normal grading
incidental thereto;
(B) The relocation of soil on his property by the homeowner in residence on property up to five acres,
for the purpose of improved landscaping or gardening, provided such relocation of soil does not
affect any drainageways on or drainage to or from the subject property; or
(C) Filling of land performed in conjunction with the construction, repair or replacement of a septic
field approved by the Village under Chapter 51 of the Village Code.
(‘77 Code, § 15.01) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5-18-81) Penalty, see § 10.99
§154.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
The Board of Trustees shall not consider any application for the removal of soil from the premises for sale
or otherwise unless and until the owner of the premises shall first file with the Village Clerk an
application requesting such permission, together with a map of the premises showing the contour lines
and grades resulting from such intended removal of soil in relation to the topography of the premises, and
the proposed contour lines and proposed grades shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
Board of Trustees. No such permission for soil removal shall be issued until such map has been filed, and
until the proposed contour lines and grades have been approved by the Board of Trustees.
(‘77 Code, § 15.01) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5-18-81)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
15-154-1 Title XV
(Rev. 05/12)
§154.04 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL; HEARING.
(A) The Board of Trustees, in considering and reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision
shall consult the Village Engineer as necessary and shall be guided and take into consideration the
public health, safety and general welfare, and particular consideration shall be given to the
following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Existing and proposed storm water runoff characteristics.
(7) Potential effects on adjacent lands and improvements.
(8) Potential effects on the aquifer recharge capacity and water tables.
(9) Sedimentation.
(10) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious physical development of the Village.
(B) In the event permission is not granted, the applicant, upon written request for a hearing made to the
Board of Trustees, shall be given an opportunity to be heard within 30 days thereafter.
(C) After examining the application, and the plan provided for in § 154.03, or after the hearing, in the
event a hearing is requested by the applicant, the Board of Trustees shall grant the requested permit
if it can be determined that the proposed soil removal, excavation, filling or regrading will not
create conditions inimical to the public health, welfare and safety, and will not result in the creation
of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land
values, nor create any drainage, sewerage or storm water diversion problems or other conditions of
danger. Such permit shall be effective for a period of time to be determined by the Board of
Trustees.
(‘77 Code, § 15.03) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5-18-81)
§154.05 CONTOUR AND GRADE REQUIREMENTS.
If a permit to remove the soil, excavate, fill or regrade shall be granted, the owner or person in charge
shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions, or change in the
flow of storm water off the site and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of
debris, and graded to conform with the contour lines, and grades as approved by the Board of Trustees or,
if so designated by the Board of Trustees, the Village Engineer.
(‘77 Code, § 15.04) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5-18-81)
§154.06 TOP SOIL RETENTION.
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil, excavation, filling or regrading,
when a permit has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer of arable soil for a depth of ten
inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a depth of ten inches shall be set aside for retention on the
premises, and shall be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed, excavated,
filled or regraded pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Village Engineer.
(‘77 Code, § 15.05) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5-18-81) Penalty, see § 10.99
_____________________________________________________________________________________
15-154-2 Title XV
(Rev. 05/12)
§154.07 BOND REQUIREMENT.
Before any permit for soil removal, excavation, filling, grading or regrading shall be granted or issued, the
owner or applicant shall file with the Board of Trustees, a bond, in form and with acceptable surety, if
required, in such amount, but not less than $5,000, as shall be deemed sufficient to insure the faithful
performance of the work to be undertaken and to insure the repair of damages, if any to Village streets
and roadways resulting from such work.
(‘77 Code, § 15.06) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5-18-81; Am. Ord. 87-7, passed 8-17-87)
§154.08 FEES AND COSTS.
All fees and costs incurred by the Village and related to an application for a permit for soil removal,
excavation, filling or regrading and the Village Engineer’s engineering plan review, periodic inspections,
final inspections and approval for release of bond shall be paid by the owner or applicant. At its
discretion, the Board of Trustees may instruct the Village Engineer to estimate such fees and costs and
require the owner or applicant to deposit a like amount with the Village Clerk. The amount shall be
returned to the owner or applicant upon proof of payment of such fees and costs or, in the event that the
owner or applicant fails to make such payment, such fees and costs shall be paid out of the amount
deposited. (‘77 Code, § 15.08) (Am. Ord. 81-6, passed 5/18/81)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
15-154-3 Title XV
(Rev. 05/12)
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-1
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
§155.01 Jurisdiction; Submission of Subdivision Plans Required
§155.02 Approval of Subdivision Plat; Proof of Performance
§155.03 Compliance Required
§155.04 Definitions
§155.05 Water Supply and Sanitary Sewerage Systems; Compliance Required
§155.06 Installation of Street Signs
§155.07 Landscaping Requirements Within Subdivision
§155.08 Buildings of Similar Architectural Design
Plan and Plat Procedure; Requirements
§155.20 Tentative Plan
§155.21 Repealed
§155.22 Action by Subdivider; Submission Requirements
§155.23 Final Plat
§155.24 Fees; Escrow Requirements
§155.25 Conditions of Final Acceptance; Return of Funds
Subdivision Design Standards
§155.35 Conformance to Comprehensive Plan
§155.36 Rights-of-Way of Streets
§155.37 Street Arrangement
§155.38 Lot Standards
§155.39 Reserved for Future Use
§155.40 Street Improvements
Permits
§155.55 Requirements for Issuance of Building Permits
§155.56 Occupancy Permits
Dedication of School Grounds, Fire/Rescue Sites or Capital Facilities, and Park Lands
and Library Lands, or Payment of Cash Contributions in Lieu Thereof
§155.60.00 Legislative Intent
§155.60.01 Criteria for Requiring School Grounds Dedications
§155.60.02 Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreational Land Dedications
§155.60.03 Fire/Rescue Capital Facilities Contributions and Site Dedication
§155.60.04 Criteria for Requiring Library Site Dedication
§155.60.05 Criteria for Requiring a Cash Contribution in Lieu of Dedication of School, Park,
Library and Fire/Rescue Sites
§155.60.06 Adjustment to Fair Market Value
§155.60.07 Density Formula
§155.60.08 Reservation of Additional Land
§155.60.09 Combining With Adjoining Developments
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-2
§155.60.10 Topography and Grading
§155.60.11 Improved Sites
§155.60.12 Environmental Risk Audit
§155.60.13 Suitability of Soils at Site
§155.60.14 Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats
§155.60.15 Real Estate Tax Escrow
§155.60.16 Objections
§155.60.17 Condition to Annexation
§155.60.18 Indemnification
§155.60.19 Distribution
§155.60.20 Needs Assessment; Land and Capital Facilities Acquisition Plan
§155.60.21 Time of Payment
§155.60.22 Miscellaneous
Exhibit A Agreement Regarding Receipt of Developer Subdivision Contributions
Exhibit B Agreement Between Developer and Municipality to Delay Cash Contributions
Exhibit C Table of Estimated Ultimate School Population per Dwelling Unit
Administration and Enforcement
§155.70 Approval of Plan Commission Required
§155.71 Inspection at Subdivider’s Expense
§155.72 Variations
§155.99 Penalty
Appendix A: New Road Construction
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§155.01 JURISDICTION; SUBMISSION OF SUBDIVISION PLANS REQUIRED.
Whenever any subdivision of land shall be laid out after March 21, 1960 within the corporate limits of the
Village or within contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the incorporated
boundaries of the Village as reflected by the official plan, the subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit
a tentative and a final subdivision plan to the Plan Commission of the Village. Plans shall in all respects
be in full compliance with the regulations hereinafter set forth, it being the purpose of this chapter to
safeguard the health and public welfare, in particular, to preserve the Village as a residential community.
(‘77 Code, §23.01)
§155.02 APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAT; PROOF OF PERFORMANCE.
(A) A subdivider or his agent shall submit for approval by the Plan Commission and/or Village Board
a plat of the whole subdivision proposed. All public improvements must be stipulated on the
plat. When the subdivision is to be developed in sections, those sections must be so stipulated on
the plat and conform with requirements below.
(B) Upon approval of the whole plat a subdivider or his agent may develop the subdivision
and construct the public improvements in stages or sections as follows:
Total Subdivision Area Maximum Number of Sections
100 acres and more 3 sections minimum of 30 acres at a time
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-3
50 - 99 acres 2 sections minimum of 20 acres at a time
Less than 50 acres All public improvements must be constructed for total
subdivisions as one section
(C) Public improvements shall include:
(1) Roads;
(2) Drainage facilities;
(3) Sanitary and water facilities; and
(4) All other work related to public improvements that maybe required.
(D) Proof of performance shall consist of the following:
(1) An owner, subdivider or his agent shall post an acceptable performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit from a reputable financial institution in favor of the Village equal to
125% of the estimated cost of any and all improvements to be constructed as provided
herein and the estimate shall be determined by the Village Engineer in connection with
the submission of any and all plans and specifications, and plats of subdivision filed
in connection with this chapter and the 125% bond shall be posted prior to approval of
the final plat of subdivision, and shall automatically be forfeitable if the work covered
by the bond is not fully performed within three years from the approval by the Village of
the final plat of subdivision.
(2) If the subdivision is to be developed in two or more sections, the Village Board may
in its discretion allow the subdivider to post a performance bond or irrevocable letter of
credit in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of improvements for the first
section only of the subdivision. However, the amount of such performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit shall not be reduced or cancelled until all improvements for
the entire subdivision which are secured thereby are constructed, except for reductions
which may be approved in the discretion of the Village Board upon the review and recommendation
of the Village Engineer where such reduction does not impair the security
of the Village for the uncompleted improvements, and provided further that the amount
of such performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be increased as necessary
for any subsequent section of the subdivision to an amount equal to 125% of the estimated
cost of improvements for such section.
(E) Before construction of public improvements can be started in another section of the same subdivision,
all public improvements must be completed in the previous section. The sole exception
to this is the final blacktopping of the roads where proper time must be allowed for settling.
(F) The Village shall require that all work on public improvements by the subdivider shall be inspected
and reviewed, on a periodic basis, by the Village Engineer. All expense for this inspection
and review shall be charged to the subdivider. After the improvements are complete,
the subdivider shall at its own expense provide “as built” drawings which shall be a prerequisite
for release of the subdivider’s performance bond referred to in division (D) of this section. All
subdividers shall be notified of these requirements upon submission of a plat of subdivision to
the Village Plan Commission.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-4
(‘77 Code, §23.02) (Amd. Ord. 85-3 passed 3-18-85) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.03 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is within the Village or within the unincorporated jurisdiction
area of one and one-half miles closest to the then existing boundary line of the Village, except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (‘77 Code, §23.03) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ARTERIAL STREET. A street designed to provide for heavy traffic of considerable continuity and
used primarily as a traffic artery for intercommunication between the several areas of the Village
and its surrounding territory.
LOT. A parcel of land in a subdivision separated from other parcels by virtue of a graphic division on
the subdivision plat. The area of a lot is not to include any part of a road or street whether dedicated
or not.
OFFICIAL PLAN. The comprehensive plan adopted by the corporate authorities, including its official
map together with all changes and amendments officially adopted from time to time by the Village
Board.
OWNER. The individual, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal
entity having a proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided.
STREET. The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of travel and transportation.
SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots for the purpose of building development
and for which a plat of subdivision shall be recorded with the Lake County, Illinois, Recorder
of Deeds.
(‘77 Code, §23.04) (Am. Ord. 88-2 passed 2-15-88)
§155.05 WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEMS; COMPLIANCE
REQUIRED.
(A) Public water supply and/or sewerage systems shall comply with the requirements of the Illinois
Sanitary Water Board. All construction work shall be subject to inspection by representatives
of the Board and by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall be notified in writing of
the start of construction work at least 48 hours prior to its beginning.
(B) Private water supply and sanitary sewerage systems (all systems not under the jurisdiction of
the Illinois Sanitary Water Board) shall comply with the all relevant Federal, Illinois, Lake County
and Village laws, ordinances and regulations.
(C) For certain properties in the area bounded by Quentin, Lake Cook and Rand Roads (the “TrianTitle
XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-5
gle”), there is a Lake Michigan water allocation assigned, with a further allocation reserved to the
Village to be allocated in its discretion, as determined by an Intergovernmental Agreement with
the Village of Palatine entered into on August 9, 1999. Therefore, for all properties being subdivided
within the Triangle area, the following process must be followed:
(1) The owner or subdivider must apply to the Village to allocate water rights in accordance
with the Intergovernmental Agreement with the Village of Palatine entered into on
August 9, 1999 and with the relevant ordinances of the Village.
(2) Upon application for subdivision, the owner or subdivider should refer to relevant sections
of the Water Allocation Ordinance, contained in Chapter 52 of the Municipal Code.
(3) Once the final plat of subdivision is approved, the Village will certify the memorandum
of division of water allocation and record with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds
against all properties affected by the division.
(4) If necessary, the Village will then notify the Village of Palatine in writing to memorialize
the water allocation division as an amendment to Exhibit 9 of the Intergovernmental
Agreement with the Village of Palatine entered into on August 9, 1999.
(‘77 Code, §23.07) Penalty, see §155.99 (Ord. 00-15 passed 7-17-00)
§155.06 INSTALLATION OF STREET SIGNS.
After completion of any and all improvements within a subdivision and after the improvements have been
accepted by the Village, the Village shall cause to be constructed certain street signs at all intersections
within the subdivision. However, the expense of construction of the signs shall be borne by the subdivider
and shall be done at the subdivider’s expense. In connection herewith, the subdivider shall deposit the
sum of $200 per intersection to be used by the Village for the construction, and the sums shall be
deposited prior to approval of the final plat of subdivision and in all such cases the funds deposited shall
be nonrefundable. (‘77 Code, §23.16)
§155.07 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS WITHIN SUBDIVISION.
The following requirements are made for the planting of new trees within a subdivision:
(A) The developer shall be required to plant a minimum of two trees on each subdivided lot
that contains less than two existing trees of two and one-half inches or more in diameter. In the
case of a corner lot, three trees shall be required. (Some examples: Oak-Burr, White, Red,
Black, Pin; Hickory, Black Walnut, Basswood, Ash; Conifers; Russian Olive; Flowering
Crabs; Locust and others when approved.)
(B) All trees shall be of a caliper of not less than two and one-half inches and the developer
shall furnish certification that the trees are free from disease.
(C) All trees shall be transplanted stock; the transplanting shall be done prior to the Village’s acceptance
of the public improvements of the subdivision.
(D) All trees shall be planted outside of the area where a septic field is to be situated.
(E) Trees shall be planted at least four feet from any paved area on or adjacent to any subdivided lot.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-6
(F) Proper maintenance and care shall be given to all newly planted trees and shall be replaced by
the developer if not healthy within one year following the date of planting.
(G) The following trees due to their undesirable traits, that is, subject to disease, insects, root structures
nuisance, litter, and reseeding problems, are not acceptable within the Village: Elms, Poplars,
Box Elders, Soft Maples and Hackberry.
(‘77 Code, §23.20) (Ord. 78-2 passed 2-18-78) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.08 BUILDINGS OF SIMILAR ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN.
(A) No building permit shall be issued for any new building or for remodeling or alteration of
an existing building which, if erected, remodeled, or altered would result in single family
homes of similar design defined herein as having substantially identical facades or floor plans, existing
within 1,000 feet of each other.
(B) Whenever the Building Inspector or the Zoning Officer of the Village finds that the erection,
Remodeling or alteration of a single-family residence for which application for a building
permit has been made, may result in buildings of similar design existing within 1,000 feet of each
other he shall refer the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 20 days of receiving
the referral of any application, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing which shall
be open to the public. The Chairperson shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing.
The applicant shall be given the opportunity of submitting oral and written testimony at such
hearing.
(C) All decisions and findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals will be referred to the Village
Board with report and recommendations per the procedures stated in §§157.090 through 157.101.
(‘77 Code, §23.21) (Ord. 78-1 passed 1-16-78)
PLAN AND PLAT PROCEDURE; REQUIREMENTS
§155.20 TENTATIVE PLAN.
(A) Any person owning land within the limits of the Village or within one and one-half miles of
such limits, wishing to divide the same into lots for the purpose of sale, or wishing to resubdivide
land previously subdivided, or to change the boundaries of any lots or parcels thereof, shall
first submit to the Village, 15 days prior to the regular monthly meeting of the Village Plan
Commission, ten copies of a tentative sketch plan and a written application for preliminary approval
accompanied by an application fee in accordance with §155.24 which fee will be deductible
from the general subdivision fees when and if the final plat is approved or not approved
by the Village Board. Such application shall be made to the Plan Commission in accordance
with all statutory laws, local ordinances and state and local regulations and all rules,
regulations and standards heretofore adopted by the Plan Commission or Board of Trustees of the
Village.
(B) The tentative plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show:
(1) The boundaries of the property to be subdivided and/or dedicated indicating the section
and half section lines if any, including significant topography showing creeks, streams,
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-7
natural ponds, lakes, marshes, swamps and sloughs.
(2) Sizes of lots (can be approximate pending final engineering surveys).
(3) Street widths and corner radii, and a profile map of streets shown on map.
(4) All existing easements or rights-of-way.
(5) Tentative grades of streets.
(6) Existing sewers, water mains, wells, springs, seeps, culverts, septic systems (including filter
fields) or other underground facilities within the tract or adjacent to the tract, indicating
pipe sizes, grades, manholes and exact locations, and storm and sanitary sewer outfalls.
(7) Position of existing and proposed monuments.
(8) Location of available public service (gas, water, electricity).
(9) Contour lines at intervals of not more than ten feet.
(10) Open spaces, if any, to be dedicated for public parks or playgrounds or other public uses
and location and use of all property reserved for the common use of all property owners.
(11) The flowlines of streams and other flood water runoff channels and their normal shorelines.
(12) The shorelines of all established flood crest elevations as established by the Deer Park
Flood Plain Map.
(13) Normal shorelines of lakes, ponds, swamps, and other detention basins.
(14) Lines of inflow and outflow, if any.
(15) Farm drains, inlets and outfalls, if any.
(16) Profile drawings of each stream, channel, pond and basin showing elevations of the following:
(a) Stream bed or flow line.
(b) Channel banks, if any.
(c) Waterway openings of existing culverts and bridges within and near the tract.
(d) Size and elevation of outlets at the lakes or water course into which sewers and
drains outfall.
(e) Flood crest elevations.
1. Where, in the opinion of the Village, the number of flood crest observations
or determinations which have been established on a stream or
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-8
channel are inadequate to provide the data necessary to determine possible
future flooding, the profiles shall extend or project the established
flood crest elevation upstream or downstream from a single elevation
approximately parallel to the stream bed or flowline as surveyed.
2. If a subdivider believes that the established flood crest elevation or
profile unreasonably restricts the layout of his proposed subdivision or
its development or that an error has been made in its establishment, he
may appeal to the Plan Commission for a review thereof which shall
make its recommendation to the Board of Trustees. Such appeal on the
proposed amendment shall be heard by the Plan Commission only after
notice thereof has been given in the manner provided for zoning
ordinance amendments (rezoning).
(f) Comprehensive drainage plan. A comprehensive drainage plan, first in preliminary
form, designed to handle safely the floodwater runoff following the heavier
rainstorms.
(17) Location and design of subdivision signs.
(18) For subdivisions containing five acres or more, a soil map of the property prepared by a
soil scientist; for subdivisions of less than five acres, a plat showing the location of soil
test holes dug to determine septic suitability.
(C) A decision on any tentative sketch plan by the Plan Commission shall be made known to
the applicant within five days after the monthly meeting of the trustees of the Village and the
tentative approval of any tentative plan by the Plan Commission shall not constitute an acceptance
of any final plat of any subdivision or redivision of land.
(D) The tentative sketch plans shall be accompanied by a written statement from the applicant
which shall include agreement to pay to the Village such inspection fees incurred by it in connection
with proper inspection by its designated official of the construction of roads, drainage
structures and other improvements installed.
(‘77 Code, §23.09) (Amd. Ord. 93-5 passed 10-1-93) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.21 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE (Repealed, Ord. 15-13, 10-19-15; Ord. 00-6 passed 3-20-00)
§155.22 ACTION BY SUBDIVIDER; SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
Prior to the filing of an application for a final plat, the subdivider shall submit the following to the Village
Clerk:
(A) Statement of agreement. A statement of agreement that:
(1) The land improvements required by the Village shall be completed by the owner or
subdivider in accordance with this chapter and plans as approved by the Village Engineer.
(2) All improvements and the as-built plans of the improvements shall be completed by
the owner or subdivider within two years following approval of the final plat by the President
and Board of Trustees.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-9
(B) Public liability and property damage insurance.
(1) The owner or subdivider shall provide that the Village and its agents are named under
the contractor’s public liability and property damage insurance policy. The policy shall
protect the Village and its agents against loss from liability for damages on account of injury
or death suffered by any person or persons by reason of performance of the
work required to be performed by the contractor. The policy shall further provide for
legal defense against any claim on the policy. The contractor’s insurance shall be in an
amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit for each occurrence.
(2) The certificate ev id en c ing the insurance coverage required hereunder shall be provided to
the Village and shall have a clause requiring that the Village be notified of any cancellations
with 30 days notice.
(C) Memorandum of Water Allocation Division. For all property to be subdivided within the
area bounded by Quentin, Lake Cook, and Rand Roads (the “Triangle”), the owner or subdivider
of said property must provide a memorandum of the proposed division of the water allocation.
(Ord. 00-15 passed 7-17-00) (‘77 Code, §23.10) (Ord. 80-5 passed 11-17-80) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.23 FINAL PLAT.
(A) After approval of the tentative plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit for approval four copies
of the final plan on which shall appear all data shown on the tentative plan. However, the final
date shall be based on correct engineering surveys and the following shall be shown on the final
plan:
(1) The width of lots, dimension of lots and blocks, the full width of streets bounding
the proposed subdivision (with their names) and the widths and names of intersecting
streets in the property immediately adjacent, the name of the proposed subdivision, the
name of the owner, a correct survey of the property with the legal description thereof,
building lines, easements and all necessary dimensions, both linear and angular shall
be shown.
(2) Linear dimensions in feet and decimals of a foot and all deflection angles, radii, arcs
and central angles of all corners along the property line of each street.
(3) Location of all drains and relation to existing underground structures and water bodies
or streams must be shown and proof of legal right to discharge such drainage on
or through abutting property or properties with no damage to such properties or other
highways.
(4) The final disposition of all drainage to a natural water course.
(5) Summary of all restrictions applicable to any part of the subdivision relating to buildings,
use, building lines or otherwise.
(6) Certification by a licensed engineer preparing the map and acknowledged by the owner.
(7) Date plat drawn.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-10
(B) The final plat shall be in substantial conformance with the approved tentative plat. Minor variations
from the approved tentative plat shall be permitted without the necessity of receiving
tentative approval of such variations.
(C) It shall be unlawful to file any plat of subdivision with the respective Recorder of Deeds
or Registrar of Titles unless the same contains in writing the approval of the Village Plan
Commission.
(D) The final plat shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for its consideration within one year
from the time the tentative plan is approved or the applicant shall renew the tentative plan after the
period of one year. The Final Plat shall be submitted to the Chairperson of the Plan Commission
at least 25 days prior to the regular monthly meeting of the Village Board of Trustees and a
decision on the final plat shall be made known to the applicant within five days after the
monthly meeting of the Board of Trustees, and in default hereof the tentative plan approval shall
be void.
(E) In the event of approval, the final plat shall be signed by the Chairperson of the Plan Commission
and the President of the Board of Trustees and their seal attached.
(‘77 Code, §23.11) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.24 FEES; ESCROW REQUIREMENTS.
Each application for preliminary or final subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a non- refundable
filing fee of $500.00 and one or more deposits with the Village, all as required pursuant to provisions
of Chapter 38, Reimbursement for Professional Fees and Other Expenses, and said Chapter 38
shall be applicable to such applications.
(‘77 Code, §23.14) (Ord. 85-4 passed 6-17-85; Amd. Ord. 93-5 passed 10-18-93, 13-25 passed 10-21-13)
§155.25 CONDITIONS OF FINAL ACCEPTANCE; RETURN OF FUNDS.
(A) As-built plans. After completion of all public improvements and prior to final acceptance of
the improvements, the subdivider shall make, or cause to be made, “as-built” drawings for the
improvements constructed. These as-built plans shall be submitted to the Village in the following
formats: (i) black (India) ink on .004-inch mylar, or materials of equal permanence and durability,
bearing the seal and signature of the engineer (ii) reproducible (intermediate copies)
and (iii) digitally on a diskette, cd-rom or other permanent format as prescribed by the
Village Engineer. The submission of these as built plans, in all required formats shall be a condition
of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the surety bond assuring their
completion. All as- built plans required hereunder shall become the property of the Village. (Am.
Ord. 03-13 passed 9-15-03)
(B) Acceptance of required land improvements. Upon the completion of construction of any public
improvements required by this section, in conformance with approved engineering plans and specifications,
the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Village Engineer four sets, plus one reproducible
set on mylar, of the as-built plans and certification by the Village Engineer that such
public improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved engineering
plans and specifications. The developer’s engineer must certify to the Village Engineer that
the improvements are complete and as per the approved plans. The Village Board will enact a resTitle
XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-11
olution accepting the improvements.
(C) Maintenance guarantee. The developer shall guarantee public improvements against defects in
materials and workmanship for a period of one-year from the date of acceptance of the public
improvements by the Village. The developer agrees to repair or replace any of the public improvements
which, during the one-year period after acceptance, shall become damaged or deficient
due to defective materials or workmanship.
(1) Conditions of guarantee. The developer shall establish a cash escrow account or provide
a letter of credit in the amount of 5% of the final construction costs of the improvements.
The escrow account or letter of credit shall remain in force for the aforesaid
one-year maintenance period and shall be for use by the Village to effect such repairs
deemed necessary for public safety and which the developer has neglected to repair for a
48-hour period after notification. Disbursement from the cash escrow account or pursuant
to the letter of credit shall be made solely upon the direction of the Village and shall
not be subject to approval or disapproval by the developer or escrowee or the financial
institution issuing the letter of credit or their agents.
(2) Return of funds. Within 45 days following the one-year maintenance period, the escrowee
or the financial institution issuing the letter of credit shall pay over to the owner,
without further demand or notice, any balance of funds then remaining undisbursed under
the letter of credit or escrow account.
(‘77 Code, §23.19) (Ord. 80-5 passed 11-17-80)
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
§155.35 CONFORMANCE TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan. Consideration in the design of a
street plan shall be given to arrangement, extension, width, grade and location of all streets in the
proposed subdivision and in the relation to the existing and previously planned streets adjacent to or in the
vicinity of the proposed subdivision. Because of the topographical and geological condition of the area
comprising the Village and its environs, special consideration shall be given to the natural storm water
drainage and sewer disposal systems. The Plan Commission shall, and is hereby empowered to request
adequate proof for the sewer and drainage facilities in preventing floods, overflows, or retarding drainage
detrimental to human health and plant life. (‘77 Code, §23.06) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.36 RIGHTS-OF-WAY OF STREETS.
(A) All rights-of-way shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Primary streets 100 feet
Secondary streets 80 feet
Minor streets 66 feet
Cul-de-sacs 140 feet diameter at end
(B) Alleys are not permitted except where expressly deemed necessary by the Plan Commission.
(‘77 Code, §23.06(a)) Penalty, see §155.99
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-12
§155.37 STREET ARRANGEMENT.
The arrangement of streets in subdivisions shall make provision for continuation of the existing local
streets in adjoining areas. Where adjoining areas are subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of streets. When a new subdivision adjoins
unsubdivided land susceptible of being subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries
of the tract proposed to be subdivided. (‘77 Code, §23.06(b)) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.38 LOT STANDARDS.
(A) Single-family residence subdivisions where the smallest lot is 40,000 square feet exclusive of
road easements, and lots smaller than 40,000 square feet exclusive of road easements shall be prohibited.
(1) Width at front building setback shall be 130 feet. Depth shall be not less than 150 feet.
(2) Setback from front line shall be 50 feet from the road easement at the point at which
the easement is contiguous to the lot line.
(3) Setback from side and rear lot lines shall be 30 feet.
(B) Not more than 10% of the residences in any one development shall have, in the estimation of
the Plan Commission, identifiably the same floor plan, or elevation.
(C) Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line or substantially so and
along curvilinear street lines. Side lines or lots formed by radial projections shall form a lot
having not less than 20 feet across the rear property line.
(D) Double frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back upon a thoroughfare and in
such instances, vehicular and pedestrian access between the lots and the thoroughfare is prohibited.
(E) Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream shall have an additional
depth or width as required to provide an acceptable building site.
(‘77 Code, §23.06(c)) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.39 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE. (Amd. Ord. 03-4 passed 1-20-03)
§155.40 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
Street improvements shall conform to the following requirements:
(A) For residential subdivisions where the smallest lot is one acre or more.
(1) Primary and secondary street pavement 24 feet wide with an eight-foot wide shoulder
on both sides of the pavement of which the first three feet bordering the pavement shall
be eight-inch thick compacted gravel or crushed stone, and the remainder shall be compacted
earth or better.
(a) Minor streets and cul-de-sac streets. Pavement 22 feet wide with compacted
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-13
three-foot wide gravel or crushed stone shoulder on both sides of the pavement.
(b) Marginal access streets. Pavement 22 feet wide, compacted six-foot wide gravel
or crushed stone shoulder on subdivision side of street.
(2) For half streets the pavement shall be 18 feet wide, outside edge of pavement to center
line of the street.
(3) Pavements in cul-de-sac turnabouts in all developments shall have a minimum radius of
50 feet. Where landscaped center islands are installed, the adjacent paving shall have
permanent edging.
(B) Public streets shall be required in all subdivisions, except that private streets may be approved
by action of the Village Board where the lot size is two acres or more and the public interest is
best served thereby.
(C) Drainage swales on both sides of the pavement in accordance with Village standard design shall
be required.
(D) All unpaved areas within the dedicated street areas shall be graded and seeded or sodded
in accordance with Village standard design and specifications.
(‘77 Code, §23.06(e)) Penalty, see §155.99
PERMITS
§155.55 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
(A) No building permit shall be issued providing for the improvement of any lot in the subdivision
until there has been filed with the Building Department a copy of the plat bearing the approval
of the Plan Commission and the approval of the President and the Village Board of Trustees,
certified to by the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County or the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County
that the plat has been recorded or registered in his office.
(B) Further, it shall be required on any property abutting or requiring a driveway or entrance on a
road that is under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of Transportation, the Lake County
Highway Department or the Townships of Cuba or Ela that an entrance and driveway permit
be obtained from the Department before any improvement or construction begins and where
applicable, the agency has executed the final plat of subdivision.
(C) No building permit shall be issued for the improvement of any lot in the subdivision until all public
improvements provided for in the final plat of the subdivision are satisfactorily and substantially
completed and accepted by the Village. There shall be a notation to this effect made
on each final plat of subdivision prior to approval by the Village.
(‘77 Code, §23.12) (Ord. 85-3 passed 3-18-85) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.56 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
No occupancy permit shall be issued in connection with any improvements of any lot in the subdivision
until all improvements provided for in the final plat of subdivision are satisfactorily completed and
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-14
accepted by the Village. (‘77 Code, §23.15)
DEDICATION OF SCHOOL GROUNDS, FIRE/RESCUE SITES OR CAPITAL
FACILITIES, AND PARK LANDS AND LIBRARY LANDS,
OR PAYMENT OF CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF
§155.60.00 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
As a condition of approval of a final plat of a residential subdivision or of a final plat of a residential
planned development, each subdivider or developer, its successors and assigns, shall be required to
dedicate land for library, park, recreational, fire/rescue and school purposes to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the development, or shall be required to make a cash contribution in lieu
of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the Village with the concurrence of
the affected district or districts, which concurrence shall be obtained in writing. However, the Village
shall have the final decision making power in this regard. Land dedication sites may be made to the
Village or to the applicable district at the discretion of the Village Board. The dedications and cash
contributions required hereunder shall be made in accordance with the criteria and formulas herein.
Sections 155.60.00 through 155.60.22 of the Subdivision Regulations are collectively referred to and may
be cited as the Impact Fee Ordinance.
§155.60.01 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL GROUNDS DEDICATIONS.
1. Requirement and Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by a residential
subdivision or planned development shall bear directly on the amount of land required to
be dedicated for school grounds. “School grounds” shall include land or site improvements,
which include school buildings or other infrastructure necessitated and specifically and
uniquely attributable to the residential subdivision or planned development. The land dedication
requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of (a) estimated children to be served in
each such school classification over the (b) maximum recommended number of students to be
served in each such school classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to (c) the
appropriate number of acres for school grounds for each such school classification as stated
herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land
for school grounds to serve the estimated increase in number of students for each such school
classification.
2. School Classifications and Size of School Grounds: These requirements for acreage are based
upon a review of available data studies and literature on the subject, including but not limited
to, information provided by the State Superintendent of Education and the unique characteristics
of the Village, including its general rural character and open spaces, and the desire of the residents
to maintain this character and open space in future school grounds. These requirements
for acreage shall be presumed as the appropriate acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating
any cash contribution in lieu of land dedication herein unless timely objected to as provided
herein. Objections to these acreage requirements for any particular development shall be
made in accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein to the Plan Commission. Failure to timely object
to these acreage requirements in strict accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein shall constitute
a waiver of any right to raise an objection at a later time.
School classifications and size of school grounds within the Village shall be determined in accordance
with the following criteria:
School classifications and size of school grounds within the Village shall be determined in acTitle
XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-15
cordance with the following criteria:
SCHOOL DISTRICT 95
SCHOOL
CLASSIFICATION
BY GRADES
MAXIMUM NUMBER
OF STUDENTS FOR EACH
SUCH SCHOOL
CLASSIFICATION
APPROPRIATE NUMBER
OF ACRES OF LAND FOR
EACH SCHOOL SITE OF SUCH
CLASSIFICATION
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
GRADES K-5 or K-6
600 Students 11 acres
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS
GRADES 6-8 or 7-8
900 Students 29 acres
HIGH SCHOOLS
GRADES
1,500 Students 45 acres
SCHOOL DISTRICT 220
SCHOOL
CLASSIFICATION
BY GRADES
MAXIMUM NUMBER
OF STUDENTS FOR
EACH SUCH SCHOOL
CLASSIFICATION
APPROPRIATE NUMBER
OF ACRES OF LAND FOR
EACH SCHOOL SITE OF SUCH
CLASSIFICATION
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
GRADES K-5 or K-6
500 Students 15 acres
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS
GRADES 6-8 or 7-8
800 Students 25 acres
HIGH SCHOOLS
GRADES 9-12
3,000 Students Total 87 acres total
3. Location: The Comprehensive School Plan anchor the standards adopted by the affected
School District shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. School grounds shall be located in
the Village in accordance with plans heretofore or hereafter adopted by the school district. If the
school district has not planned school grounds within the Village or the proposed subdivision or
planned development, or in the neighborhood in which such subdivision or planned development
is located, the school grounds shall be so located as to be readily accessible to the greatest number
of children projected for such neighborhood.
§155.60.02 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATIONAL LAND
DEDICATIONS.
1. Suitability: The land for park and recreational dedications shall be suitable for the purpose
for which it is intended. Land set aside by developers for parks, recreation and conservation
purposes shall not be what has been “left over” after residential, commercial and industrial development.
2. Requirement and Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed residential development
shall bear directly on the amount of land required for dedication for park and recreational
purposes. The total requirement shall be 10 acres of land per 1,000 of ultimate population
and may be allocated by the Village Board at its discretion based upon the following criteria:
TYPE OF RECREATION
AREA
MINIMUM
SIZE
PARK ACREAGE PER 1,000
PERSONS
Play Lot 8,000 square feet 1
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-16
Neighborhood Park 3acres 2 acres
Village-Wide Park for Active Sports 1 4 acres
Village-Wide Community Park 1 4 a cres
These requirements for acreage are based upon a review of available data studies and literature
on the subject, including but not limited to, the National Recreation and Park Association’s
Recreation, Park and Open Space Standards and Guidelines, 1990. These requirements shall
be presumed as the appropriate acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating any cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication herein unless timely objected to as provided herein. Objections
to these acreage requirements for any particular development shall be made in accordance
with Section 155.60.16 herein to the Plan Commission. Failure to timely object to these
acreage requirements in strict accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein shall constitute a waiver
of any right to raise an objection at a later time.
3. Location: The park and recreation plans as adopted by the Village’s Comprehensive Plan shall
be used as a guideline in locating sites. A central location that will serve equally the entire development
or a location that is adjacent to existing park and recreational land is most desirable. In
large developments, these sites can be located throughout the development according to established
standards for park area distances.
§155.60.03 FIRE/RESCUE CAPITAL FACILITIES CONTRIBUTIONS AND SITE
DEDICATION.
1. Requirement and Population Ratio: Requirement and Population Ratio: The development of
new residential subdivisions and planned developments increases the demands upon the existing
fire/rescue protection services provided by the Village in a proportionate and ascertainable
manner and creates the need for additional fire/rescue, firehouse and training sites. Studies reveal
the need to develop additional fire/rescue protection services. Therefore, as a condition of
approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a planned development containing
residential uses, each developer or subdivider shall be required to dedicate land for
fire/rescue facilities to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development
or shall be required to make a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication.
The ultimate density of a proposed residential development shall bear directly on the amount of
land required for a fire/rescue site dedication. The Village hereby finds that the total requirement
shall be 3 acres of land per 10,000 of ultimate population. This requirement is based upon a
review of available data as well as the fire/rescue districts’ own internal examination of
fire/rescue utilization and needs.
This contribution and/or dedication is based upon a review of available data, studies and
literature including, but not limited to, the requirements of surrounding communities. They shall
be presumed to be correct and accurate and shall be used in calculating cash contributions
herein unless timely objected to as provided herein. Objections to this Section 155.60.03 shall be
made in strict accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein. Failure to timely object to these requirements
in strict accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein shall constitute a waiver of any
right to raise an objection at a later time.
The Fire/Rescue Capital Facilities Contribution shall be held in trust by the Village or other
public body designated by the Village and shall be used for the purpose of assisting in providing
additional facilities for municipal purposes. The Village may contract with other units of
local government for the provision of fire/rescue services. Funds obtained pursuant to this
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-17
Section 155.60.03 may be transferred to those entities for the purpose of assisting in the
provision of additional facilities which will benefit the Village.
2. Location: The location of any new fire/rescue facility and/or training site shall be determined by
the appropriate fire district in consultation with the Village.
§155.60.04 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING LIBRARY SITE DEDICATION.
1. Requirement and Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed residential development
shall bear directly on the amount of land required for dedication. New development and
increased population create greater demands for adequate and efficient library services to meet
the educational, cultural and recreational needs of the citizenry. They create the need for additional
library facilities. The Village hereby finds that the total requirement shall be 2.5 acres
of land per 10,000 of ultimate population.
These requirements are based upon a review of available data, studies and literature on the
subject, as well as the Library District’s own internal examination of library utilization and
needs. They shall be presumed as the appropriate acreage requirements and shall be used in
calculating any cash contribution in lieu of land contribution herein unless timely objected to
as provided herein. Objections to these acreage requirements for any particular development
shall be made in accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein. Failure to timely object to these
acreage requirements in strict accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein shall constitute a
waiver of any right to raise an objection at a later time.
2. Location: The location of any new library facility shall be determined by the Library after consultation
with the Village.
§155.60.05 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU
OF DEDICATION OF SCHOOL, PARK, LIBRARY AND FIRE/RESCUE SITES.
When the residential development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical, or when the
available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes or school, fire/rescue or library sites or
is in conflict with the approved Comprehensive School Plan, the Village, with the concurrence of the
affected district, shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land
dedication.
The cash contribution in lieu of dedication of school grounds shall be held in trust by the Village or other
public body designated by the benefiting School District and shall be used solely for the acquisition of
land for school grounds to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or
development or for the expansion of any existing school grounds that already serves such needs.
The cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the Village
and shall be used solely for the acquisition of park and recreation land as classified above, which will be
available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for
the expansion of other existing local park and recreation lands that already serve such needs or for any
other lawful park purpose or for any park purpose agreed to by the subdivider or developer at the time of
platting.
The cash contribution in lieu of a library site dedication shall be held in trust by the benefiting Library
District or other public body as designated by the Village and shall be used for the acquisition of library
land as required herein, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-18
that subdivision or development or for the expansion of existing or proposed library facilities that already
serve or will serve such needs or for any other lawful purpose agreed to by the subdivider or developer at
the time of platting.
The cash contribution in lieu of fire/rescue site dedication shall be held in trust by the benefiting Fire
Protection District or Fire Department or other public body as designated by the Village and shall be used
for the acquisition of land for fire/rescue facilities or training sites to serve the immediate and future
needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the expansion of any other existing fire
station or training site that already serves such needs or for any other lawful fire/rescue purpose. If any
portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation or fire/rescue land dedication or dedication
of library and/or school grounds is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within 13 years
from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded by the entity holding the contribution to the record owner
of the subdivided land at the time of the refund. If there is more than one record owner of the subdivided
land or of the land that comprises the planned development, as applicable, such record owners shall
share in the refund pro rata based on the cash contributions originally paid by each property.
1. Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land dedication shall be based on the
“fair market value” of the acres of land in the area that otherwise would have been dedicated as
park and recreation sites, library sites, fire/rescue sites and school grounds. The fair market value,
on a per acre basis, shall assume, unless determined otherwise pursuant to Section 155.60.16
herein, that the land is zoned in a one-family dwelling residential zoning district subdivided
with appropriate frontage on a dedicated street or road, has all appropriate utilities available, is
improved as set forth in Section 155.60.11 herein, and is otherwise property capable of being
used for residential development. Based upon a study of comparable real estate transactions, it has
been determined that the present “fair market value” of such improved land in and surrounding
the Village is, as of May 17, 2010, as follows:
A. $222,600.00 per acre for purposes of locating an elementary or junior high school
within School Districts 95 or 220.
B. $397,500.00 per acre for purposes of adding on to the existing high schools.
C. $111,300.00 per acre for purposes of locating a park.¹
D. $196,000.00 per acre for purposes of locating a fire station.²
E. $350,000.00 per acre for purposes of locating and/or adding on to the existing Library.³
These figures shall be adjusted by the Village Board from time to time with appropriate study
and documentation. The “fair market value” as defined above shall be used in calculating
any cash contribution in lieu of land dedication herein unless timely objected to as provided
in Section 155.60.16 herein. Objections to the fair market value as defined above shall be made
in accordance with Section 155.60.16 to the Plan Commission. Failure to timely object to the
“fair market value” as defined above in strict accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein shall
constitute a waiver of any right to raise an objection at a later time.
2. Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Contribution: There shall be situations in subdivisions
or planned developments when a combination of land dedication and a cash contribution in
lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions shall arise when (a) only a portion of the
land to be developed is proposed as the location for a library, park, fire/rescue site or school
grounds (that portion of the land within the subdivision failing within the library, park,
fire/rescue or school location shall be dedicated as a site as stated above, and a cash contribution
in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated);
or (b) a major part of. the local library, park, fire/rescue site or school grounds has
already been acquired by the particular district or Village and only a small portion of land is
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-19
needed from the development to complete the site (the remaining portion shall be required by
dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof for the rest of the required land shall be required).
FOOTNOTES AS TO VALUATION
¹ Land suitable for park and recreational purposes may have a lesser value depending upon location,
buildability, and whether the site is used as an active or passive park site.
² Fire stations must be strategically located to maximize response time and have access to
major arterial roads. This fair market value reflects these considerations.
³ An addition to the existing library would entail purchase of property adjoining the existing library.
A second library must be strategically located to accommodate the maximum number of
p a t r o n s , and in the tradition of the existing library, be on a major thoroughfare.
§155.60.06 ADJUSTMENT TO FAIR MARKET VALUE.
The fair market value identified in Section 155.60.05 above shall be subject to an adjustment every three
years, based upon a study of comparable real estate transactions. The study of comparable sites shall be
provided to the Village by each district; and the study of park or recreational sites shall be undertaken by
the Village. These figures shall be due to the Village on February 1, 2006, and every three years
thereafter. At that time, the Village shall both update Exhibit C as described in Section 155.60.08 herein
and shall determine whether to amend the criteria used in the tables in Sections 155.60.01 and 155.60.02;
or the criteria used in Sections 155.60.03 and 155.60.04. In the event that any of the districts do not
provide updated figures for fair market value, the Village will continue to use the dollar amounts as most
recently provided.
§155.60.07 DENSITY FORMULA.
The Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit, prepared by Illinois School Consulting
Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., Naperville, Illinois, and as updated from time to time,
constitutes projections of anticipated population density and is generally indicative of current and short
range projected trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of
required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is
filed thereto by the subdivider or developer pursuant to Section 155.60.16 herein.
A bedroom as used in this Section 155.60.07 shall include any room which may be used for bedroom
purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room located on any floor in a dwelling unit which may be
convertible into a sleeping area and is not clearly identified for some other specific purpose such as a
kitchen (one per unit), dining room (one per unit), living room (one per unit), bathroom(s) and family
room (one per unit).
The most recent version of the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit shall be used in
calculating any cash contribution in lieu of land dedication herein unless timely objected to as provided in
Section 155.60.16 herein. Objections to the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
shall be made in accordance with Section 155.60.16 to the Plan Commission. Failure to timely object to
the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit in strict accordance with Section
155.60.16 herein shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection at a later time.
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the Table of Estimated Ultimate PopuTitle
XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-20
lation Per Dwelling Unit listed above, he shall submit his own demographic study showing the estimated
additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event final
determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with Section 155.60.16 herein.
If in the written opinion of the Village Administrator the Density Formula is not appropriately applied
because the new development will be an age-restricted community or extended care facility that is not
expected to have any significant impact on school enrollment, the Village Administrator may recommend
to the Village Board that the dedications for school sites and cash contributions in lieu thereof be waived
or modified for the specific development without the necessity of an objection procedure pursuant to
Section 155.60.16 of this Chapter 155. The Village Board either may accept the recommendation by a
majority vote of the Board members, or failing that, it may refer the matter to the Plan Commission for
consideration pursuant to the terms of Section 155.60.16 of this Chapter 155.
§155.60.08 RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.
When the Comprehensive Plan or the standards of the Village call for a larger amount of park and
recreational land or library or school grounds in a particular subdivision or planned development than the
developer is required to dedicate pursuant to Sections 155.60.01, 155.60.02, 155.60.03 and/or 155.60.04
the land needed beyond the developer’s dedication shall be set aside and reserved by the developer for
subsequent purchase by the Village (at a price determined at the time of reservation) or other public body
designated by the Village, provided that such acquisition is made within five years from the date of
approval of the final plat.
§155.60.09 COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS.
Where appropriate, a public open space or a school ground that is to be dedicated should, if possible, be
combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas
and/or school grounds without undue hardship on a particular developer.
§155.60.10 TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING.
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for
its intended purpose. Wetlands and flood plains may be accepted for Village ownership and maintenance,
but shall not serve as a credit toward the required park site dedication. Storm water detention areas shall
not be accepted for Village ownership and maintenance, and the portion of a detention area designed to
function primarily as a component of the storm water control system shall not serve as a credit toward the
required park site dedication. A park site shall be not less than one acre in area. The Village Board
reserves the right, however, in its sole discretion, to accept in whole or in part, certain areas such as, but
not limited to, tree massings, prairie remnants, high quality or unique wetlands, or other natural features
as all or part of the required park site dedication in furtherance of open space preservation that may be
unique to a given parcel or development. Wetlands, flood plains, detention areas, retention areas and areas
of steep slope shall not be accepted as school, park, fire/rescue or library sites and shall not serve as a
credit toward the required school, park, fire/rescue or library site cash contribution in lieu of land
dedication.
In addition, the following site conditions and preparation standards shall be met:
1. Slope:
a. Should not vary greatly in appearance from existing and adjacent slopes;
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-21
b. Optimum slopes range from two percent minimum to five percent maximum. No less
than two percent slope is acceptable under any circumstances;
c. Maximum allowable slope is 10 percent, except under special conditions where greater
slopes are desirable to enhance the use of the site; and
d. On-site drainage patterns shall be designated and constructed to:
i. Ensure flow toward swales; and
ii. Ensure drainage away from active areas.
2. Grading:
a. Rough grading shall be completed at the time of rough grading of adjacent contiguous areas;
b. Grading shall comply with Village approved plans;
c. Subgrade shall be graded and compacted so it will parallel finished grade;
d. Subgrade material shall be loosened and fine graded to a depth of two to four inches. All
stones over four inches in size, sticks, debris, rubbish and other foreign substances shall
be removed; and
e. Finished grades shall be uniform in slope between points for which elevations have
been established.
3. Soils:
a. Soils shall not differ from those naturally occurring;
b. Soils shall not offer any restriction to the ultimate use of the property;
c. Topsoil shall be spread evenly and lightly compacted to a minimum depth of six inches
over the entire site;
d. Topsoil must be good, friable soils with good tillage and shall be without any admixture
of subsoil, clay, gravel, stones, debris, refuse, sand or other subsurface elements;
e. Topsoil shall not be placed in a muddy or frozen condition;
f. Topsoil shall contain no toxic substances which may be harmful to plant growth; and
g. Topsoil shall be spread no later than the placement of topsoil on the first lot adjacent to
the site.
4. Seeding:
a. All proposed library, park and recreational and school grounds shall be seeded and an acceptable
stand of grass or vegetation established prior to dedication of the area to the Village;
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-22
b. Village-approved ground covers and grasses shall be used for all park and recreational
areas suitable for the nature of the activity planned to occur thereon;
c. Seeding shall be completed during the fall or spring planting times, depending upon the
recommended seed planting specifications;
d. Seeding shall be on moderately dry soil on a seed bed which will easily accept and
nurture germination of seeds;
e. Seeding shall be watered sufficiently so that the vegetation becomes reasonably established;
and
f. The developer shall be responsible for making necessary reparations to the site
caused by erosion or other damage. Reparations shall be completed prior to acceptance of
the site.
§155.60.11 IMPROVED SITES.
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electricity, natural gas, telephone and
cable television, and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter, where applicable), as
applicable to the location of the site, and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of the Village
ordinances and codes. The landscaping normally included within the definition of “improved sites under
said ordinances and codes may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any such school
grounds and the construction of school facilities thereon, except for groundcover as required in Section
155.60.10(4)(a) herein. The site shall have direct access to a fully improved street across at least 20
percent of the distance of its perimeter. School and park sites should ideally be accessible by a bicycle/
pedestrian trail, and any such access route onto the property shall be at least 25 feet wide. Such access
routes should normally be dedications and not easements, depending on which entity of government
is to be responsible for said routes. Any vehicular access route leading to or on the site shall be of
sufficient size and good geometry to properly accommodate vehicles that, will access and traverse the
site including, but not limited to, good principles of traffic circulation, accommodation of one-way
and/or two-way drives for school buses, separation of bus traffic from passenger automobile traffic, bus
drop-off areas separate from publicly-dedicated streets, guest and employee parking areas, and the like.
Such off-street access routes, drives, drop-offs and parking areas will not be dedicated rights-of-way and
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the site to maintain.
§155.60.12 ENVIRONMENTAL RISK AUDIT.
Prior to the conveyance of any land to the Village, library district, fire protection district or school district,
the intended grantee shall be furnished with an environmental risk audit prepared by an environmental
professional meeting the minimum requirements of 415 1LCS 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii), certified to and acceptable
to the grantee, assuring the grantee that there are no hazardous substance(s) (as defined hereinafter)
on, under, to or from the land. Said environmental audit shall be what is commonly referred to as a
Phase I Environmental Audit, which shall meet the minimum requirements for a preacquisition audit as
set forth in 415 ILCS 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii)(v).
In the event the Phase I Environmental Audit concludes there is presence or likely presence of a release or
substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) or pesticide on, under, to or from the land, the
grantee shall furnish a Phase II Environmental Audit as set forth in 415 ILCS 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii)(vi), including
a soil toxicity analysis and recommendation from said environmental professional, meeting the
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-23
minimum requirements of 415 ILCS 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii), which concludes that there is no presence or likely
presence of a release or substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) on, under, to or from
the land, and certifying that, in the judgment of said environmental professional, there is no reasonable
probability that the land contains any hazardous substance(s) in violation of any federal or state environmental
standards.
In the event said Phase II Environmental Audit and/or soil toxicity analysis discloses the presence or likely
presence of a release or a substantial threat of a release of any hazardous substance(s) at, on, under, to
or from the land to the conveyed, the grantor shall first cause all such hazardous substance(s) to be removed
at its sole cost and expense in accordance with all federal, state and local environmental laws,
rules and regulations and furnish the intended grantee with a “No Further Remediation Letter” from the
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the clean up prior to the conveyance of any of the land to
the intended grantee.
Prior to the conveyance of the land, the subdivider or developer, as the case may be, and the owner of the
land to be conveyed, shall execute and deliver to the intended grantee an Environmental Indemnification
Agreement, which form has been approved by the Village Attorney, agreeing to defend, indemnify and
hold the Village, its corporate authorities, officers, officials, employees, agents, successors and assigns,
and the school district, as the case may be, and its respective officers, officials, employees, agents, successors
and assigns, harmless from and against any and all liability, claims, damages, causes of action and
expenses arising out of the presence of any hazardous substance(s) in, under or upon said land to be conveyed
prior to the date of conveyance.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if any environmental report discloses the presence of
hazardous substances on a piece of land, the Village or applicable district in its discretion may reject the
land in favor of a cash contribution, irrespective of subsequent remediation efforts.
Hazardous substance(s) includes without limitation:
1. Those substances included in the definitions of hazardous substances, extremely hazardous
substances, hazardous materials, toxic substances, toxic chemicals, toxic wastes, hazardous
chemicals, hazardous wastes, solid waste and pesticides in CERLA, SARA, RCRA, HSWA,
TSCA, OSHA, FWPCE, Illinois Pesticides Act (415 ILCS 60/1 et seq.), Illinois Responsible
Property Transfer Act (765 ILCS 90/1 et seq.) and the Illinois Hazardous Materials Transportation
Act (430 ILCS 30/1 et seq.), 49 U.S.C. Section 1801 et seq., as amended, and as they may be
amended in the future, and in the regulations promulgated pursuant to said laws.
2. Those substances defined in Section 1003 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and in
the regulations promulgated pursuant to said act or other Illinois laws pertaining thereto.
3. Those substances listed in the U.S. Department of Transportation Table (49 CFR 172.101 and
amendments thereto) or by the Environmental Protection Agency (or any successor agency) as
hazardous substances (40 CFR Part 302 and amendments thereto).
4. Such other substances, materials and wastes which are to become regulated under applicable
local, state or federal law, or which are classified as hazardous or toxic under federal, state or local
laws, ordinances or regulations.
5. Any material waste or substance which is (a) asbestos, (b) polychiorinated biphenols, (c) designated
as a hazardous substance pursuant to Section 311 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section
125 1 et seq. (33 U.S.C. Sec. 1321) or listed pursuant to Section 307 of the Clean Water
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-24
Act (33 U.S.C. Sec. 13 17), (d) explosives, or (e) radioactive materials.
6. For purposes of this Section 155.60.12, hazardous substances shall include petroleum or its byproducts
as regulated under RCRA and any applicable state law or regulations.
§155.60.13 SUITABILITY OF SOILS AT SITE.
The subdivider or developer, at its own cost or expense, shall provide to the Village, library district, fire
protection district or school district soil boring data, soil compaction test results and such other engineering
studies, data and information pertaining to the proposed school, library, fire/rescue or park and
recreational site, which the Village, library district, fire protection district or school district may request
to enable it to determine the suitability of the proposed land dedication for library, fire/rescue or
school grounds or park and recreation purposes. The Village, library district, fire protection district or
school district shall have the right to reject any site which the Village, library district, fire protection
district or school district determines, in accordance with sound engineering practices, is not suitable for a
library site, fire/rescue site, park and recreational site or school grounds purposes.
§155.60.14 TITLE INSURANCE, SURVEY, ASSESSMENT PLATS.
Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the Village, library district, fire protection district or
school district shall be accompanied by:
1. A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in the state to insure
the grantee’s title to such real estate in an amount equal to the value computed pursuant to
Sections 155.60.01, 155.60.02, 155.60.03 and 155.60.04 herein, with extended coverage over
the general exceptions to title and subject only to:
a. real estate taxes not yet due and payable,
b. covenants, conditions and restrictions of record which do not materially impair the use
of the subject property as a library, school or park and recreational use,
c. utility easements located within 20 feet of the boundary lines of the subject real estate
(except where approved on the final engineering plans approved by the Village Engineer),
d. existing drainage ditches, feeders and laterals,
e. existing underground pipe or other conduit, and
f. acts done or suffered by or judgments against the grantees.
2. A current ALTA boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a licensed Illinois Land Surveyor
to be in compliance with the American Land Survey Standards, showing no encroachments;
and
3. Except in instances where the real estate is to be conveyed is a lot in a recorded subdivision,
an assessment plat and tax division petition in a form acceptable to the appropriate Village authorities
so the land to be conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number
(PIN) for exemption purposes.
In addition, monuments must be established and the land staked immediately prior to dedication of the
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-25
property. The subdivider or developer shall pay for the cost of the owner’s title insurance in said amount,
the ALTA survey, the assessment plat and any and all costs in connection with the tax division petition.
§155.60.15 REAL ESTATE TAX ESCROW.
The developer shall pay the general real estate taxes on the land not yet due and payable as of the date of
transfer, and shall deposit a sum of money in escrow with the intended grantee’s attorney or a title
company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois, which is prorated as of the date of transfer on the
basis of 110 percent of the tax assessor’s latest assessed valuation, the latest known equalization factors
and the latest known tax rate on the land. In the event the previous tax information or the previous tax bill
includes other property, then the amount to be deposited in escrow shall be adjusted ratably based on the
net acreage of the land compared to the net acreage of the other parcels covered by said tax bills. After the
land has been divided for real estate tax purposes and has been conveyed to the intended grantee, the
grantee shall proceed with due diligence to apply for a real estate tax exemption on the land.
§155.60.16 OBJECTIONS.
All objections relating to acreage requirements, presumptions as to fair market value, the able of Estimated
Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit or any other application of the Deer Park Impact Fee Ordinance
to a particular subdivision or planned development, shall first be referred to the Plan Commission
for a hearing. An objection must be made, if at all, prior to the approval of the final plat of subdivision
by the Village. A failure to object by such time shall constitute a waiver of the right to object under
the provisions of this Section 155.60.16. The procedure for a hearing before the Plan Commission shall
be as follows:
1. Duties of the Plan Commission: The Plan Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity and
shall have the following duties:
a. Advise and assist the Village in resolving objections regarding the Table of Estimated Ultimate
Population Per Dwelling Unit in Section 155.60.07, the size of the school,
park, fire/rescue and library sites in Sections 155.60.01, 155.60.02, 155.60.03 and
155.60.04, respectively, the fair market value of the land used to calculate the cash
contribution in Section 155.60.05 or any other application of this Section 155.60.16 to
a particular subdivision or planned development.
b. The Village shall adopt procedural rules to be used by the Plan Commission in carrying
out the duties imposed by this Section 155.60.16.
2. Information and Services to Be Used: The Village shall make available to the Plan Commission
all professional reports relating to the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling
Unit, the size of the library, fire/rescue, park and school sites and the fair market value of the
land used in calculating these cash contributions. The Plan Commission may also retain the
services of professionals (attorneys, appraisers, statisticians, etc.) to assist in its review of issues
raised by any objection.
3. Procedure for Resolving an Objection
a. Upon receipt of an objection, the Village Manager shall place the same on the next
regular meeting agenda of the Village Board. Thereafter the Village Board shall refer the
objection to the Plan Commission and by resolution establish a hearing date.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-26
b. The Plan Commission shall provide public notice of the hearing date to consider the objection
and shall notify the affected library, fire protection, and school districts by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the filing of the objection and of any hearing
regarding same.
c. The objector shall publish notice of the hearing date once each week for three consecutive
weeks, at least 30 days before but no more than 60 days before the scheduled
date of the hearing. Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the corporate limits of the Village. The notice of public hearing shall not appear
in the part of the paper where legal notices or classified ads appear. The notice shall not
be smaller than one-quarter page of a standard size or tabloid-size newspaper. The objector
shall send a copy of said notice to any person who has requested said notice by
certified mail (stamped at a U.S. Postal Service facility showing the date of mailing) at
least 30 days prior to the hearing date.
d. The notice shall contain all of the following information:
a. The headline shall read: “NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON OBJECTION
TO APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE REQUIRING THE DEDICATION
OF SCHOOL GROUNDS, FIRE/RESCUE SITES OR CAPITAL FACILITIES,
PARK LANDS ND LIBRARY LAND OR PAYMENT OF THE
CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF.”
b. The date, time and location of the public hearing.
c. A statement that the purpose of the hearing is to consider the objection to a component
of the application of the ordinance requiring the dedication of park lands,
library sites, school grounds, or fire/rescue sites, or calculation of cash contribution
in lieu thereof.
d. A general description of the parcel(s), service area or areas within the Village
that are the subject of the hearing.
e. A statement that the Village shall make available to the public, upon request, an
easily understandable and detailed map of the parcel(s), service area or areas
to which the ordinance applies, and any other available information about the objection.
f. A statement that any member of the public affected by the ordinance or the parcel(
s) or service area or areas shall have the right to appear at the public hearing
and present testimony and/or evidence in support of or against the objection.
e. A public hearing shall be held for the consideration of the objection. In addition to
the Village, any affected library district, school district and fire/rescue provider shall be
allowed to participate in such hearing as a party thereto to present evidence, crossexamine
witnesses and make arguments to the Plan Commission regarding the issues
raised in the objection. The Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to adopt, reject
in whole or in part, or modify the objection presented at the hearing, by written report
to the Village, within 60 days after the hearing. The Village shall then have at least
60 but not more than 120 days to approve, disapprove or modify, by ordinance the findings
of the Plan Commission’s report and recommendations.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-27
4. Costs and Fees: The objector shall bear all costs of the hearing before the Plan Commission
including, but not limited to attendance fees paid the Plan Commission members, publication
costs, professional consultants’ fees and any other expenses of the Village.
§155.60.17 CONDITION TO ANNEXATION.
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required by Sections 155.60.01, 155.60.02,
155.60.03, 155.60.04 and 155.60.05 shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to
the Village which includes residential uses or will be developed as a residential use, and provisions
therefore shall at a minimum be incorporated in any annexation or pre-annexation agreement governing
such land. However, the Village reserves the right to negotiate dedications of land or cash contributions in
lieu of land or a combination thereof greater than those set forth herein.
§155.60.18 INDEMNIFICATION.
As a condition to the Village distributing land dedications and/or cash contributions in lieu thereof the
appropriate district shall execute an indemnification agreement in the form set forth in Exhibit A of this
Impact Fee Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
§155.60.19 DISTRIBUTION.
The cash contribution in lieu of land dedication imposed by this Impact Fee Ordinance, as may be
amended from time to time, shall be collected and held by the benefiting district to be used for the purposes
set forth in this Impact Fee Ordinance.
As a condition of distribution of these land dedications and/or cash contributions in lieu of land dedications,
the Village shall require that the school district, library district, or fire/rescue provider benefiting
from such land dedications and/or cash contributions conduct a needs assessment and adopt a plan
for acquisition of land and capital facilities needed to accommodate growth. In the case of parks, the Village
shall create a needs assessment and plan for land acquisition.
§155.60.20 NEEDS ASSESSMENT; LAND AND CAPITAL FACILITIES ACQUISITION PLAN.
1. A needs assessment shall contain the following information for each district (school, library,
fire/rescue provider and park):
a. A description of the nature and location of existing park, library, fire/rescue and school
lands and existing park, school, library, fire/rescue facility and capital facilities within
each district.
b. An identification of the capacity of each school building, fire/rescue facility, library facility
or park site within the particular district and of the number of students then enrolled
in each school building.
c. A projection of the character and location of new development that is expected to occur
within each district or Village during the succeeding 10-year period. The district or Village
may obtain the information necessary to make this projection from sources such
as but not limited to: municipalities, other units of government, agencies and consultants.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-28
d. An identification of the amount of lands that will be necessary within the school district
and Village in order to accommodate the demands of such projected new development,
and an estimate of the public grounds acquisition costs that will be incurred or
have been incurred by each district in acquiring such lands.
e. A general description of each classification of capital facilities (including construction,
expansion or enhancement of any public facilities and the land improvement, design,
engineering and professional costs related thereto) that will be necessary within each district
in order to provide adequate capacity for the projected new development, and an
estimate of the capital facilities costs that will be incurred by each district in constructing
such capital facilities.
2. Based upon the needs assessment, the school district, fire/rescue district or library district
shall provide the Village an acquisition plan for lands and capital facilities. This acquisition plan
shall:
a. Project for a planning period of at least five years, the need for lands and capital facilities
within the district or Village;
b. Set forth a schedule for the acquisition of such lands and facilities to meet the projected
need (which schedule may be conditioned upon the availability of financing);
c. Indicate the size and general location of the needed lands and facilities;
d. Identify the estimated or incurred costs of acquiring such needed lands and facilities;
e. Set forth the anticipated funding sources for the acquisition of such needed lands and facilities;
f. Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed land and facilities based upon the district’s
current financial condition;
g. Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed land and facilities based upon the district’s
or Village’s estimate of the revenues (including, without limitation, cash contribution
in lieu of land dedication required by Section 155.60.05) pursuant to the plan; and
h. Determine the impact on property taxes in the Village assuming the plan is implemented.
3. If the Village deems it necessary, it may require an updated needs assessment and plan for acquisition
of land and capital facilities from the district annually. The failure to require said assessment
update shall not invalidate the requirements of this Section 155.60.20.
§155.60.21 TIME OF PAYMENT.
All land dedications and cash contributions imposed by Sections 155.60.01, 155.60.02, 155.60.03,
155.60.04 and 155.60.05 shall be due and payable upon final plat approval. However, the Village may
agree that the payment of the cash contributions may be made at the time of building permit issuance in
consideration of which the subdivider or developer shall execute an agreement, in substantially the form
of Exhibit B of this Impact Fee Ordinance, as amended from time to time, agreeing that the cash contributions
payable shall be adjusted in accordance with the requirements herein and further agreeing that the
cash contributions may be expended for the purposes described in Exhibit B. In the event the Village
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-29
agrees to delay the payment of the fees required under this Ordinance to the time of building permit issuance,
the cash contributions owed shall be based upon this Impact Fee Ordinance, as amended from time
to time, which is in effect at the time the building permit is issued.
In calculating the fee at the time of platting, the Village shall assume the maximum density permitted under
the zoning classification approved pursuant to the table attached as Exhibit C. For example, if the
subdivision in question is zoned single family, the Village will assume for purposes of calculating fees
payable, pursuant to this Impact Fee Ordinance, as amended from time to time, that all houses will have
five bedrooms. The Village will then hold sufficient funds pending issuance of the building permit to enable
it to refund any overpayments resulting from the fact that houses with less than five bedrooms are
constructed. Refunds shall be made at time of issuance of the building permit.
For any lot which received final plat approval for development prior to the enactment of this Impact Fee
Ordinance, as amended from time to time, and which remains vacant at the time this Ordinance is
enacted, then all dedications and fees imposed by this Ordinance shall be due and payable at the time a
building permit is issued.
§155.60.22 MISCELLANEOUS.
In calculating any cash contributions in lieu of land dedication payable at time of issuance of building
permit as provided in Section 155 .60.05 herein, the Village shall use the fair market value as set forth in
Section 155.60.05 or any amendment thereto and in effect at the time of the contribution and building
permit issuance.
The Village recognizes the fact that developments may differ in their impact upon a community. Consequently,
the Village reserves the right to negotiate dedications that are different from those contained in
this Impact Fee Ordinance.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-30
EXHIBIT A
AGREEMENT REGARDING THE RECEIPT
OF DEVELOPER SUBDIVISION CONTRIBUTIONS
THIS AGREEMENT, entered into as of the day of by and between the Village of
Deer Park, Lake and Cook Counties, Illinois (the “Village”), and , a governmental
body within the State of Illinois (the “Benefiting Government”).
WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the Village, through its ordinances or through the provisions of its annexation
agreements has required that developers make contributions to the Village, that the Village, in turn, may
make available for other government bodies that are affected by the subdivision improvements; and
WHEREAS, such contributions may be in land or in money and, when transferred or paid over to
those government bodies, inure in part to the benefit of those government bodies and not entirely to the
direct benefit of the Village; and
WHEREAS, from time to time within the Village, and within other municipalities, disputes have
arisen regarding the validity and amount of such contributions; and
WHEREAS, the Village is willing, at. its discretion, to continue seeking the contribution of land
or money but wishes to procure a commitment from other government bodies benefited by the receipt of
such contributions that those government bodies will (a) acknowledge that the requirement that such
subdivision contributions be made is totally within the discretion of the Village as to their existence,
manner and amount; (b) the other government body that benefits from the contribution will pay the cost
of defending any lawsuit that is filed challenging the appropriate amount of the contributions, the time at
which they are to be made or any other aspect of the contributions; and (c) that the benefited government
body will comply with the terms of a final and nonappealable judicial determination by a court of
competent jurisdiction rendered in connection with the lawsuit; and
WHEREAS, the Village is willing, in its discretion, to pay over or require contributions only to
other government bodies that execute this Agreement;
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED between the Village and the Benefiting Government,
in consideration for the payment of money or the transfer of the land to the Benefiting Government,
which the Village from time to time may within its discretion cause to be made by developers that are
subdividing property, the Benefiting Government does agree, as follows:
1. The Benefiting Government acknowledges that, except as otherwise provided in the Village’s
ordinances and/or annexation agreements, the Village is not obligated to cause the
payment of money or the transfer of land to the Benefiting Government. The Benefiting Government
recognizes that the Village may, at its sole discretion, amend its ordinances or annexation
agreements or its practices to discontinue the payment of subdivision contributions to the
Benefiting Government.
2.
A. In the event a lawsuit is filed against the Village, the Benefiting Government, and/or
others by a developer that is subdividing property or any other person, corporation or
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-31
entity that challenges the appropriateness, amount, timing or any other aspect of a subdivision
contribution that, pursuant to the terms of the Village’s ordinances or annexation
agreements, has been paid or is due to the Benefiting Government, then the Benefiting
Government does agree to pay the costs and litigation expenses (including reasonable attorneys’
fees) incurred in defending such lawsuit. The costs and expenses shall be paid
by the Benefiting Government when and as incurred by the Village but in no event more
than once a month. As a condition precedent to the payment of these costs and expenses,
the Village shall submit to the Benefiting Government copies of the original statements
reflecting the costs and expenses, together with the supporting documentation that may
be reasonably requested by the Benefiting Government.
B. The Village covenants and agrees that it shall employ competent and skilled legal counsel
to represent the Benefiting Government and the Village, and further covenants and
agrees that it shall keep the Benefiting Government fully advised as to the progress
and status of the litigation. In particular, the Village shall provide to the Benefiting
Government copies of all pleadings filed in the litigation and shall consult regularly
(and shall cause its attorneys to consult regularly) with the Benefiting Government or
its attorneys, as applicable, as to the strategy for defending the lawsuit. In no event may
such litigation be compromised or settled by the Village without at least 30 days’ prior
written notice to the Benefiting Government. In the event that the Benefiting Government
decides that it would prefer to be represented in the litigation by legal counsel of its own
choosing, then the Benefiting Government shall be free to retain its own legal counsel
for that purpose and to intervene in the litigation. In the event the Benefiting Government
shall intervene in the litigation, this Agreement shall terminate from and after the
date of the intervention and neither party to this Agreement shall have any further obligations
under the terms of this agreement from and after that date and the Benefiting Government
may choose to continue to defend or choose not to defend the suit; provided,
however, that the Benefiting Government shall still be liable for all sums that have accrued
pursuant to the above subparagraph 2-A and that remain due and owing from
the Benefiting Government to the Village relating to the defense of any lawsuit filed in
connection with dedications required for cash contribution in lieu thereof collected
for or distributed to the Benefiting Government.
3. In the event that a final and nonappealable judicial determination is made by a court of competent
jurisdiction that contributions of land or cash received by the Benefiting Government are, in
whole or in part, excessive, the Benefiting Government shall promptly repay those contributions
to the person who procures such a judgment, together with all other amounts judged by
the court to be owing from the Benefiting Government. In the event that a judicial determination
should require the payment of damages or payment of attorneys’ fees of the plaintiffs’ attorneys,
in addition to the return of contributions held to be excessive, the Benefiting Government
shall pay such additional amounts.
4. In f u r t h e r consideration of the continued payment by the Village to the Benefiting Government
of the subject contributions of land or money, the Benefiting Government agrees that
its obligations under this Agreement shall extend to both past and future cash and land contributions.
5. On or b e f o r e June 1st of each year, every Benefiting Government that receives payments
from the Village under this Agreement shall submit a report to the Village describing the manner
in which the payments have been used and provide any additional information the municiTitle
XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-32
pality may require. When this Agreement provides that funds turned over to the Benefiting
Government are to be used for a specific purpose or within a specific time period, the report
shall address those issues. If the Benefiting Government should fail to file such a report with
the Village, the Village may delay the payment of any additional funds due the Benefiting
Government until such time as a full report containing adequate information is transmitted to
the Village. The Benefiting Government understands that it will be asked to execute an indemnity
agreement similar to this Agreement on an annual basis and that the Village shall not pay
any additional funds due to the Benefiting Government until such time as the Municipality is
in receipt of such annual executed indemnity agreement.
6. This A g r e e m e n t shall be terminated by either party for any reason or no reason at all upon
30 days’ prior written notice to the other party evidencing the intention to so terminate this
Agreement. But the termination of this Agreement shall not affect the continuing obligation of the
Benefiting Government or the Village with regard to claims or damages allegedly arising out of
the Village’s efforts prior to termination to impose, collect or distribute contributions, or to the
actual distribution of subdivision contributions.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed this Agreement as of the date first above written.
Benefiting
Village of Deer Park Government:
Village President
Title:
(SEAL) (SEAL)
ATTEST: ATTEST:
Village Clerk Secretary
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-33
EXHIBIT B
AGREEMENT BETWEEN DEVELOPER
AND MUNICIPALITY TO DELAY CASH CONTRIBUTIONS
This Agreement (“Agreement”) between the Village of Deer Park, Lake and Cook Counties (the “Village”),
and , (“Developer”) agree as follows:
WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the Village has approved a final plat of subdivision or a final plat of a planned development
at the request of Developer for the real estate legally described in Exhibit A attached hereto and made
a part hereof (the “Land”). Accordingly, pursuant to the Village’s Subdivision Regulations, certain cash
contributions in lieu of dedications for library, fire/rescue, park and recreation, and school lands are immediately
due the Village from the Developer.
WHEREAS, Developer has, however, requested that the payment of the aforesaid cash contributions be
delayed and that the same become due and payable on a per dwelling unit basis at the time the Village
issues a building permit for the particular dwelling unit.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration for the Village agreeing to delay its receipt of the cash contributions,
Developer hereby agrees as follows:
1. The amount of cash contributions owed shall be calculated based upon the Deer Park Impact Fee
Ordinance, or as provided for in such other future ordinance amending or replacing the Deer Park
Impact Fee Ordinance (the “Ordinance”) which is in effect at the time of the issuance of a building
permit; and
2. Notwithstanding any present or future law, regulation and/or legal precedent to the contrary, the
unit of local government that is the ultimate recipient of the subject cash contributions may expend
such contributions for any of the following purposes intended to serve immediate or future needs of
the residents and children of the Developer’s subdivision or planned development: (a) for the
acquisition of land; (b) for site improvements such as, by way of example, streets, curbs, gutters,
stormwater control, and utility extensions; (c) for construction of capital facilities, including, by
way of example, new buildings and structures, and the expansion or enhancement of existing
buildings and structures; and (d) for so-called soft costs directly related to the foregoing items, such
as architectural and engineering costs.
3. Developer has reviewed the Ordinance, and all of the methodology, formula, calculations, projections,
assumptions, numbers and other factors used to arrive at the land dedication requirements
or cash contributions that are required under the Ordinance and this Agreement (the
“Contribution”) and hereby acknowledges and agrees that:
a. Pursuant to the terms of the Ordinance, Developer has been offered the opportunity to raise
in a hearing before the Village Plan Commission, any objections relating to acreage requirements,
presumptions as to fair market value, the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population
Per Unit Dwelling Unit, or any other application of the Ordinance; Developer has not
raised such objections; Developer has thereby waived the right to assert those objections.
b. Developer hereby waives any future right to object to or institute any legal action regarding
the Contribution.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-34
c. Developer hereby acknowledges that the Ordinance and Calculations have been properly
passed, calculated and imposed.
4. This Agreement constitutes a covenant that is appurtenant to and runs with the Land. Either this
Agreement or a memorandum thereof may be recorded against legal title to the Land by either party
hereto; provided, however, it shall be a condition of the Village’s issuance of the first building
permit for a dwelling unit on the Land that Developer shall provide satisfactory evidence to the
Village that this Agreement or a memorandum thereof has been recorded against legal title to the
Land.
5. Developer represents and warrants to the Village that it is the sole holder of record fee title to the
Land.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Village and the Developer have caused this Agreement to be duly
authorized, executed and entered as of the date first above written.
Village of Deer Park
Village President Developer
ATTEST:
Village Clerk
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-35
EXHIBIT C
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE SCHOOL POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Type
Of
Unit
Children Per Unit
Adults
18years +
Total Per
Dwelling
Unit
Preschool
0-4 years
Elementary
Grades
K- 5
5-10 years
Middle
Grades
6-8
11-13
years
Total
Grades
K- 8
5-13 years
High
School
Grades
9-12
14-17
years
Detached Single Family:
2 Bedroom 0.113 0.136 0.048 0.184 0.020 1.700 2.017
3 Bedroom 0.292 0.369 0.173 0.542 0.184 1.881 2.899
4 Bedroom 0.418 0.530 0.298 0.828 0.360 2.158 3.764
5 Bedroom 0.283 0.345 0.248 0.593 0.300 2.594 3.770
Attached Single Family:
1 Bedroom 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.193 1.193
2 Bedroom 0.064 0.088 0.048 0.136 0.038 1.752 1.990
3 Bedroom 0.212 0.234 0.058 0.292 0.059 1.829 2.392
4 Bedroom 0.323 0.322 0.154 0.476 0.173 2.173 3.145
Apartments:
Efficiency 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.294 1.294
1 Bedroom 0.000 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 1.754 1.758
2 Bedroom 0.047 0.086 0.042 0.128 0.046 1.693 1.914
3 Bedroom 0.052 0.234 0.123 0.357 0.118 2.526 3.053
Source: Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., Naperville, IL 1996
(Ord. 03-4 passed 1-20-03, Amd. Ord. 04-20 passed 4-19-04, 10-07 passed /10)
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-36
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§155.70 APPROVAL OF PLAN COMMISSION REQUIRED.
No land shall after March 21, 1960 be subdivided nor any street laid out, nor any improvements made to
the land until the plan or plans of the subdivision or street improvements shall have been certified to and
approved by the Plan Commission. This approval must be in writing and placed on the original tracing
of the final plans as hereinafter specified under §155.71. (‘77 Code, §23.05) Penalty, see §155.99
§155.71 INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER’S EXPENSE.
All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions of this chapter shall be inspected at
the subdivider’s expense. The Village Engineer, a registered professional engineer shall provide an
inspection of the job for the Village Board both prior to and during the process of construction. When the
work is completed, the engineer shall certify to the governing body that the work complies in all respects
with the approved plans and specifications.
§155.72 VARIATIONS.
The Plan Commission may recommend a variation of the application of the regulations in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this chapter in cases where there are particular difficulties or peculiar
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any such regulation relating to the dividing of land.
The Plan Commission shall give its reasons for any such recommendation to the Board of Trustees, which
has the authority to approve or deny such variation. (‘77 Code, §23.13)
§155.99 PENALTY.
Any person who shall subdivide, sell, or dispose of any parcel of land in violation of the terms of this
Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense and shall be responsible for
the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to the Village’s attorney fees, court costs and
other costs and expenses incurred by the Village related thereto. Any person who shall willfully violate
any of the provisions of this Chapter (after he has been notified by a duly authorized official of the Village
that he is in violation) shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 and shall be responsible for
the Village’s cost of prosecution, including but not limited to the Village’s attorney fees, court costs and
other costs and expenses incurred by the Village related thereto. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense. (‘77 Code, §23.18) (Amd. Ord. 15-02 passed 3/16/15)
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-37
APPENDIX A: NEW ROAD CONSTRUCTION
Section
1. Base and Surface Construction
2. Pipe Underdrains
3. Aggregate Ditch
4. Alternative Drainage Design for Subdivisions Zoned R-1.
§1. BASE AND SURFACE CONSTRUCTION.
(A) The base material shall consist of bituminous aggregate mixture (BAM) in accordance with Section
312 of the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction in Illinois (SSRBC) dated July 1, 1984 as it may be amended from time to
time. The BAM base course shall be seven inches thick when compacted to not less than 93% of
the maximum theoretical density. The BAM base course shall be installed in two lifts neither of
which shall exceed a maximum of four inches per compacted layer. The surface of each layer
shall be clean and dry before succeeding layers are placed.
(B) The surface course shall consist of bituminous concrete (Class I) not less than two inches
when compacted to not less than 93% of the maximum theoretical density, and shall be placed
under the following conditions:
(1) After the base course has weathered two winters, the Village Engineer shall make an inspection
for failures in the base course.
(2) Any failures in the base course noted by the Village Engineer shall be repaired according
to the standards set forth in Section 620 of the Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction in Illinois (SSRBC) relating to pavement patching, as published
by the Illinois Department of Transportation, or any substitute or successor regulation
thereto.
(3) The entire base course of the pavement shall have a geotechnical fabric applied as specified
for Reflective Crack Control System A per SSRBC Section 443 pertaining to
Reflective Crack Control Treatment of the SSRBC, or any substitute or successor regulation
thereto.
(‘77 Code, Ch. 23, Spec. A(1)) (Ord. 88-2 passed 2-15-88)
§2. PIPE UNDERDRAINS.
(A) The drainage swales on both sides of the pavement of all public streets shall have a minimum
eight- inch diameter pipe underdrain installed meeting the provisions of Section 607 of the
SSRBC relating to pipe drains and underdrains. Course aggregate No. 16 shall be used in
place of fine aggregate No. 1 or 2 as specified in Section 607. The trench shall be wrapped
using a fabric envelope meeting the requirements of “Special Provisions for Pipe Underdrains”
(Check Sheet No. 19 in the Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions Booklet)
published by the Illinois Department of Transportation, or any substitute or successor regulation
thereto.
(B) The sump pump discharge line from buildings on the lots within the subdivision and septic sysTitle
XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-38
tem curtain drain discharge lines shall be connected to the pipe underdrains in the drainage
swales. All connections shall be effected through tee or wye fittings.
(C) The Village Engineer, in his sole discretion, may, but shall not be required to, waive the
pipe underdrain requirements of division (A) of this section for a particular project provided the
proposed gradient of the drainage swale is 2% or greater.
(‘77 Code, Ch. 23, Spec. A(2)) (Ord. 88-2 passed 2-15-88)
§3. AGGREGATE DITCH.
(A) The drainage swales on both sides of the pavement of all streets shall be a four foot wide aggregate
ditch lining installed meeting the requirements of Section 283 of the SSRBC relating to
flexible ditch lining and aggregate ditches, or any substitute or successor regulation thereto.
(B) The aggregate ditch lining shall be continuous throughout the drainage swales. Culvert crossings
of the drainage swales shall be installed at the top of the aggregate ditch lining.
(C) The Village Engineer, in his sole discretion, may waive the aggregate ditch requirements of divisions
(A) and (B) of this section for a particular project provided the proposed gradient of the
drainage swale is 2% or greater and the design engineer can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Village Engineer that the elimination of the aggregate ditch will not cause erosion of the
drainage swale.
(‘77 Code, Ch. 23, Spec. A(3)) (Ord. 88-2 passed 2-15-88)
§4. ALTERNATIVE DRAINAGE DESIGN FOR SUBDIVISIONS ZONED R-1.
(A) The Village shall permit for subdivisions in which the smallest lot is one acre or larger
curbs, gutters and storm sewers to be constructed as an alternative to the pipe underdrain and
aggregate ditch requirements of §§2 and 3 above per the following design standards:
(1) Combination concrete curbs and gutters shall meet the standards of Section M-3.12 of
the SSRBC or any substitute or successor regulation thereto.
(2) The street pavement widths as listed in §155.40(A)(1), (2) and (3) shall be maintained
with the combination concrete curb and gutter widths being in addition to the pavement
widths.
(3) The street pavements shall be drained by a storm drainage system designed to accept
the runoff from a storm with an intensity expected once in ten years and a maximum
overland flow distance of 300 feet. The rational method of storm sewer sizing shall be
utilized in the design. The design engineer shall provide the Village Engineer with a
topographic survey of the entire watershed in which the proposed subdivision is located.
The storm sewer system in the proposed subdivision shall be sized to accept the runoff
from all tributary areas at the design storm intensity and at a coefficient of runoff anticipated
for the property in a condition developed to the Village standards.
(4) Storm sewers, manholes, catch basins and inlets shall be constructed in accordance
with Sections 550 and 602 of the SSRBC, or any substitute or successor regulation thereto.
Title XV
(Rev. 10/15)
15-155-39
(5) All lots within the subdivision anticipated to be improved with a building or buildings
shall also be improved with a six-inch diameter storm sewer service line connected to
the storm drainage system within the subdivision. The sump pump discharge line
from buildings proposed for construction as well as the septic system curtain drain
discharge line shall be connected to the storm sewer service line. The storm sewer service
line shall be constructed in accordance with Section 601 of the SSRBC, or any
substitute or successor regulation thereto.
(‘77 Code, Ch. 23, Spec. A(4)) (Ord. 88-2 passed 2-15-88)
Z:\D\DEER PARK\Code\TTL XV-Chapt 155-Subdivision Regulations-10-15.docx
CHAPTER 156: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
§156.01 General Provisions
§156.02 Drainage
§156.03 Loud, Unnecessary Noise
§156.04 Pools Creating Nuisances
§156.05 Pools to be Kept in Sanitary Condition
§156.06 Existing Above-Ground Pools; Amortization Period
§156.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. Definition: The term “private residential swimming pool means a receptacle for water, or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet (2’), intended for the
immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment,
constructed, installed and maintained in the ground, for the sole use of members of dwelling units
or guests and not for a fee or in connection with any business, governmental, social or fraternal
organization. Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in residential districts only.
Above ground swimming pools are not permitted, except as provided in §156.06. Inflatable wading
pools not more than two feet (2’) in depth are not swimming pools for purposes of this Section. Hot
tubs not exceeding eight feet (8’) in diameter and four feet (4’) in depth, built into a deck attached
to a residence are not swimming pools for purposes of this Section.
B. Building Permit Required: A building permit is required for the construction, alteration,
enlargement or installation of a private residential swimming pool.
C. Approval of Plans: All plans and specifications for the construction, installation, enlargement or
alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances shall be presented to the
Building Inspector for examination and approval as to proper location, construction and use.
D. Plans and Specifications: All plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale of not less than oneeighth
of an inch to the foot (1/8” = 1’). All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured
and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot lines, and including information
pertaining to the pool, walk and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water
disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool, indicating depth, shall be
included.
E. Deviation From Plans: All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and
drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans.
F. Setback Area; Maximum Area:
1. Side and Rear Yards: No portion of a private residential pool, or any of its equipment or
appurtenances, shall be located at a distance less than thirty feet (30’) from any side or
rear property line and not less than twenty-five feet (25’) from any septic tank or septic
field absorption field line. Platforms, decks or walkways constructed at grade level may
encroach three feet (3’) into the thirty foot (30’) side and rear yard setback.
_____________________________________________________________________________
15-156-1 Title XV
(Rev. 05/12)
2. Front and Corner Side Yards: No portion of a private residential swimming pool and its
appurtenances may encroach into a front yard or a corner side yard.
3. Pool Area: The inside swimming area of a private residential swimming pool shall not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the rear yard area.
G. Materials: Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be constructed of any impervious
material which will provide a tight tank with light colored, easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or
bottom surface of the pool shall have a non-slip finish as smooth as possible. The side and the end
walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish.
H. Electrical Requirements: All electrical installation provided for, installed and used in conjunction
with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance with the National Electrical Code,
State and local laws. No electrical conductors shall cross over or under a pool, nor be within ten
feet (10’) of the pool, except conductors which are appurtenant to the pool equipment. Any metal
fence or other structure adjacent to a pool shall be properly grounded.
I. Structural Design: Pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within, and to resist
the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty.
J. Wall Slopes: To a depth up to five feet (5’) from the pool top, the wall slope shall not be more than
one unit horizontal in five (5) units vertical (1:5).
K. Floor Slopes: The slope of the pool floor on the shallow side of the transition
point shall not exceed one unit vertical to seven (7) units horizontal (1:7). The slope of the pool
floor on the deep side of the transition point shall not exceed one unit vertical to three (3) units
horizontal (1:3). The transition point between shallow and deep water shall not be more than five
feet (5’) deep.
L. Diving Boards: No diving board shall be more than three (3) meters above the water surface.
International Building Code, as amended, shall determine minimum water depths and distances
when diving boards are proposed.
M. Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty-six inches (36”) wide shall be provided to
extend entirely around the pool. The walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the
surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of non-slip construction. The slope
of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4”) to the foot, designed so as to
prevent back drainage from entering the pool.
N. Steps or Ladders: Two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided. The means of egress shall be located at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool.
Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of non-slip material and shall have a handrail on
both sides.
O. Fences: All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence which shall enclose either the
periphery area of the pool walks or the entire yard where the pool is located, so as to prevent the
passage of any object having any dimension in excess of six inches (6”). A fence enclosing only the
pool shall be three and one-half feet (3.5’) in height above the existing grade. The finished side of
all pool fences shall face the abutting properties and all fence openings shall be equipped with gates
having self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate. A fence enclosing the
_____________________________________________________________________________
15-156-2 Title XV
(Rev. 05/12)
entire yard where the pool is located shall comply with the regulations in Chapter 151 of this Code.
All fencing material shall be approved by the Building Inspector. Plants, shrubs, bushes or any
other living screening shall not constitute a fence meeting the requirements of this Chapter.
P. All residential swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type, the water drawn from the pool
being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool, and shall comply with all
applicable regulations of Lake County.
§156.02 DRAINAGE.
No direct connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer or septic system and no drainage shall be made
into or over a septic system or into a storm ditch or swale or otherwise result in any of the contents
flowing onto, or beyond the boundaries of the owner’s property. All drainage shall be hauled from the
owner’s property by an enclosed tanker truck or similarly equipped vehicle.
§156.03 LOUD, UNNECESSARY NOISE.
No loud unnecessary or unusual noises shall be permitted in or around a private swimming pool, nor any
noise which disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents. This includes radios, musical
instruments, and phonographs, which shall not exceed the volume necessary for convenient hearing of the
persons who are on the pool premises.
§156.04 POOLS CREATING NUISANCES.
No pool shall be so operated or maintained as to create a nuisance, an eyesore or otherwise to result in a
substantial adverse effect on neighboring properties, or to be in any other way detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare. The Building Inspector shall refer any complaints or questions under this
section to the Plan Commission, which shall have the authority to issue an appropriate order to terminate
the condition about which there is a complaint. The Building Inspector shall refer the application for any
pool which he considers to be undesirable in appearance to the Plan Commission. The Commission shall
have the authority to approve, deny, or impose appropriate changes or safeguards. Its decision shall be
based upon the avoidance of a substantial adverse effect upon property values in the neighborhood.
§156.05 POOLS TO BE KEPT IN SANITARY CONDITION.
A swimming pool and its appurtenant facilities shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition.
§156.06 EXISTING ABOVE-GROUND POOLS; AMORTIZATION PERIOD.
Any resident of the Village owning an above-ground pool prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
may continue to utilize the pool, or any replacement pool, until September 30, 2014, subject to the
following conditions:
A. After the effective date of this Ordinance, no existing above-ground pool may be filled or re-filled
until the owner has registered the pool with the Village Building Inspector. Registration shall be
required only once for each above-ground pool. No fee shall be required for registration. Proof of
ownership of the pool prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be required for registration.
B. Registration of an existing above-ground pool shall be valid only as to the owner of the property on
the date of registration and is not transferable. If the property is sold, any above-ground pool must
be removed and no above-ground pool shall be permitted thereafter.
____________________________________________________________________________
15-156-3 Title XV
(Rev. 05/12)
C. All provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to above-ground pools, except that no building
plans or permits shall be required; no diving boards shall be permitted; and requirements regarding
floor slopes and walkways shall not apply.
D. Every registered above-ground pool shall be permanently removed after September 30, 2014 and no
above-ground pools shall be permitted thereafter.
(Ord. 78-5, passed 3-20-78) (Am. Ord. 09-01, passed 01-22-09)
____________________________________________________________________________
15-156-4 Title XV
(Rev. 05/12)
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-1
CHAPTER 157: SIGNS
Section
General Provisions
§157.01 Purpose
§157.02 Scope
§157.03 Definitions
§157.04 Exemptions
§157.05 General Standards
§157.06 Computations
§157.07 Signs Allowed on Private Property
§157.08 Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning District
§157.09 Maximum Total Sign Area Per Zoning Lot by Zoning District and Street
Classification
§157.10 Number, Dimensions, Location of Individual Signs by Zoning District and Street
Classification
§157.11 Number and Dimensions of Certain Individual Signs
§157.12 Permitted Sign Characteristics by Zoning District
§157.13 Permitted Extra Signs
§157.14 Unified Business Center and Planned Development Sign Plan
§157.15 Planned Development Sign Districts
§157.16 Legal Nonconforming Signs
§157.17 Signs in the Public Right-of-Way
§157.18 Prohibited Signs
§157.19 Maintenance and Operation
§157.20 Proposed Fee Schedule
§157.21 Overlay Sign District
Administration
§157.40 Administrative Officer
§157.41 Permit Requirements and Fees
§157.42 Application Review Procedures
§157.43 Inspection Procedures
§157.44 Variations
§157.98 Violations
§157.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§157.01 PURPOSE.
This chapter is established to create the standards for a comprehensive and balanced system of sign
regulations for the following purposes:
(A) To encourage, as a means of communication in the Village, the employment of signs which are:
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-2
(1) Compatible with their surroundings.
(2) Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain.
(3) Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors.
(4) Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
(5) Respectful of the reasonable rights of other sign owners.
(B) To preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
(C) To improve pedestrian and traffic safety.
(D) To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the Village’s ability to attract sources of
economic development by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs.
(E) To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property.
(F) To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding
land uses.
(G) To ensure that signs are designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which
they principally relate.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
§157.02 SCOPE.
No sign shall be constructed, erected, initially painted, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled,
relocated or expanded until a permit for such sign has been obtained in accordance with the standards and
procedures set out in this chapter. However, no permit shall be required for routine maintenance as defined
herein.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
§157.03 DEFINITIONS.
The definitions noted below apply uniquely to this chapter and supersede any conflicting definitions found
in Chapter 158. The rules for interpretation found in Chapter 158 shall be applicable to these definitions.
ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator of the Village of Deer Park.
ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a
commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured, or an entertainment offered on the premises
where the sign is located or to which it is affixed.
ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a
special effect or scene.
AWNING. Any structure entirely supported by the wall to which it is attached and which has a frame
covered by a non-rigid material and/or which can be retracted against the wall by which it is
supported.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-3
AWNING, CANOPY, and MARQUEE SIGN. A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to,
an awning, canopy or marquee.
BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole or a building
by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, shall not be
considered banners.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN. A sign that identifies an institution or other non-profit organization on
whose premises it is located and which contains the name of the institution or non-profit organization
and/or movable letters announcing events or activities occurring on the site.
CANOPY. Any permanent exterior roof structure attached to a building at the inner end and supported
on the outer end in conformance with the Building Code of the Village of Deer Park.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that
can be changed or rearranged. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day
shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. A
sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or
temperature shall be considered a “time and temperature” portion of a sign and not a changeable copy
sign for purposes of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or
indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial
activity.
COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN. A sign plan approved by the Plan Commission indicating the
size and location of all signs to be located in a unified business center.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign indicating the name of the future building and/or the
names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, and similar professionals
involved in the design and construction of a structure or project during the period of construction.
DISPLAY FRONTAGE. The length of a building the plane of which is within 45° of parallel to and
directly exposed to a public street or thoroughfare.
ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, re-hang, place, affix, or relocate and includes the painting
or lettering of signs.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION. The illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source
of light which is not contained within the sign itself.
FACADE. Any side, surface or wall below the roof of a building which is parallel or within 45° of
parallel with a parcel’s frontage on a public thoroughfare, which faces toward and relates to that
public thoroughfare. If a building has a complex shape, then all walls or surfaces facing in the same
direction, or nearly the same direction, are part of a single facade.
FLAG. Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of
a government, political subdivision, or other entity.
FLASHING SIGN. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign where the source of illumination is not
maintained constant or stationary in the intensity or color at all times when such sign is inuse.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-4
FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or
anchored in the ground, and that are independent from any building or other structure. Freestanding
signs include ground and pole signs.
GASOLINE STATION. A premises used primarily to dispense fuels for motor vehicles.
GROUND SIGN. Any detached sign which has its bottom portion erected upon or supported directly
on the ground.
INCIDENTAL SIGN. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the
zone lot on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and
other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the zoning
lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign where the text gives the name and address of a building, business,
development, or establishment. Such a sign may also be wholly or partly devoted to a readily
recognized symbol.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which is illuminated by light sources.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION. The illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source
of light concealed or contained within the sign itself, and which becomes visible in darkness through
the translucent portion of the sign face.
MARQUEE. Any hood or roof-like structure of permanent construction supported entirely by the
building, and projecting from the building’s wall over an entrance, sidewalk or pedestrian
thoroughfare.
MOVIE or LIVE ENTERTAINMENT THEATER. A fully-enclosed building with fixed or movable
seats arranged in an auditorium fashion, where motion pictures or live entertainment acts are
presented.
NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or
partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
POLE SIGN. A sign mounted on one or more freestanding pole(s) so that the bottom edge of the
sign is a minimum of seven feet above ground level.
PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure,
or a sign designed to be transported, including but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by
means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons or
inflatable devices; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked
and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business, and is not parked in a location visible from the public right-of-way for a
duration of greater than 4 hours within a 24 hour period.
PROJECTING SIGN. A sign wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support, and which
projects more than 12 inches in a perpendicular fashion from such building.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-5
PYLON SIGN. A narrow sign which extends higher than five feet, with a fully enclosed and
continuous exterior face running from the top of the sign to the ground.
REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the lot or tract of land on which the
sign is located, or to the sale or lease of one or more structures or a portion thereof located thereon.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN. Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no
commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where
the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of the
zoning chapter.
ROOF SIGN. A sign mounted on the roof of a building.
SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, message, or illustration which is affixed to, or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land, and which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
SIGN CONTRACTOR. A person or entity who performs work for compensation in connection with
the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, improvement, maintenance,
conversion or manufacture of any sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE. The sign and all parts associated with its mounting.
SIGN SURFACE AREA. The total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter composed of a
single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or
other figures, together with any material, or color used as an integral part of the display or to
differentiate the sign from the background on which it is placed.
SIGN SUPPORTS. All structural features by which a sign is held up, including, for example, poles,
braces, guys, and anchors.
SUSPENDED SIGN. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and
is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign or attention attracting device that is to be in existence for a limited
period of time, and is not permanently mounted.
UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER. A premises containing three or more individual offices or
businesses sharing a common building.
VILLAGE. The Village of Deer Park, Lake County, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Deer Park.
WALL SIGN. Any sign attached parallel to and supported by a wall or building, and within six inches
of such wall, or painted on the wall surface of any building.
WINDOW AREA. Any transparent area on a facade through which the interior of a premises may be
viewed from outside.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-6
WINDOW SIGN. Any sign, either permanent or temporary, which is affixed or placed so that its
message or image is read as a part of the total composition of a window area.
ZONING LOT or LOT. A single tract of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract
to be used, developed or built upon as a single unit, under single control or ownership. It may be a
single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds, or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to one
another and used as one lot.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
§157.04 EXEMPTIONS.
The following signs shall be exempt from all but the maintenance and public safety requirements of this
chapter:
(A) Government Signs. Any public notice, warning, directional, and other instructional or regulatory signs
required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
(B) Interior Signs. Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, which is not able to be
read from vehicles passing on adjoining streets.
(C) Non-sign Decorations. Temporary displays, including holiday lights, decorations, painted window
areas, works of art, flags (not exceeding 50 sq. ft.), memorial signs, religious or historic symbols, and
other displays with no commercial message.
(D) Traffic Control Signs on private property, such as “Stop,” “Yield,” and similar signs which meet
Illinois Department of Transportation standards, and which contain no commercialmessage.
(E) Memorial Signs. Memorial signs or tablets listing names or buildings and date of erection, when cut
into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or
other incombustible material.
(F) Directional and Warning Signs. Non-illuminated signs, not exceeding four square feet in area, which
provide instruction, direction or warning and are located entirely on the property to which they pertain
to identify rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features of
a similar nature or with respect to warnings, “no trespassing,” “no dumping,” and similar warning
signs.
(G) Business Nameplates. Non-electrical nameplates denoting the business name of an occupation legally
conducted on the premises, provided that the sign area does not exceed two square feet in area,
provided that no more than one sign per principal use may be erected.
(H) Bulletin Boards. Bulletin board signs not exceeding 20 square feet for public, charitable or religious
institutions where the same are located on the zoning lot of the institutions.
(I) Subdivision Identification Signs. Subdivision and multiple family complex identity signs, provided
that:
(1) Only one sign is erected on each corner at each primary entry to the subdivision orcomplex;
and
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-7
(2) If there is more than one primary entrance, the separation between signs along the perimeter
of the complex shall be at least 200 feet; and
(3) The sign area of an individual sign does not exceed 50 square feet on both sides of a twosided
sign, or 50 square feet on a one-sided sign; and
(4) The sign contains only the name of the subdivision or complex and appropriate logo, and
does not contain a commercial message; and
(5) The sign is located outside of the “vision triangle,” defined in § 157.05(H)(1); and
(6) The sign has a landscaped base.
(J) “Open” Signs. No more than two temporary signs which advertise premises open for inspection,
provided such signs do not exceed four square feet each, are located with no more than one sign per
frontage on the zoning lot to be inspected. and are only in place when the related premises is actually
open for inspection.
(K) Construction Signs. One sign per frontage denoting the name of the project, the architect, engineer,
contractor, and/or lending agency for the project. Such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet, nor shall
such signs be erected prior to the beginning of construction for which a valid building permit has
been issued. They shall be confined to the site of construction, and shall be removed 10 days after
completion of construction or the expiration of the building permit.
(L) Model Home Signs. A sign identifying an unoccupied new home used as a demonstration model for
the purpose of selling other homes in a residential subdivision of more than four dwelling units. Each
model home located within a recorded residential subdivision may have one identification sign not
to exceed four square feet in area, located entirely within the lot containing themodel.
(M) Garage Sale Signs. A sign which advertises a residential garage sale, provided that such signs do not
exceed four square feet each, are located with no more than one sign per lot frontage either on the
zoning lot containing the sale or on other private property with that property owner’s or tenant’s
permission, and are only in place one week prior and during the time the garage sale is actually taking
place.
(N) Management Signs. Signs not exceeding four square feet which designate the real estate management
agent for a premises.
(O) Real Estate Signs. One real estate sign per street frontage of a zoning lot, advertising the availability
of a sale or lease of premises within said zoning lot. Such signs may not be located in the public rightof-
way, nor be directly illuminated. They shall not exceed eight square feet for residential districts,
and 24 square feet for commercial districts.
(P) Window Signs. Signs affixed to the inside of a window, advertising commercial situations relating to
goods or services sold on premises, provided that the total of all signs in the window area does not
exceed 20% of the window area; and, further provided that each window sign has the initial date of
display permanently and visibly affixed on its face, and that no window sign is displayed for longer
than 30 days.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-8
§157.05 GENERAL STANDARDS.
(A) Applicable Regulations. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all signs must conform to the
regulations and standards of all other applicable chapters of this code.
(B) Commercial Message Location. A sign which displays a commercial message is permitted only on
the premises where the business, profession, accommodation, commodity, service, entertainment, or
other commercial activity represented on the sign is located.
(C) Interchangeable Noncommercial Messages. Any sign that may display one type of noncommercial
message may also display any other type of noncommercial message, so long as the sign complies
with the other requirements of this section.
(D) Interchangeable Noncommercial and Commercial Messages. Any sign that shall display a
commercial message may also display any non-commercial message, either in place of or in addition
to the commercial message, so long as the sign complies with the other requirements of this section
(E) Obstruction to Doors, Windows, or Fire Escapes. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected,
relocated or maintained so as to prevent or inhibit free ingress to, or egress from any door, window
or fire escape, or inhibit the use of fire protection systems. No sign or advertising structure shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape. No sign shall interfere with any opening required for
ventilation.
(F) Glass Limitation. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass. If any single piece or
pane of glass has an area exceeding three square feet, it shall be a safety glass, or its equivalent as
approved by the Administrative Officer, and of such thickness as required to withstand windloads.
(G) Movable Sign Parts.
(1) No sign or its parts shall be permitted to be movable or rotating, nor shall any sign have
illuminated effects which convey the illusion of movement.
(2) With the exception of marquee signs, gasoline price signs, changeable copy signs, and exempt
signs, no sign may contain movable letters or other changeable copy.
(3) All manually movable items on a sign, such as covers to service openings, shall be secured by
latches.
(H) Location.
(1) No sign exceeding 30 inches in height shall be located in any of the following vision triangles
formed by intersecting streets. At any intersection where at least one of the intersecting streets
is a major or collector street as defined in the official map of the Village, the sides of the triangle
formed by the centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be 120 feet in length as measured
outward from the point of intersections of the centerlines along such centerlines. At all other
intersections, each of such sides shall be 80 feet in length.
(2) No signs shall be painted directly upon the exterior walls of a structure.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-9
(3) No sign shall be allowed to encroach upon the public right-of-way or public property, except
as permitted under §157.15.
(4) No sign facing the side or rear lot line of an abutting residentially zoned lot shall be located
within 50 feet of that residential lot line.
(5) No freestanding signs shall be allowed within 20 feet of a principal building(s) on a zoning lot.
(I) Illuminated Signs. All illuminated signs shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located
in any residence district or upon any public street or park. Any illuminated sign located on a
lot adjacent to or across the street from any residence district, which sign is visible from such
residence district, shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully through only the lettering and
graphic elements of the sign. The background for such lettering and graphics shall be opaque
or translucent and shall transmit light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through
the lettering and graphics.
(J) Landscaping Requirements. The following requirements must be included on plans that are
submitted as a part of a sign permit application:
(1) For every one square foot of gross sign area, there shall be provided one square foot of
landscape area adjacent to the sign.
(2) The required landscape area shall compliment the sign and consist of plantings such as, but not
limited hedges, conifers, flowering plants, ground cover and evergreens. Sodded or seeded
areas shall not qualify as part of the landscaped area.
(3) In addition to the plantings described above, the landscaped area shall also contain ground
protection such as, but not limited to ground cover plants or mulch.
(4) It shall be the duty of the owner of such parcel to maintain all such landscaped areas in a neat
and proper manner.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
§157.06 COMPUTATIONS.
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height:
(A) Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face shall be the total exposed surface
within a continuous perimeter composed of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of
characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any material, or
color used as an integral part of the background of the display, or to differentiate the sign from the
background on which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative
fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning chapter regulations and is clearly
incidental to the display itself.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-10
(B) Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be
computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical
sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same
time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches
apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
(C) Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be the measurement from the top of the highest
element of the sign to:
(1) The average level of the finished ground surface, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding
or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign, around any sign located more than 25
feet from a street right-of-way;
(2) The established street elevation when the sign is located within 25 feet from one street rightof-
way; or
(3) The average of all street elevations when the sign is located within 25 feet from more than one
street right-of-way.
(D) Computation of Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area for a Zone Lot. The permitted sum of the area
of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be computed by applying the formula contained in
§157.09, “Maximum Total Sign Area,” for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Lots fronting
on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage. However, no signs
permitted by one frontage may be transferred to another frontage.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
§157.07 SIGNS ALLOWED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) Signs shall be allowed on private property in the Village in accordance with §§ 157.08 through
157.12.
(B) Sign Area Bonuses. The installation of safe and effective signs shall be encouraged through a bonus
system.
(1) The replacement of non-conforming signs shall be encouraged through a bonus of 10% applied
to the allowable area for individual signs and 10% applied to the aggregate sign area, if permits
for the replacement of all legal non-conforming signs on a premises are requested and approved
prior to January 1. 1995.
(2) For every freestanding sign, a one foot height increase is allowed for every 10 feet of additional
setback, beyond that required by the section, up to a maximum height of 15.5 feet.
(3) For principal buildings located within 20 feet of a public right-of-way, the permitted area of a
wall sign may be increased by 10% of the allowable wall sign area.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-11
§157.08 PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT.
Sign Type R1-R3 GB OR INS* PD**
Freestanding
Residential (2) P N N N P
Other N S S S S
Incidental (2) N P P P P
Building
Canopy N S S P S
Identification (3) P P P S P
Incidental (2) N P P P P
Marquee & Awning N S N N S
Residential (1) P N N N P
Suspended N S N P S
Wall N S S S S
Window N S N N S
P = Allowed without sign permit
S = Allowed only with sign permit
N = Not allowed
(1) No commercial message shall be allowed on any sign, except for a commercialmessage
drawing attention to an activity legally offered on the premises.
(2) No commercial message shall be allowed on a sign.
(3) Only address and name of occupant allowed on sign.
* This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted under
the zoning ordinance in residential districts (i.e., churches, schools, governmental facilities).
** All signs permitted in the PD - Planned Development District shall be subject to review by the
Plan Commission as part of the planned unit development procedures contained in Chapter
153.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 99-10, passed 3-15-99) Penalty, see §157.99
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-12
§157.09 MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA PER ZONING LOT BY ZONING DISTRICT AND
STREET CLASSIFICATION.
R1-R3 GB OR INS* PD
The maximum total area of all signs on a zoning lot for which a
permit is required shall not exceed the lesser of the following:
Maximum Number of Total Square
Feet
Regional Arterial
(Rand Road)**
NA 350 200 200 See Note
Below
Local Arterial** NA 200 100 150 See Note
Below
Local Collector & Residential
Streets**
NA NA NA 100 See Note
Below
Maximum Square Feet of Signs per
Linear Foot of Street Frontage
Regional Arterial NA 3.0 1.5 0.25 See Note
Below
Local Arterial NA 1.5 0.5 0.20 See Note
Below
Local Collector & Residential
Streets
NA NA NA .015 See Note
Below
* This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted under
the zoning ordinance in residential districts (i.e., churches, schools, governmental facilities).
** All street classifications shall be as identified in the Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Deer
Park.
Note: For individual free-standing businesses in the PD District, the maximum area of all signs on a
zoning lot shall be as required for uses permitted in the GB or O&R Districts as described in
the list of permitted and special uses contained in the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 158.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 99-10, passed 3-15-99)
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-13
§157.10 NUMBER, DIMENSIONS, LOCATION OF INDIVIDUAL SIGNS BY ZONING
DISTRICT AND STREET CLASSIFICATION.
R1-R3 GB OR INS* PD
Individual signs shall not exceed the applicable maximum
number, dimensions or setbacks shown on this table, and
on the table in § 157.11.
Freestanding Signs
Square
frontage
Feet per linear foot of
Regional Arterial NA 0.35 0.35 0.15 0.35
Local Arterial NA 0.20 0.10 0.10 see
below
note
Local Collectors & Residential
Streets
NA NA NA 0.05 NA
Height (feet) 4 10 10 6 10
Setback (feet) 5 10 10 15 10
Number Permitted
Per Zone Lot 1 1 1 1 1
Extra Signs per feet of street
frontage (1)
NA 1/500 1/500 1/500 1/500
Building Signs
Area (max sq. ft.) 2 NA NA 50 NA
Wall Sign (percent) (2) NA 8 5 NA see
below
note
* This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted under
the zoning ordinance in residential districts (i.e., churches, schools, governmental facilities).
(1) Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage,
but signs cannot be accumulated and used on one street in excess of that allowed for lots with
only one street frontage.
(2) There shall be no more than one wall sign for each business occupying the premises, except that
where a building faces more than one street and is occupied by a single business establishment,
there may be one wall sign on each wall of the building facing a street.
(3) No permitted free-standing sign shall be required to be less than 25 square feet.
(4) Freestanding signs shall not exceed 125 square feet in area.
(5) The area of a building used to calculate the permitted area for wall signs shall be limited to one
story, or a height of 12 feet, whichever is less.
Note: For individual free-standing businesses in the PD District, the maximum area of all signs on a
zoning lot shall be as required for uses permitted in the GB or O&R Districts as described in
the list of permitted and special uses contained in the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 158.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 99-10, passed 3-15-99) Penalty, see § 157.99
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-14
§157.11 NUMBER AND DIMENSIONS OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUAL SIGNS.
Number Allowed Maximum Sign Area Vertical Clearance
from Sidewalk,
Private Drive or
Parking Area
No sign shall exceed any applicable maximum number or dimensions, or encroach on any
applicable minimum clearance shown on this table.
Freestanding
Residential,
and Incidental
Other See Table in
§ 157.10
See Table in § 157.10 NA
Building
Canopy Sign 1 per
entrance
building 25% of vertical surface of
canopy
9 ft.
Awning Sign 1 per
frontage
street .25 sq. ft. of
frontage, or 50
whichever is lesser
building
sq. ft.
9 ft.
Marquee Sign 1 per building .25 sq. ft. of
frontage, or 50
whichever is lesser
building
sq. ft.,
9 ft.
Suspended Sign 1 per
entrance
business NA 9 ft.
Window Sign NA 25% of total window area NA
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 99-10, passed 3-15-99) Penalty, see §157.99
§157.12 PERMITTED SIGN CHARACTERISTICS BY ZONING DISTRICT.
R1-R3 GB OR INS* PD
Changeable Copy N S N P see note
below
Illumination, Internal (1) N S S P S
Illumination, External N S S P S
Illumination, Exposed Bulbs
or Neon
N S N N see note
below
P = Allowed without sign permit
S = Allowed only with sign permit
N = Not allowed
* This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted under
the zoning ordinance in residential districts (i.e. churches, schools, governmental facilities)
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-15
(1) Light shall shine fully through only the lettering and graphic elements of the sign. The
background for such lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit
light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through the lettering andgraphics.
Note: For individual free-standing businesses in the PD District, the maximum area of all signs on a
zoning lot shall be as required for uses permitted in the GB or O&R Districts as described in the
list of permitted and special uses contained in the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 158.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 99-10, passed 3-15-99)
§157.13 PERMITTED EXTRA SIGNS.
(A) Criteria. Certain business operations are hereby found to be unique with respect to their sign
requirements and therefore justified to be permitted to have extra signs, in addition to those specified
in § 157.07, as specified below. These include:
(1) Gasoline Service Stations. Gasoline/Service stations are unique because their primary functions
are performed out-of-doors in a manner prescribed by State statutes.
(2) Movie and Live Entertainment Theaters. These theaters are unique because of the rapid
turnover of the name of their entertainment product.
(3) Unified Business Centers. Unified business centers are unique because of the concentrated
development and their centralized ownership characteristics.
(4) Temporary Signage for Retail Business. Retail businesses are unique because of their need to
attract their customer base at key points in their business cycle.
(B) Gasoline/Service Stations. In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the
following signs are permitted uniquely to gasoline/service stations:
(1) Two signs per pump island which designate the function of the island as “self-service” or “full
service.” Such signs shall not have more than two faces and shall not exceed three square feet
per face.
(2) One sign per type of fuel sold which designates the price of that fuel. Such signs shall not have
more than two faces and shall not exceed six square feet per face. The sign area for more than
one type of fuel may be combined into one sign.
(3) One non-illuminated sign identifying the service performed in each service bay may be placed
over the opening to each bay. Such signs shall have one face and shall not exceed three square
feet each.
(4) One non-illuminated nameplate identifying the owner or operator is permitted adjacent to the
doorway of the station. Such nameplate shall have one face and shall not exceed two square
feet in area.
(5) Temporary signs advertising batteries, tires, oil or other products directly related to motor
vehicles, if the signs are located directly adjacent to a display of the product(s) described. Such
signs may have two faces, however, their total area shall not exceed eight square feet.
(6) Any signs required by State or Federal Government.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-16
(C) Movie and Live Entertainment Theaters. In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this
chapter, the following signs are permitted uniquely to theaters:
(1) Each theater may have one sign of up to 50 square feet which will accommodate changeable
lettering copy.
(2) A theater’s changeable copy sign may have two faces if it is freestanding, but both faces must
be parallel and located no more than two feet apart.
(3) A theater’s changeable copy sign may be located on a marquee, provided it does not project
above or beyond the structural limits of such marquee, nor does it project closer than two feet
from the curb line.
(4) Otherwise, a theater’s changeable copy sign shall conform to the regulations for the sign type
to which it most nearly resembles.
(D) Unified Business Centers and Planned Development Sign Districts. In addition to the signs permitted
by other sections of this chapter, the following additional signs are permitted uniquely to unified
business centers and planned development sign districts.
(1) A unified business center and planned development may have one identification sign for the
center in addition to the signs permitted for each separate business. Such identification signs
may only include the name and graphic logo of the center, address of the center, and also may
include a time and/or temperature sign.
(2) The permitted area of such identification sign shall be based upon a ratio of four square feet
per one acre of the site, up to a maximum of 75 square feet. Every unified business center and
planned development is permitted an identification sign of eight square feet.
(3) Otherwise, unified business center and planned development identification signs shall conform
to the regulations of the sign type to which they most closely resemble.
(4) Unified business centers and planned developments may have common directory signs to guide
pedestrians to individual businesses on the site. Such signs shall be limited to one square foot
per business listed on the sign. Centers must have a minimum of 10 businesses to qualify to
have one directory sign and may have one additional sign for each 10 businesses.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see §157.99
(E) Temporary Signage. In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following
additional signs are permitted uniquely to retail businesses.
(1) A retail business occupant may obtain a temporary sign permit for signage in conjunction with
the initial opening of a business. This permit will be valid for a period of thirty (30) days. The
size, construction, material, and location of the signage is to be approved by the Building
Officer.
(2) A commercial business occupant may obtain a temporary sign permit for signage in conjunction
with annual sales promotions. This permit will valid for ten days. A business may obtain only
one (1) such permit in any calendar year. The size, construction, material, and location of the
signage is to be approved by the BuildingOfficer.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-17
§157.14 UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIGN PLAN.
No permit shall be issued for a sign to be located in a Unified Business Center until a comprehensive sign
plan has been approved for the center and the sign complies with the provisions thereof.
(A) Unified Business Center and Planned Development Sign Plan Approval. Approval of a unified
business center and planned development sign plan shall be at the discretion of the Village Board,
after review and recommendation of the Plan Commission, and in accordance with the criteria noted
herein.
(B) Application Content. In addition to the requirements listed for permit applications in
§ 157.41(B)(2), the application for a unified business center and planned development sign plan shall
include a format for all signs to be used in the center, including their maximum size, color, location,
illumination details, lettering type, mounting details, and landscaping details.
(C) Criteria. The criteria used by the Village in its review of the proposed unified business center or
planned development sign plan shall include:
(1) Scale and Proportion. Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its
visual relationship to the other signs, buildings and surroundings.
(2) Integral Elements. The signs in the plan shall be designed as integral architectural elements of
the building and site to which they principally relate and shall not appear as incongruous “addons”
or intrusions.
(3) Restraint and Harmony. The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and
harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
(4) Effective Composition. The number of graphic elements and letters shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey each sign’s message and shall be composed in proportion to the
area of the sign’s face.
(5) Compatibility. Each sign shall be compatible with signs within the proposed unified business
center or planned development.
(6) Unified Image. The effect of the signs proposed in the plan shall be the establishment of a
unified image for the center.
(D) Permitted Variations. In conjunction with the approval of a unified business center or planned
development sign plan, the Plan Commission may authorize limited variations to the regulations
included in this section. Such variations shall be permitted only when the applicant demonstrates that
they are necessary to provide an improved unified business center or planned development sign plan
that is consistent with the purposes of this section. The variations permitted are limited to the
following:
(1) Freestanding Signs. For freestanding signs the Plan Commission may vary the height
limitations up to the maximum of 15 feet or the height of the principal building to which the
sign pertains (whichever is lower), and may increase the allowable sign area per freestanding
sign by 25%, up to a maximum of 100 square feet.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-18
§157.15 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIGN DISTRICTS.
(A) Together with the application for a planned development, the Plan Commission shall also consider
the designation of the property covered by the planned development as a special sign district. This
special sign district shall be approved by ordinance of the Village Board as a “Planned Development
Sign District” for the purpose of improving the overall appearance of signs in the district.
(B) Initiating a District. Only the person listed as the applicant for the planned development may initiate
the consideration of a special sign district by presenting a request to the Planning Commission as part
of the application for the planned development.
(C) Comprehensive Sign Plan. No sign for which a permit is required may be erected in a planned
development sign district unless it is in conformance with the approved comprehensive sign plan for
that district.
(1) Initial Sign Plan. Prior to the creation of a planned development sign district the Plan
Commission shall examine all proposed signs and recommend to the Village Board a
comprehensive sign plan for the District, including special sign regulations where appropriate.
The planned development sign district regulations contained in the comprehensive sign plan
may supersede regulations found in this section.
(2) Amendments. The comprehensive sign plan for a district may be amended by following the
same procedure that is used to establish the initial planned development plan.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
§157.16 LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
(A) Legal Nonconforming Signs. Any sign, not prohibited herein, located within the Village on January
1, 1994, or located in an area annexed to the Village thereafter, which does not conform with the
provisions for permitted signs of this chapter, is considered a “legal non-conforming sign.”
(B) Signs Existing on Effective Date.
(1) For any sign existing in the Village on January 1, 1994, an application for a sign permit must
be submitted to the Administrative Officer before July 1, 1994.
(2) For any sign on property annexed at a later date, applications for sign permits shall be submitted
within six months of the effective date of the annexation or within such period as may be
established in an annexation agreement between the Village and the landowner.
(3) Signs that are the subject of applications received after the applicable date set forth in this
section shall be subject to all of the terms and conditions of this ordinance and shall not be
entitled to the protection of this section.
(4) Applications for permits for existing signs submitted before July 1, 1994, shall be exempt from
the initial fees adopted under authority of this chapter, but not from renewal and subsequent
fees.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-19
(C) Nonconforming Existing Signs, Permits, and Terms.
(1) A sign that would be permitted under this chapter only with a sign permit, but which was in
existence on January 1, 1994, or on a later date when the property is annexed to the Village,
and which was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in
effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason of its size, height, location, design,
or construction is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, shall be issued a
Nonconforming Sign Permit if an application in accordance with division (B)(4) above
(division (12)(B) of Ord. 93-9) is timely filed.
(2) Such permit shall allow the sign(s) subject to such permit, which were made nonconforming
by the adoption of this chapter, to remain in place and be maintained for a period ending no
later than January 1, 1999, provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent
of the nonconformity. A change in the information on the face of an existing nonconforming
sign is allowed.
(D) Loss of Legal Nonconforming Status.
(1) A sign loses its legal nonconforming status if one or more of the following occurs:
(a) Sign Altered. The sign is altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair,
which tends to or makes the sign less in compliance with requirements of this chapter
than it was before alteration;
(b) Sign Relocated. The sign is relocated either on the premises or to another location;
(c) Sign Unsafe. The sign fails to conform to the sections of this chapter regarding
maintenance and operation, and public safety standards;
(d) Sign Damaged. Damage occurs to a sign which requires repairs exceeding 50% of the
replacement value of the sign;
(e) Excessive Maintenance Costs. When any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would
constitute an expense of more than 25% of the replacement value of the sign.
(f) New Occupancy Permit. A change in use occurs which requires a new occupancy permit
for the premises to which a legal non-conforming sign relates.
(2) On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be immediately brought in
compliance with this section with a new permit secured, therefor, or shall be removed within
30 days of that date.
(E) Continuing Obligation. Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming
sign, or owner of the property on which the legal non-conforming sign is located, from
the provisions of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs, provided however,
that any repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall
not modify the sign structure, sign face or message in such a way which makes the sign more nonconforming.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-20
§157.17 SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following:
(A) Permanent Signs, including:
(1) Public signs erected by or on behalf of a government body to post legal notices, identify public
property, convey public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(2) Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities.
(B) Emergency Signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility
company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
§157.18 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation under § 157.04, are
prohibited in the Village. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
(A) Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature.
(B) In order to ensure reasonable traffic safety, it shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any fluttering,
undulating, swinging, rotating, blinking, or flashing sign or attention gathering device. No sign or
advertising structure nor its associated landscaping shall be erected, installed or maintained in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or as to distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle
by reason of position, shape, color or lighting thereof.
(C) No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to
interfere with, obstruct the view of, or imitate, resemble, or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign or advertising structure shall make use of the words
“stop,” “go,” “slow,” “look,” “caution,” “warning,” “danger,” or any similar word, phrase, symbol,
or character, or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp or light, in such a manner
as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(D) No person shall, for the flagrant purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people
to a business or activity, park any vehicle or trailer on the public right-of-way, public property, or
private property so as to be prominently visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto
or located thereon any sign or advertising device.
(E) Signs nailed, tacked or otherwise affixed to trees or other vegetation in such a way as to puncture
bark.
(F) Handbills, posters, notices, or similar attention gathering devices posted or affixed on traffic control
boxes, signs, lamp poles, utility poles, or traffic control support.
(G) Temporary Signs on private property, including Portable Signs.
(H) Beacons, including any rotating or multibeamlights.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-21
(I) Pennants.
(J) Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
(K) Roof signs.
(L) Projecting signs.
(M) Animated signs.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
§157.19 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION.
(A) Maintenance and Repair. Every sign, including but not limited to those signs for which permits are
required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and good structural condition at all times,
including replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning and other acts required to maintain the
sign. advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning in its originally permitted and installed
condition in accordance with the following criteria and with the applicable chapters of this code:
(1) Paint or Treat. To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading or rotting, the permittee of any sign or
advertising structure shall, as required, paint all parts and supports thereof unless the same are
galvanized, stainless or otherwise treated.
(2) Repairs. Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling
paint and other damage to a sign, advertising structure, marquee, awning, canopy or support
structure shall be repaired.
(3) Clean and Sanitary. All signs or advertising structures and the area surrounding same shall be
maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and
clear of all debris, rubbish and obnoxious substances, and any related grassed area or
landscaping shall be kept trimmed and in a healthy condition.
(4) Notification. Every sign or advertising structure hereafter erected shall have painted or
permanently affixed in a conspicuous place thereon and continuously maintained, in legible
letters, the date of erection, the name of the permittee, and the voltage of any electrical
apparatus use in connection therewith.
(B) Obsolete or Abandoned Signs. For any sign or advertising structure now or hereafter existing, which
advertises a business, commodity, service, entertainment, activity, or event which has been
discontinued, or is located on property which has been vacant and unoccupied, the Administrative
Officer shall give written notice requiring removal to the sign to permittee thereof, or if the permittee
cannot be located, to the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure
or premises upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper person fails to remove the sign or
structure within 60 days after such notice the Administrative Officer is hereby authorized to cause
the removal of such sign or advertising structure.
(C) Unsafe and Unlawful Signs. For any sign or advertising structure that is unsafe or insecure, or is a
menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected, or is being maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the Administrative Officer shall give written notice to the permittee
thereof, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the owner, agent or person having the beneficial
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-22
use of the building, structure or premises upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper
person fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards of this section within
30 days after such notice, the Administrative Officer is hereby authorized to cause the removal of
such sign or advertising structure. The Administrative Officer may summarily, and without notice,
cause the removal of any sign or advertising structure which is an immediate safety hazard to persons
or property.
(D) Lien to Recover Costs. In the event of failure by any party to reimburse the Village within 60 days
for costs incurred for repair or removal ordered by the Administrative Officer, the Village Beard shall
certify the charges for repair or removal to the Village’s legal counsel, who will be then authorized
to file a Notice of Lien in the Office of the Lake County Recorder of Deeds to foreclose this lien, and
to sue the owner of the real estate, or sign permittee, or their agents, in a civil action to recover the
money due for the foregoing services, plus all expenses and reasonable attorney’s fees to be fixed by
the court. Included in the expenses recoverable by the Village are the costs of filing the notice of lien,
foreclosing the lien, and all litigation costs, together with all office and legal expense incurred in
connection with the collection of the amount due.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
§157.20 PROPOSED FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees for sign permits and plans for the period beginning October 20, 2008 shall be:
Unified Business Center
Sign Plan, Application Fee ........................................................................................... $150
Planned Development
Sign Plan, Application Fee ........................................................................................... $150
Sign Permit: New
Including inspection per zoning lot............................................................................... $150
Sign Permit: Temporary .............................................................................................................. $50
A $250 cash deposit is also required. This deposit will be returned following
removal of the temporary signage. If the signage is not removed immediately
upon expiration of the permit, the deposit will be forfeited and a notice of
violation will be issued.
Sign Inspection Fees
Annual Sign Inspection Fee ............................................................................................ $75
Re-inspection Fee ........................................................................................................... $60
(Ord. 00-5, passed 3-20-00) (Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 10-20-08)
§157.21 OVERLAY SIGN DISTRICT.
(A) Creation of Overlay Sign District: The Overlay Sign District is hereby created in order to establish
certain regulations relative to the installation of signs in order to enhance and maintain the appearance
and character of certain commercial areas within the Village. All freestanding signs erected in the
Village’s Overlay Sign District shall be installed and maintained subject to the provisions of this
Section 157.21. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the provisions of
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-23
Chapter 157, Signs, of this Code shall otherwise remain in full force and effect as to the Village’s
Overlay Sign District.
(B) Applicability: The provisions of this Section shall be applicable to all property within the Village that:
(1) is zoned as part of the Village’s (PD) Planned Development Zoning District and (2) has not
previously been granted a special use for a Planned Unit Development (PUD). The provisions of this
Section shall not be applicable to: (1) property within the PD Zoning District that has been granted a
special use for a PUD or other special use; and (2) property within the PD Zoning District that may
be granted a special use for a PUD or other special use after the effective date hereof. The property
to which this Section shall specifically be applicable includes: that property bounded by Lake-Cook
Road, Quentin Road and Rand Road.
(C) Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be permitted to be installed and maintained within the
Village’s Overlay Sign District. A freestanding sign is defined as a permanent sign anchored in the
ground, supported by and affixed to one or more uprights, or other structural members, which are
placed in or on an approved foundation, and not attached to a building. A freestanding sign shall
include, but shall not be limited to, ground, pole and pylon signs.
(1) The size of a freestanding sign shall be limited to one (1) square foot per lot frontage not to
exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. Lot frontage is limited to the size of the specific lot upon
which the principal commercial building is constructed. When calculating the permitted size of
such freestanding sign, the lot frontage of adjacent property upon which other buildings are
located shall not be included.
(2) Not more than one (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted on any zoning lot, including but not
limited to on any corner lot or on any through lot on which a building or buildings are located.
(See Section 157.10)
(3) A five foot minimum setback shall be required from any front lot line adjacent to Rand Road
(Major Arterial Street) and the minimum setback which shall be required from all other
property lines shall be ten feet.
(4) The maximum height of a freestanding sign from the existing or proposed grade to the highest
point of the sign shall be fifteen feet (15’).
(5) The maximum number of colors (white is excluded as a color) permitted on the face of a
freestanding sign shall be three (3).
(6) Sign Permits can only be issued for a legally licensed business within the Village of Deer Park.
(D) Wall Signs
(1) Wall signs are limited to one (1) square foot per store and not in excess of one (1) square foot
per lineal foot of business building frontage (i.e., tenant space, not lot frontage), but shall, in
any event: (a) not exceed forty (40) square feet of permitted gross sign surface area; (b) the
height of any such wall sign shall not exceed one-half of its length. Building frontage is limited
to the size of the lineal tenant space leased fronting the street. Leased space must be contiguous
in order to be considered continuous frontage (i.e., more than one contiguous space is leased
by one specific tenant). An example of tenant spaces of thirty (30) feet each
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-24
that comprise of spaces A, B, C, and D are as follows: Spaces A and B can be considered a
sixty (60) foot building frontage, because they are contiguous. Although spaces A and C each
have thirty (30) foot building frontage, Spaces A and C are not contiguous and therefore, cannot
be combined to be considered as having sixty (60) feet of building frontage. Each is a separate
lineal space of thirty (30) feet.
Exception:
A single free standing building occupied by one business only, is limited to 2 sq. ft. per lineal
foot of building frontage, but shall not, in any event, exceed 80 sq. ft.
(2) Signage can be comprised of individual letters or a box sign. For purposes of this Section, a
“box sign” shall mean a sign, the frame of which is constructed as a box with channels into
which individual letters or a panel of letters can be inserted.
(3) Individual letters shall be measured by the total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter
composed of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering,
illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any material, or color used as an
integral part of the display or to differentiate the sign from the background on which it is placed.
The signage shall be centered within the allowable wall area, not to exceed 80% of the width
of the lineal frontage. Information on the sign shall be limited to the name and/or description
of the business. No product advertising or other type of advertising shall be permitted as part
of the sign.
(4) For the purpose of calculating the gross square footage of the surface area of a box sign, the
entire box face shall be included.
(5) The maximum number of colors (white is excluded as a color) permitted on a wall sign face is
three.
(6) One wall sign is permitted on a building, except when a building faces more than one street
and such building is occupied by a single business establishment, in which case there may be
one wall sign on each wall of the building facade facing a street.
(E) Illuminated Signs:
(1) Signs may be illuminated only by indirect lighting, or backlighting, or by internal white light,
which lighting shall, in any event, not exceed fifty (50) foot candles when measured with a
standard light meter held parallel to the face of the sign at a distance equal to the narrowest
dimension of the sign face.
(2) All lighting shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign to prevent glare onto
any street or adjacent property, and shields and/or reflectors shall be used where necessaryfor
this purpose.
(3) Freestanding signs which are illuminated shall receive their electrical supply from an electrical
source that is underground, and overhead electrical lines to such signs are prohibited.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-25
(4) After completion of installation and before the sign is illuminated for regular use, the sign shall
be inspected by the Village and approved in writing to determine whether it complies with the
approved plans and specifications and to determine that the direction of the lighting does not
interfere with the vision of drivers on any nearby road, street, or highway.
(F) Prohibited Signs: The following signs are and shall be prohibited within the Village’s Overlay Sign
District:
(1) Roof signs;
(2) Billboards;
(3) Changeable copy signs, whether manual or electronic;
(4) Off-site signage, temporary or permanent, unless otherwise permitted;
(5) Any sign placed on a vehicle or trailer that is parked or located for the primary purpose of
displaying the sign.
(G) Temporary Promotional Signs:
(1) A “Temporary Promotional Sign” shall be defined as any sign, banner, valance or advertising
display that is intended to be used for short duration specific to a scheduled event or sale and
shall be permitted within the Village’s Overlay Sign District.
(2) Permit Required: No person shall erect, construct, alter, repair, change, maintain and/or
relocate any temporary promotional sign without first obtaining a Temporary Sign Permit from
the Village. A temporary sign permit can only be issued subject to an initial opening of a retail
business or for an annual sales promotion up to a maximum of seventeen days.
(3) Location: No temporary sign shall be placed or projected over any wall opening. No temporary
sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire
escape, nor shall any such sign be attached to any standpipe or fire escape. No temporary sign
requiring a permit shall be located off-site of the business or lot that is the subject of said sign.
No temporary sign shall be attached to a utility pole, fire hydrant or street sign. No temporary
sign shall interfere with snow removal.
(H) Existing Signage: Any currently existing signage located within the Village’s Overlay Sign District
which was lawful when initially established, erected and/or installed shall constitute a legal nonconforming
sign and shall be permitted to be maintained in good condition within the Village’s
Overlay Sign District.
(I) Variations: Relative to any application submitted to the Village for a building permit that requests
approval of signage that does not comply with these regulations, the applicant for said building permit
shall be afforded the opportunity to request a variation from the provisions of this Section pursuant
to Section 157.44 of this Code.
(J) Miscellaneous:
(1) Sign Colors; Logos: An exception from the application of this Section relative to color
restrictions for signage shall be applicable to any logo or mark registered with the United States
Patent and Trademark Office, provided, however, that the background of the entire sign is
unpainted or is painted in muted, natural tones, and the colors utilized are consistent with any
related ground sign or wall sign. Approval of this exception shall require the previous written
approval of the Village Administrator, or his designee, with the written consent of the Village
Board of Trustees.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-26
(2) Location of Any Signage: All signage installed and maintained in the Village’s Overlay Sign
District shall be installed on private property and not within any Village right-of-way and shall
be installed so as to not obstruct the sight line of any vehicles or any pedestriantraffic.
(3) Permanent Sign: No person shall erect, construct, alter, repair, change, maintain and/or relocate
any permanent sign without first obtaining a building permit for the work, and notwithstanding
anything contained in this Section 157.21 to the contrary, a permit shall be required for
changing the letters or the message on any sign or for the repainting of any existing sign.
(Ord. 2013-18, passed 06-17-13)
ADMINISTRATION
§157.40 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
The Building and Zoning Official of the Village is designated to administer this
chapter. (Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93, O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
§157.41 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND FEES.
(A) Permit Required. A sign for which a permit is required under § 157.08 must receive that permit prior
to being constructed, erected, painted, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled, relocated or
expanded. No permit shall be required for routine maintenance of a sign.
(B) Permit Application. Application for permits to erect, construct, or alter a sign shall be submitted on
a form and in the manner prescribed by the Administrative Officer. Each application shall be signed
by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property upon which it is to be located. Applications
for permits shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with
all applicable regulations, including:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) A drawing or drawings indicating the location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon
which the sign or advertising structure is to be attached or erected;
(3) A drawing or photograph showing the position of the sign or advertising structure in relation
to structures;
(4) Two prints of the drawings and specifications, and color renderings for the proposed sign or
advertising structure, including the methods of construction, illumination, materials and
attachment to the buildings or in the ground. Such drawings must include all text and graphics
proposed on the sign, drawn to scale with dimensions;
(5) If required by the Administrative Officer, a copy of a statement by a registered professional
engineer indicating that the sign meets structural and wind pressure requirements, and will not
pose a public health or safety threat;
(6) Name of person, firm, corporation or association responsible for erecting the sign or advertising
structure.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-27
(7) Written consent of the owner or agent of the zoning lot on which the sign or advertising
structure is to be erected;
(8) A completed application for any electrical permit required to be issued for the sign or
advertising structure;
(9) A master sign plan documenting all existing signs on the zoning lot, including their type and
area, location, and the occupant of the site to which each sign pertains; and
(10) Any additional information as the Administrative Officer shall require to show full compliance
with this and all other applicable chapters of this code.
(D) Permit Fees. Fees to be charged for permits issued shall be as established in a separate resolution
which may be, from time to time, amended by the Village Board. Persons guilty of erecting or
maintaining a sign without first securing the necessary permit shall be subject to a penalty fee of 50%
of the normal fee amount in addition to the obligation to pay the normal fee in addition to any other
remedies the Village may have under the this code. No fee for an annual inspection permit shall be
charged during the calendar year in which the sign or advertising structure is erected.
(E) Initial Sign Permit. An initial sign permit shall be issued by the Administrative Officer covering the
period from the date of the inspection of the completed sign installation, construction, or modification
through the last day of that calendar year.
(F) Annual Inspection Permit. The Administrative Officer shall direct an inspection annually, and at such
other times as the Officer deems necessary, of each sign and advertising structure for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the sign is secure, whether it is in need of removal or repair, and whether it is
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1) Sign permits for each subsequent year shall be issued for one calendar year. Except as provided
herein, sign permits shall be renewable annually at the beginning of each calendar year upon
submission of a renewal application form and the applicable fees. To meet the expense of such
inspection, the sign permittee shall pay to the Village Clerk an annual fee, and receive an annual
inspection permit.
(2) Renewal applications shall contain a statement by the applicant that no change in the sign(s)
under the permit has been made.
(3) In the event that the sign permittee cannot be located, any person, firm, corporation or
association owning or in possession, in charge or in control of the sign or advertising structure
shall pay the inspection fee after being properly invoiced by the Administrative Officer. In the
event an owner or responsible party cannot be found the sign or advertising structure shall be
removed.
(G) Lapse of Sign Permit. An annual or continuing sign permit shall lapse automatically if not renewed.
A sign permit shall also lapse if the business activity on the zoning lot is discontinued for a period of
180 days or more, and is not renewed within 60 days of a notice from the village to the last permittee.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-28
§157.42 APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.
The following procedure must be followed for approval of a sign permit:
(A) Planning and Zoning Commission. Applications for all new signs, not previously located on the
zoning lot, or changes to existing signs, shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
review and recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval or
denial, or request certain modifications to the proposed sign(s). Such recommendations shall be
referred to the Village Board for final consideration.
(B) Planning and Zoning Commission. Appeals from decisions of the Building and Zoning Official, and
all variances to this chapter shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission. All
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be referred to the Village Board for
final consideration.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93, O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
§157.43 INSPECTION PROCEDURES.
(A) Pre-Installation Inspection. The person responsible for the installation of a sign shall schedule with
the Administrative Officer a pre-installation inspection prior to installing any sign requiring a permit.
Such inspection shall include a footing inspection, if applicable, and confirmation of the other details
of mounting and placement.
(B) Final Inspection. The person responsible for the installation of a sign shall notify the Administrative
Officer upon completion of the work for which a permit is required and so schedule a final inspection.
(C) Six Month Deadline. If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within six months
after the date of issuance, the permit shall be null and void.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
§157.44 VARIATIONS.
(A) Intent. It is the intent of this division to permit variations from the requirements of this chapter only
so as to recognize unusual hardships and make reasonable accommodations for them.
(B) Petition for Variation. A petition for a variation from any provision(s) of this chapter may be made
by any person having a proprietary interest in the sign for which such variation is requested.
(1) Petition Contents. A petition for variation shall be filed in writing with the Administrative
Officer on a form supplied by him and shall be accompanied by such documents and
information as are necessary to clearly exhibit the practical difficulty for which the variation is
necessary, including:
(a) The names, addresses, and telephone number of the petitioner, the owner of the property
on which the sign is to be erected or affixed, the owner of the sign, and the person
responsible for erecting or affixing the sign.
(b) A description of the requested variation, including reference to the section of this chapter
from which relief is requested.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-29
(c) Justification of the requested variation.
(d) The location of the premises on which the sign is to be erected or affixed.
(e) A site plan of the premises involved, showing accurate placement thereon of the proposed
sign.
(f) A print of the drawings and specifications describing the sign to be erected or affixed
and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground. Such
drawings and specifications shall include details of dimensions, materials, color, and
weight.
(g) The written consent of the owner of the premises on which the sign is to be erected or
affixed.
(h) A fee, as determined by ordinance adopted by the Village Board from time to time, to
be paid at the time of filing of the petition for variation.
(2) Hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the petition for
variation within 30 days of receipt of a completed written application.
(a) Hearing Notice. Notice shall be given of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing
in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 158.54.
(b) Required Attendance. The petitioner or its authorized representatives shall attend the
meetings of the Board at which the variation is to be heard.
(c) Decision. Within 15 working days of the close of the required public hearing on the
variation, unless otherwise agreed to by the petitioner, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall prepare and submit written findings, and by a majority vote, issue a
decision to grant, deny, wholly or in part, or modify the variation.
(3) Appeals from Decision of Planning and Zoning Commission. Decisions of Planning and Zoning
Commission may be appealed to Village Board by applicant. The Village Board shall, at its
next regular meeting following filing of the appeal decide whether to hear the appeal and set a
hearing date for the appeal hearing.
(4) Standards. Variations shall only be approved to overcome an exceptional condition which
poses practical difficulty or particular hardship in such a way as to prevent the display of a sign
as intended by this chapter. No variation shall be granted unless the Board finds that the petition
meets each of the following standards:
(a) Unique Hardship. The proposed variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the
applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship which would result
if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out and which is not generally applicable
to other property within the Village.
(b) Reasonable Return. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in this chapter.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-30
(c) Hardship Not Self-Created. The alleged hardship has not been created by the petitioner
nor any person presently having a proprietary interest in the premises.
(d) Consistent with Public Welfare. The proposed variation will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood. The proposed variation will not by itself or with other signs contribute to
the creation of visual distraction which may lead to personal injury or a substantial
reduction in the value of property.
(e) Graphic Effectiveness Demonstrated. The petitioner has demonstrated that all reasonable
efforts (utilizing color, contrast, lettering legibility, illumination, and graphic
composition) have been made to increase the reading effectiveness of the proposed sign
within the normal requirements of this chapter.
(f) Consistent With Sign Chapter Intent. The proposed variation is in harmony with the
intent, purpose, and objectives of this chapter.
(g) Special Site Conditions. The petitioner has demonstrated that the natural or man-made
characteristics of the site development plan, including, but not limited to the amount of
landscaped area and landscape materials, berms screens, buffers, the setbacks of the
proposed sign, buildings and parking areas, and the visual relationship between the
proposed variation and other site improvements are such as to mitigate the impact of the
proposed variation.
(5) Conditions. Such conditions and restrictions may be imposed on the premises to be benefitted
by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth herein, to reduce or
minimize any injurious effect of such variation on other property in the neighborhood, and to
implement the general intent, purpose, and objectives of this chapter.
(6) Revocation. In any case where a variation has been granted, and where no work pertinent
thereto has been initiated within one year from the date of approval of the requested variation,
then without further action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the variation shall become
null and void.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93, O19-06, Passed 04-18-19)
§157.98 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Any of the following shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to the enforcement
remedies and penalties provided by this section, by the zoning chapter, and by state law:
(1) To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or
permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on which the sign is located;
(2) To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without first securing such a
permit;
(3) To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or
permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on which sign is located;
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19)
15-157-31
(4) To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this
chapter, or for which the sign permit has lapsed; or
(5) To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation shall be considered a
separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this ordinance.
(B) Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a
separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93) Penalty, see § 157.99
§157.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter, or of any condition or requirement adopted
pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other
appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this chapter shall be considered a
violation of Chapter 158. The remedies of the village shall include the following:
(1) Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any signs in the same zoning lot;
(2) Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the
sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity;
(3) Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the village under Chapter 158;
(4) Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed by such court under
Chapter 158; and
(5) In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such
measures as are available to the village under the applicable provisions of Chapter 158 and
building code for such circumstances.
(Ord. 01-22, passed 4-23-01)
(B) The Village shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for or
allowed by state law for the violation of the zoning chapter.
(C) All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the
availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy
shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation.
(Ord. 93-9, passed 12-20-93)
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-1
CHAPTER 158: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
§158.01 Purpose
§158.02 Short title
§158.03 Definitions
§158.04 Interpretation and Construction
§158.05 Building on Zoning Lot
§158.06 Division of Zoning Lots
General Use Regulations
§158.07 Allowable Use of Land or Buildings
§158.08 Prohibited Use of Land or Buildings
§158.09 Conformance with District Regulations
§158.10 Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
§158.11 Accessory Structures and Uses
§158.12 Utility Equipment
§158.13 Solar Energy System
§158.14 Special Uses
§158.15 Yards; Permitted Obstructions
§158.16 Yards; General Requirements
§158.17 Signs
§158.18 Visibility; VisionTriangles
Use Districts; Regulations
§158.19 Creation and Establishment
§158.20 Official Zoning Map
§158.21 Annexed Territory
§158.22 Alternative Zoning
§158.23 General Conditions for all Districts
§158.24 R-1 43,560 Square Feet Single Family Residential District
§158.25 R-2 80,000 Square Feet Single Family Residential District
§158.26 R-3 200,000 Square Feet Single Family Residential District
§158.27 GB General Business District
§158.28 Public Lands District
§158.29 PD - Planned Development District
§158.30 OSD - Overlay Sign District
§158.31 Site Lighting
§158.32 Screening and Landscape Easements
§158.33 Off-street Parking and Loading
§158.34 Water Supply andWells
§158.35 Hillcrest Road Overlay District
Site Development Plan
§158.36 Application for Approval Required
§158.37 Preliminary Conference
§158.38 Application for Approval of Site Plan
§158.39 Content of Site Plan
§158.40 Review of Site Plan
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-2
Administration and Enforcement
§158.41 Building and Zoning Official; Powers and Duties
§158.42 Planning and Zoning Commission
§158.43 Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals References
§158.44 Duties of the Commission
§158.45 Special Zoning Commission
§158.46 Meetings
§158.47 Maintenance of Records
§158.48 Oral Reports and Recommendations
§158.49 Zoning Certificates
§158.50 Occupancy Certificates
§158.51 Variations
§158.52 Appeals
§158.53 Amendments
§158.54 Application Requirements for Amendments, Special Uses orVariations
§158.55 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§158.01 PURPOSE.
This Chapter is enacted for the purpose of dividing the Village into zones, or districts, restricting and
regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings,
structures, and land for trade, industry, residence and other specified uses; to regulate the intensity of the
use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces surrounding such buildings; to
establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial, business, residential,
and other uses within such area; to fix standards to which buildings or structures shall conform
therein; to prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of such districts, respectively;
to prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a
way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder; to limit congestion in the
public streets by providing for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of vehicles; providing
for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and structures; and prescribing
penalties for the violation of the ordinance; to preserve the present character of the Village; to lessen
congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout
the Village; and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
§158.02 SHORT TITLE.
This Chapter may be known and may be cited as the Village of Deer Park Zoning Code or Deer Park
Zoning Code.
§158.03 DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning
(B) Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Chapter, its meaning shall
be construed as set forth in the definition thereof, and any word appearing in parentheses, directly
after a word herein defined shall be construed in the same sense as that word.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-3
(C) All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is onehalf
foot or more, the integral foot next above shall be taken.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. An accessory structure or use is one in which:
• Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal structure or use;
• Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or use served, except as otherwise
provided herein;
• Is not physically attached to the principal structure, provided, however, any open terrace, driveway,
patio, deck, walkway, and/or similar improvement shall be considered attached to a principal
structure if it physically touches or has a deminimis separation from the principal structure
in question;
• Is customarily found as an incident to the principal structure or use;
• Is under the same ownership and control as the principal structure or use; and
• Contributes to the comfort, convenience or need of the occupants of the principal use or structure
served.
ACREAGE. Any tract or parcel of land whose area is greater than twice the prescribed lot area of the
use district within which the tract or parcel lies and which has not been subdivided or platted.
ALLEY. A public thoroughfare, not less than 20 feet wide and not more than 40 feet wide, which affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed,
used, or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for a single-family.
AUTO WRECKING or JUNK YARD. Any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running
condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land,
building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, including any
farm vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating
condition, and the commercial salvaging and scavenging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. General repair, engine rebuilding, or reconditioning of motor vehicle, collision
service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening or repair, overall painting of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE FULL-SERVICE STATION. Any building or portion thereof or premises used for
dispensing or offering for sale at retail any automotive fuels or oils, having pumps and storage tanks
thereon, or where automobile accessories batteries, tires, and other small minor automobile repair services
are sold or rendered but only if sold or rendered wholly with the lot lines of the premises. Automobile
full-service stations do not include open sales lots or public garages, as defined herein. The provision
of food or beverage sales shall be allowed only as accessory and incidental to the principal operation of
the service station.
AUTOMOBILE SELF-SERVICE STATION. Any building or portion thereof or premised where motor
fuels are stored and dispensed by persons other than the service station attendant, and may include the
provision of food or beverage sales, and other retail products, and where minor or major repair of vehicles
does not occur.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repair, replacement of parts and motor service to automobiles,
but not including any operation specific under AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged
motor vehicles or trailers, collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair, and
painting or vehicles.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-4
AUTOMOBILE WASHING FACILITY, ROLL-OVER. A building or portion thereof which is accessory
to an automobile service station, capable of being utilized for the washing of automobiles, whether
by hand or by automation, where no conveyor or drive-through facility is incorporated into the process
and where no more than two vehicles are able to be washed on the premises at any given time.
AUTOMOBILE WASHING FACILITY, WITH CONVEYOR. A building or portion thereof containing
facilities for washing more than two motor vehicles, using automatic production-line methods with a
chain conveyor, hot air blowers, steam cleaners, wax applications or other mechanical devices; or providing
space, water and equipment for hand-washing of autos, whether by the customer or the operator, with
a paved off-street parking area sufficient in size to provide a minimum number of parking spaces equal
to the product obtained by multiplying the maximum number of automobiles capable of being washed at
any one time byten.
BASEMENT. A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half of its height is above
the average level of the adjoining ground, a basement shall be counted as a story for purpose of height
measurement.
BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or restaurant, where meals are provided for compensation
for four or more persons, but not exceeding 12 persons.
BUILDING. Any structure designed or constructed for the shelter, support, protection, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind.
BUILDING ACCESSORY. A subordinate building or portion of a principal building, the use of which
is incidental to that of the principal building and customary in connection with that use.
BUILDING AREA. The BUILDABLE AREA of a lot is the space remaining after the required yard
and/or minimum open space requirements of this ordinance have been complied with.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open
space or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party
walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance and exit doors.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the natural ground elevation at the middle
of the building or the average elevation between the two front corners of the building, to the high point
of the roof in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, radio aerials, tanks
and similar projections, but not including signs, shall not be included in calculating height, except in the
B-2 General Business District.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is
located is conducted.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL. A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for
residential occupancy by one or more families.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY. A building of non-permanent construction whose design and construction
is such that it will be used for a short period of time or that it can be moved readily to another location.
BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for remuneration.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-5
CAR PORT. A structure attached or made a part of the main structure, and which is open to the weather
on at least two sides, intended for the use of sheltering not more than two motor driven vehicles.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION AREA. An area devoted to providing recreation for the general public
for profit.
COMMISSION. Pursuant to this Chapter, the Planning and Zoning Commission.
COUNTRY CLUB. A private club, either equity or proprietary, consisting of a club house, golf course,
recreational areas, parking areas, and including rooms and facilities for sleeping for members and their
guests and employees (but not to be used as a public motel or hotel) and for the dispensing and serving
of food and beverages to their members and their guests and employees.
CURB GRADE. The elevation of the established curbs in front of a building or structure, measured at
the center of such front. Where no curb grade has been established, it shall be deemed to be the established
elevation of the center line of the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured at the
center line of such front.
DISTRICT. A section or sections of the incorporated area of the Village for which the regulations and
provisions governing the use of building and land are uniform for each class of use permitted therein.
DOG, ADULT. Any canine animal of four or more months of age.
DOG KENNEL. Any premises where three or more adult dogs are owned, boarded, bred and/or offered
for sale.
DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, but not an automobile house trailer, designed or used exclusively
for non-transient residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple dwellings,
but not including short-term rental properties, hotels, boarding, lodging houses or mobile homes of any
kind.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building designed and/or arranged for two or more housekeeping units
and for occupancy and use by two or more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A separate building whose design, arrangement, cooking and other
equipment constitute only one housekeeping unit and whose use is limited to that of a dwelling for onefamily
and bona fide household servants.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment or hotel designed primarily for occupancy
by one family for living or sleeping purposes.
FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage or adoption,
or a group of not more than three persons not so related, together with his or their domestic servants,
maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. A family may include not more than two lodgers,
boarders or permanent guests, whether or not gratuitous.
FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating)
measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property
abutting on one side between the intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is
intended for and used to store the private vehicles of the family residents upon the premises and in which
no business service, or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles is carried on.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-6
GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building where automotive vehicles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed
or stored for compensation.
GARAGE AND YARD SALES. Any sale of residential household or similar items on residential premises
which shall not include the sale of any merchandise that has been purchased or brought onto the
property for the purpose of sale or resale.
GOLF COURSE. An area of land laid out and maintained for the purpose of playing golf and improved
with such buildings and structures as are necessary for such purpose.
GROUND FLOOR AREA. The lot area covered by a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls, exclusive of terraces, breezeways, open porches, carports and garages.
GUEST HOUSE. A structure for human habitation, containing one or more rooms with bath and toilet
facilities, but not including a kitchen or facilities which would provide a complete housekeeping unit.
HEREAFTER. After October 18, 1965.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling at or from
the dwelling, lot, or accessory building(s). The operation of a Short-Term Rental Property as defined in
this Section shall not be considered a Home Occupation.
HOSPITAL or SANITARIUM. An institution open to the public, in which sick patients or injured persons
are given medical or surgical care, or an institution for the care of contagious diseases or incurable
patients.
HOTEL. A building in which there are six or more guest rooms designed for temporary occupancy
individuals on a daily rate to the general public, and who are lodged with or without meals, and in which
no provisions are made for cooking in any individual room or suite. Ingress or egress to and from all
rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A Hotel
shall not be considered a Short-Term Rental Property as defined in this Section.
LABORATORY. A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing of
a product or products is not to be permitted within this definition.
LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise
or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
LOT. A parcel of land occupied by or suitable for occupancy by a use permitted by this Chapter, including
one main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces required by this Chapter,
and having its principal frontage upon a street, a private roadway leading to a public street, or other
public place.
LOT AREA. The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through side and rear lot lines,
and to the center line of any abutting street or easements.
LOT LINE. A property line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that where any portion
of the lot extends into the abutting street, the lot line shall be deemed to be the abutting boundary of the
street right-of-way or the abutting boundary line of a private easement or roadway connecting the subject
lot (and other lots, if any, contiguous to the subject property) with a public street.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-7
LOT LINE, FRONT. The street shall be deemed the front lot line of an interior lot, and the shorter street
line the front lot line of a corner lot. Where a lot abuts solely a cul-de-sac the front jot line shall be the
abutting right-of-way line of the cul-de-sac. Where the lot abuts both a cul-de-sac and one or more streets,
the front lot line shall be the shortest lot line abutting such streets, except that where the lot line abutting
the cul-de-sac equals or exceeds the required minimum frontage of the district in which the lot is located,
the lot line exposed to the cul-de-sac shall be the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is approximately, parallel
with the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the
rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel with, and at the
maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, ZONING.A single tract of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used,
developed or built upon as a single unit, under single control or ownership. A ZONING LOT or LOTS
may or may not coincide with a lot.
MOTEL. A building or group of detached or connected buildings designed or used primarily for providing
sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers, and having a parking space adjacent to a sleeping
room. A Motel shall not be considered a Short-Term Rental Property as defined in this Section.
NONCONFORMING USE. Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by use or lawfully situated
at the time of the passage of this Chapter or amendments thereto, which does not conform after the
passage of this Chapter or amendments thereto with the regulations of this Chapter.
NURSING HOME or REST HOME. A private hospital for the care of children or the aged or infirm,
or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not including facilities for the treatment of
sickness or injuries, or for surgical care. A Nursing Home or Rest Home shall not be considered a Short-
Term Rental Property as defined in this Section.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open area for the parking of privately-owned automobiles and not for
public use.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area, other than a street, used for the temporary parking of more
than four automobiles and available for public use whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation
for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE. An area, enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed,
sufficient in size to store one standard automobile, which has adequate access to a public street or alley
and permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile.
PORCH. A roofed entrance to a building, projecting out from the wall or walls of the main structure and
commonly open to the weather in part.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY. A building or portion thereof that is held out for rent, for overnight
lodging, for transient guests, for a period shorter than thirty consecutive days. This definition does
not apply to Hotels or Motels, Nursing Homes or Rest Homes.
SIGN. Defined in Chapter 157 of this Code.
STANDBY GENERATOR. A standby generator is a back-up electrical system that operates automatically.
Within seconds of a utility outage an automatic transfer switch senses the power loss, commands
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-8
the generator to start and then transfers the electrical load to the generator.
STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above, or if there is no floor above. The space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A
basement shall not be counted as a story.
STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall
for more than three feet above the top floor level and in which space not more than 60% of the floor area
is completed for principal or accessory uses.
STREET (AVENUE, PLACE, ROAD, LANE, TERRACE or HIGHWAY). All property dedicated, acquired
by public use, or granted as an easement, and intended for public or private travel by persons or
vehicles.
STREET LINE. Either boundary of the right-of-way of a street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members
of a building or structure, such as, but not limited to, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE. Anything erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the
ground, or an attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground.
THIS CHAPTER. Chapter 158 of this Title.
TRACT. Any parcel of land of any size or configuration, whether platted or subdivided and made a
matter of public record or not and having one or more owners, public or private, together with any improvements
thereon.
TRAILER. Any vehicles or similar portable structure originally designed or converted so as to provide
living quarters.
TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE. A vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle
and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons or property, including a trailer coach or house
trailer.
TRAILER, CAMP, AUTOMOBILE. Any premises occupied or designed to accommodate more than
one family living in an automobile house trailer.
TRIANGLE. Land which includes land bounded by Lake-Cook Road on the south, Quentin Road on the
west, and Rand Road on the easterly border between Lake-Cook Road and Quentin Road and all parcels
in the Village with frontage on Rand Road which are zoned PD District in the underlining GB District .
USE. The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended,
or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or building as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory
use.
UTILITY EQUIPMENT. An electrical component that is incidental to and customarily found in connection
with the principal structure (examples; air conditioner, generator, or similar equipment as determined
by the Building and Zoning Official). It must be located on the same zoning lot as the principal
structure to which it is related.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-9
VILLAGE BOARD. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Deer Park.
WIDTH, AVERAGE LOT. The total area of the lot divided by the arithmetic mean of the lengths of the
side lines.
YARD. An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky,
except by natural topographical features and except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter. A yard extends
along a lot line and at right angles to such line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations
for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE. A side yard located immediately adjacent to a street or public right of way,
occupying an area that extends from the front yard to the rear yard.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines.
YARD, REAR. The open area on the lot with the principal building, as determined by the setback requirement
of the underlying zoning district which extends for the full width of the lot, provided that in
those locations where an easement is platted in the rear of the lot, one-half of the width of the platted
easement may be included in the rear yard requirements, provided that such one-half of the easement
does not exceed five feet.
YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards.
§158.04 INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION.
(A) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, morals and welfare.
(B) Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Chapter upon the use of land or buildings,
the bulk of the buildings, lot area requirements and yard requirements, are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other rule or regulation
of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
(C) This Chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement,
provided that where the regulations of this Chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards
or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements
of this Chapter shall govern.
(D) No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing on October 18, 1965, shall become or be
made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this zoning code, and to the extent that, and in
any manner that, the unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the requirements of
this Chapter, the building, structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.
§158.05 BUILDING ON ZONING LOT.
In all zoning districts, every structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot or
zoning lot, and there shall be not more than one principal building thereon, except as authorized by the
Village Board in the Public Lands District.
§158.06 DIVISION OF ZONING LOTS.
No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more zoning lots and no portion of any
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-10
improved zoning lot shall be sold, unless all improved zoning lots resulting from each such division or
sale shall conform to all of the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
located.
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
§158.07 ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.
The following uses of land or buildings are allowed in the districts indicated hereinafter under the conditions
specified in this Chapter:
(A) Uses lawfully established on October 18, 1965.
(B) Permitted uses as designated herein.
(C) Special uses as designated herein.
§158.08 PROHIBITED USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.
No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than one which is specified as a permitted
or special use in the zoning district in which such land or building is located. However, where a permit
for a building or structure has been legally issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of
this Chapter, and provided that construction is begun within 90 days of such effective date and diligently
prosecuted to completion, the building or structure may be completed in accordance with approved plans
on the basis of which the building permit has been issued and further may, upon completion, be occupied
under a certificate of occupancy for the use for which originally designated.
§158.09 CONFORMANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
No building or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof
shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with
the regulations specified for the district in which it is located.
§158.10 NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS.
(A) Any use, building, or structure lawfully existing or under construction on October 18, 1965, or
on a date of later amendment, which does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be
known as a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use, building, or structure may be continued,
maintained, or changed to a conforming use, but a nonconforming use shall neither be expanded,
nor re-established if discontinued if the building or structure is destroyed or damaged to
the extent of 50 percent or more of its value as determined by the Building and Zoning Official.
(B) Any nonconforming use of land which is discontinued for a period of 30 days or more and any
nonconforming use of a building or structure which is discontinued for a period of 180 days or
more shall not be re-established, and any future use of such building, structure, or land shall
conform to the provisions of this Chapter.
(C) A building or structure for a nonconforming use under construction on October 18, 1965, or date
of a later amendment hereto creating the non-conformity shall be completed within one year.
§158.11 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES.
(A) Zoning Certificate: A certificate of zoning compliance evidencing compliance of a proposed
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-11
accessory structure or use with the provision of this Code shall be issued before a building permit
may be issued for an accessory structure or before an accessory use is established.
(B) Special Regulations:
(1) Variance: The following regulations shall be applicable to accessory structures and uses
unless modified by a variance approved in accordance with this Code.
(2) Height; Landscaping: No part of any accessory structure or any attachment or appurtenance
thereto shall exceed 15 feet in height above the lowest point of the grade at the
base of the structure. Every accessory structure shall have a finished exterior surface
compatible with the principle structure and shall be adequatelylandscaped.
(3) Location: No accessory structure shall be permitted in a front yard, corner side yard or
in a required side yard setback area. For each 120 square feet or fraction thereof, of floor
area (i.e., the area within the footprint), of an accessory structure, such accessory structure
shall be not less than 10 feet from any of the aforesaid setback line(s), and not less
than 15 feet from the rear property line; provided, however, that on zoning lots of less
than one acre, an accessory structure may be located on any required setback line. There
shall be not less than 10 feet of open space between any accessory structure and the
principal structure, or the distance required by any applicable fire of building code,
whichever is greater.
(4) Storage Facilities: Accessory storage structures, other than garages, shall not exceed 150
square feet in gross floor area if accessory to a residential use, and be limited to one (1)
in number per lot. A storage facility shall not contain any living accommodations or
equipment, such as cooking or sleeping facilities, and shall not be equipped with plumbing.
Heating and lighting are permissible.
(5) Garage: Total garage spaces, whether attached or detached, shall not exceed the number
of finished bedrooms in the principle structure. No detached garage shall contain any
sleeping or cooking facility.
(6) Decorative and Recreational Structure: Gazebos, pergolas, tennis courts, and similar
decorative or recreational structures are deemed accessory structures and shall comply
with the provisions of thisChapter.
(7) Antennas: Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas are deemed accessory structures and
shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter. Ham radio antennas and private service
antennas, whether ground-mounted or mounted on a principal or accessory structure, are
themselves deemed accessory structures, and shall be authorized only by a special use
permit.
(8) Temporary Structure: For purposes of this Chapter, a “temporary structure” is any structure,
not including any vehicle or equipment transported on attached wheels, which is
designed to be removable and portable, is not constructed or placed on a foundation,
piers or concrete slab, and is not otherwise permanently attached to the ground. All temporary
structures shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Section. No temporary
structure shall be located on any lot for a period of time in excess of 90 days within
any 12-month period. All temporary structures shall require a permit issued by the
Building and Zoning Official. Certain temporary structures are prohibited, specifically,
carports and any structure with non-rigid walls or roof such as tarps, canvases or similar
coverings.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-12
(9) Maximum Lot Coverage: The total lot coverage of all accessory structures or uses shall
not exceed 10 percent of the total area of the zoning lot.
(10) Wind Turbine: A turbine having a large vanned wheel rotated by the wind to generate
electricity.
§158.12 Utility Equipment
(A) Variance: The following regulations shall be applicable to Utility Equipment unless modified by
a variance approved in accordance with this Code.
(B) The Height of any utility equipment shall not exceed 48 inches from grade.
(C) All utility equipment must be installed in accordance with all building and zoning code requirements
as well as the manufacture requirements. Should a conflict occur between the requirements,
the more stringent standard shall apply.
(D) In no case shall utility equipment located in the side yard of the property be located within 8 feet
from the front of the building line.
(E) Air Conditioning Units: Air conditioning units shall not be permitted in a front yard or corner
side yard, nor shall they be permitted in the side yard setback area required in the specific zoning
district that the property is located in. Existing air conditioning units that have received a Village
issued permit for installation and installed before December 21, 2017, are allowed to remain located
in its existing location even if located within the side yard setback. Such air conditioning
units may also be replaced and be located within the same footprint, as determined by the Building
and Zoning Official, in his sole discretion.
(F) Standby-Generator: Standby-generators shall not be permitted in a front yard or corner side yard,
nor shall they be permitted in the side yard setback area required in the specific zoning district
that the property is located in. Existing standby-generators that have received a Village issued
permit for installation and installed before December 21, 2017, are allowed to remain located in
its existing location even if located within the side yard setback. Such standby-generators may
also be replaced and be located within the same footprint, as determined by the Building and
Zoning Official, in his sole discretion. In no case shall a standby-generator be used as the sole
source of power to a building except for times of utility power outages from the electrical provider.
§158.013 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
(A) DEFINITIONS
Glare: The sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes annoyance, discomfort or
loss of visual performance and visibility.
Photovoltaic Cell: A semiconductor device that converts solar energy into electricity.
Photovoltaic System: An active solar energy system that converts solar energy directly into electricity.
Renewable Energy Easement, Solar Energy Easement: An easement that limits the height or
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-13
location, or both, of permissible development on the burdened land in terms of a structure or vegetation,
or both, for the purpose of providing access for the benefited land to wind or sunlight
passing over the burdened land.
Solar Access: A property owner’s right to have unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or
building through the entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights, for the purpose
of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
Solar Collector: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for which the primary purpose
is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
Solar Collector Surface: Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar energy for use in the
collector’s energy transformation process. Collector surface does not include frames, supports
and mounting hardware.
Solar Energy: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or
light by a solar collector.
Solar Energy System (SES): A system for which the primary purpose is to convert solar energy
into thermal, mechanical or electrical energy for storage and use and reduce onsite consumption
of utility power.
Solar Energy System, Active: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is to harvest energy
by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or transferring heat from a collector
to another medium using mechanical, electrical or chemical means.
Solar Energy System, Building-Integrated: A solar energy system that is an integral part of a
principal building rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural
or structure part of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited
to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights,
awnings, shading devices and similar architectural components.
Solar Energy System, Building-Mounted: A solar energy system that is mounted on the roof of
a principal building.
Solar Energy System, Flush Mounted: A solar energy system that is mounted flush with a finished
surface, at no more than twelve (12) inches in height above that surface.
Solar Energy System, Freestanding or Ground Mounted: A solar energy system not attached
to another structure and is ground mounted on a rack or pole that is attached to the ground.
Solar Energy System, Joint: A solar energy collector or storage mechanism that supplies energy
for structures or processes on more than one (1) lot or in more than one (1) dwelling unit or leasehold,
but not to the general public and involves at least two (2) owners or users.
Solar Energy System, Off Grid: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which the circuits energized
by the solar energy are not electrically connected in any way to electric circuits that are
served by an electric utility company.
Solar Energy System, Passive: A solar energy system that captures solar light or heat without
transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the energy via a heat exchanger.
Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted: A solar energy system mounted on a rack that is fastened
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-14
to or ballasted on a building roof.
Solar Farm: A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity, whether by photovoltaics
(PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or other conversion technology for the primary
purpose of wholesale sales of generated electricity.
Solar Garden: A commercial solar-electricity (photovoltaic) array that provides retail electric
power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to multiple households or businesses residing or located
off-site from the location of the solar energy system.
Solar Heat Exchanger: A component of a solar energy device that is used to transfer heat from
one substance to another, either liquid or gas.
Solar Mounted Devices: Racking, frames or other devices that allow the mounting of a solar collector
onto a roof surface.
Solar Panel: A group of photovoltaic cells are assembled on a panel. Panels are assembled onsite
into solar arrays.
Solar Resource: A view of the sun from a specific point on a lot or building that is not obscured
by any vegetation, building, or object for a minimum of four (4) hours between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m. standard time on all days of the year.
Solar Skyspace: The maximum three-dimensional space extending from a solar collector to all
positions of the sun necessary for the efficient use of the collector.
1. Where a solar energy system is used for heating purposes only, solar skyspace shall
mean the maximum three-dimensional space extending from a solar energy collector
to all positions of the sun between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. local apparent time from
September 22 through March 22 of each year.
2. Where a solar energy system is used for cooling purposes only, solar skyspace shall
mean the maximum three-dimensional space extending from a solar collector to all
positions of the sun between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. local apparent time from March
23 through September 21 of each year.
Solar Skyspace Easement: A right, expressed as an easement, covenant, condition, restriction or
other property interest in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of any landowner
or in any order of taking, appropriate to protect the solar skyspace of a solar collector at a
particular described location to forbid or limit any or all of the following where detrimental to access
to solar energy : structures on or above the ground; vegetation on or above the ground; or
other activities. Such right shall specifically describe a solar skypace in three-dimensional terms
in which the activity, structures or vegetation are forbidden or limited or in which such an easement
shall set performance criteria for adequate collections of solar energy at a particular location.
Solar Storage Mechanism: Equipment or elements such as piping and transfer mechanisms, containers,
heat exchangers or controls thereof and gases, solids, liquids or combinations thereof that
are utilized for storing solar energy, gathered by a solar collector, for subsequent use.
Solar Thermal System: A system that includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats
or preheats water for building heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential domestic
hot water and hot water for commercial processes.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-15
(B) General Requirements
1. Solar Energy Systems (SES) are permitted in any zoning district, unless otherwise specified in
this chapter provided that all building permit requirements and general regulations are met including
the Building Code, Zoning Code and the requirements referenced herein.
2. The following shall be prohibited in all zoning districts: Freestanding or Ground Mounted Energy
Systems, Solar Farm, Solar Garden and any other SES not mounted on the roof and is an array or
panel.
3. Accessory Structure: SES’s are permitted as accessory structures as detailed in this section.
4. On-Site Use: Energy produced through the solar energy system shall be utilized on site, however,
the energy output may be delivered to a power grid.
5. Utility Provider Notification: Written evidence must be provided at the time a building permit is
requested that the utility company has been notified of the customers intent to install a solar energy
system.
6. Glare: Installation of the solar collection system shall not adversely impact adjacent properties. A
solar collection device or combination of devices shall be designed and located to avoid glare or
reflection onto adjacent properties, businesses, residential homes and adjacent roadways and shall
not interfere with traffic or create a safety hazard. All solar energy systems using a reflector to
enhance solar production shall minimize glare from reflector that impacts adjacent or nearby
properties.
7. Emergency Disconnect: An external disconnect switch, readily accessible by emergency responders,
and which is clearly identifiable and unobstructed, shall be provided to disconnect power at
the solar panel.
8. Tree Removal: Tree removal shall be minimized. If trees or vegetation are to be removed or reduced
to allow for the proper functioning of a SES, adherence to Chapter 95 of the Village’s Tree
and Shrubs Ordinance will be required, which may include the replacement of trees.
9. Additional Height: Additional height may be requested through the variation process outlined in
section 158.50 of the Village of Deer Park Zoning Code.
10. In reviewing the request for additional height, such factors as height of the system in relationship
to existing and potential structures, manmade or natural, and their impact on the system’s efficacy
shall be considered.
11. Arrangement: Where feasible, solar collection units shall be consolidated into array groupings
located toward the center of the roof, rather than situated in a disjointed manner.
12. No Solar Energy System (SES) shall be constructed or installed without first obtaining a building
permit.
13. Approved Solar Components: Electric solar energy system components must have an Underwriters
Laboratory (UL) listing or approved equivalent and solar hot water systems must have a Solar
Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC) rating.
14. Compliance with the Building Code: All solar energy systems shall meet approval of the Village
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-16
of Deer Park Building and Zoning Official in adherence with the adopted codes of the Village or
such codes as determined by the Village of Deer Park.
(C) BUILDING MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
1. Building Mounted Solar Energy Systems: Shall be developed as indicated below.
A) Residential and nonresidential structures
a) Location: Building Mounted systems are permitted in the following locations:
i) Principle structures only. Solar collection panela shall be allowed on the roof
of only the principle structure of the property and must be mounted flush with
the slope of the roof to ensure the lowest profile permissible per manufacturer
specifications. Solar collection devices shall not be constructed on any part of
the vertical portion of a mansard roof.
b) Orientation: Panels shall be orientated to maximize solar access.
c) Height: Height is measured from the roof surface, on which the solar collection device
is mounted, to the highest edge of the system.
i) Sloping Roof: Solar energy systems shall be mounted flush with the roof, shall
not have a highest finished pitch steeper than the roof pitch on which the system
is mounted, and the surface of the collector shall not extend any further than
twelve inches (12”) from the roof surface at any point. The total height of the
building, including the solar collection devices, shall comply with the height
regulations of the zoning district.
ii) Flat Roof: Solar collection devices mounted on a flat roof may be orientated to
achieve maximum sun exposure but shall not exceed two feet (2’) in overall
height, or extend above the building parapet. No such mounted panel shall exceed
the height regulations of the zoning district.
d) Projection: The collector surface and mounting devices for building mounted solar energy
systems shall not extend beyond the roof edge or the exterior perimeter of the
principal structure.
e) Roof Access: Building mounted solar energy systems shall allow for adequate roof
access for fire-fighting purposes per the International Fire Code.
f) Previous Approvals: Approved Structures by means of a Planned Unit Development,
Special Use, Variation of other approved use via ordinance shall adhere to those requirements.
The installation of a Building mounting system must comply with those
prior approvals or filing of an amended ordinance will be required.
(D) SOLAR ACCESS PROTECTION
1. Solar Access Protection:
A. Creation of Easements: Solar access easements across contiguous or nearby lots, tracts or land
may be created to establish a window of exposure to the sun so as to protect an existing or
intended solar collector’s exposure to the sun from obstruction of buildings and trees.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-17
a) Such easements may be purchased, reserved, granted, or otherwise obtained.
b) Adverse possession cannot create such an easement.
c) An easement infringed upon is a compensable property right through private remedy.
B. Recording of Easements: Solar access easements shall be recorded with the Lake County Recorder
of Deeds and filed with the Village of Deer Park.
C. Construction in Easement Areas: Any person seeking a building permit to construct or modify
any structure or building so as to increase the consumption of airspace over that lot shall certify
in writing that no solar access easements exists over that lot.
D. Denial of Permit: Should the Building and Zoning Official determine that the proposed construction
would intrude upon the easement, no building permit shall be granted.
(E) DECOMMISSIONING
1. A SES that is visibly damaged or not capable of operating for a period exceeding thirty (30) consecutive
days shall be deemed abandoned. The owner of an abandoned SES and the owner of the
property on which the SES is located shall cause either:
a) The SES to be repaired and made operable within ninety (90) days after receipt of a
notice of abandonment from the Village or
b) The removal of all SES structures and facilities within ninety (90) days after receipt of
a notice of abandonment from the Village.
2. Any abandoned SES that is not removed, within ninety (90) days after receipt of a notice of abandonment
shall be deemed a public nuisance, which nuisance the Village shall have the right, but
not obligation, to
i) Summarily abate by removing such system at the joint and several expense of the owners
of the system and of the property on which the system is located or
ii) address through other means. In the case of such removal, the Village shall have the
right, but not the obligation, to file a lien for reimbursement of any and all expenses
incurred by the Village in connection with the SES removal and related roof repair,
including, without limitation, attorney fees and accrued interest.
3. Upon removal of the SES, the owner of record of the subject property shall restore that portion of
the subject property on which the system was installed in accordance with the standards required
by the Village’s then current applicable codes.
(F) PENALTY
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 158.55 of
this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during, or
upon which a violation occurs or continues.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-18
§158.14 SPECIAL USES.
(A) Establishment: To provide for the location of certain uses hereinafter specified which are deemed
desirable for the public welfare and convenience within a given district or districts, but which
might have an adverse effect on nearby properties, or upon the character and future developments
of the district in which they are located, a classification of special uses is hereby established.
(B) Procedures: Special uses shall be authorized by the Village Board, provided that no application
for a special use shall be acted upon by the Village Board until after:
(1) A written report is prepared and forwarded to the Village Board by the Commission, in
the manner prescribed herein for amendments to this Chapter; and
(2) A public hearing is scheduled, and notice posted, and thereafter held by the Commission
and its finding and recommendations are forwarded to the Village Board.
(C) Application:Any application for special use shall be filed and processed in the manner prescribed
for applications for amendments, and shall be of such form, accompanied by such information
as shall be established from time to time by the Commission. The Building and Zoning Official
shall process such applications in the manner prescribed for amendments to this Chapter.
(D) Standards: No special use shall be granted by the Village Board unless the special use:
(1) Is deemed beneficial for the public convenience at that location;
(2) Is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, morals
and welfare and interest will beprotected;
(3) Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in
which it is located; and
(4) Except as may be recommended by the Commission and approved by the Village Board,
and conforms except in the case of a planned development, to the applicable regulations
of the district in which it is to be located.
(E) Conditions: The Commission may recommend and the Village Board may provide such conditions
and restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a special use, as may be
deemed to promote the general objectives of this Chapter and to minimize injury to the value of
property in the neighborhood.
§158.15 YARDS; PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following shall not be considered as obstructing when located in the
yards indicated:
(A) In required front yards and required side yards abutting a street: open terraces, sidewalks, walkways,
and awnings adjoining the principal building, if they do not exceed 20 percent of the depth
of the required yard, driveways and open accessory off-street parking spaces, fences as permitted
by Chapter 151 of this Code, ornamental light standards and flag poles.
(B) In required side yards and required rear yards, except those abutting a street: fences as permitted
by Chapter 151 of this Code and open accessory off-street parking spaces and/or driveways
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-19
provided all such areas are set back at least 5 feet from the property line.
(C) In required rear yards, recreational equipment, arbors and trellises, fences as permitted by Chapter
151 of this Code, provided such obstruction does not cover more than 25 percent of the required
rear yard.
§158.16 YARDS; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The minimum yard space required for one structure shall not again be considered as yard space
for other adjoining structures.
(B) No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open spaces become less than required
by thisChapter.
§158.17 SIGNS.
For regulations concerning signs, see Chapter 157 of this Code.
§158.18 VISIBILITY; VISION TRIANGLES.
In no instance shall a fence, wall, sign (excluding traffic signs), landscaping, building, or other structure
obstruct the visibility of motorists. A vision triangle, as illustrated in Figure 1, shall be maintained at all
intersections and points for vehicular egress along the following roads: Cuba Road, Lake Cook Road,
Long Grove Road, Quentin Road and Rand Road. Along all other public streets a vision triangle as
illustrated in Figure 2 shall be maintained. In certain situations, the Building and Zoning Official or the
Village Engineer may determine, in their sole discretion that the Illinois Department of Transportation
standards should apply rather than the vision triangle standards of Figures 1 or 2, even if the Illinois
Department of Transportation standards are more restrictive. The restrictions in this Section shall not
apply to subdivision signs existing as of November 1, 2004, or traffic and street signs.
Vision Triangles
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-20
USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§158.19 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT.
The following use districts are hereby created and established:
R-1 43,560 square feet Single Family Residential
R-2 80,000 square feet SingleFamily Residential
R-3 200,000 square feet SingleFamily Residential
GB General Business
PD PlannedDevelopment
OSD Overlay SignDistrict
§158.20 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
The Village shall cause to be printed a map clearly showing existing zoning uses, divisions and restrictions
and classifications of the Village. The map, together with everything shown thereon and all
amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth and described herein.
The map shall be filed with the Village Office, and shall be available for public reference. If there are no
changes in the map from year to year, no new map need be published. Any person desiring a copy of
such map, which shall be the Official Zoning Map, may purchase a copy from the Village.
§158.21 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
Any additions to the incorporated area of the Village shall be automatically classified as R-1 43,560
Square Feet Single-Family Residential District.
§158.22 ALTERNATIVE ZONING.
Where any land area is shown on either the official zoning map or the master plan of the Village to have
two or more use district designations, they shall be interpreted as alternative uses permissible for the
subject land uses and not as cumulative permissible uses. The first listed shall be deemed the preferred
use.
§158.23 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR ALL DISTRICTS.
(A) Home Occupations in Residential Districts: Home occupations in residential districts shall be
governed by the followingregulations:
(1) Permitted home occupations which involve private tutoring or other types of instruction
to a group of persons or animals whereby the total number of people and/or animals,
collectively, shall not exceed five in the aggregate, provided they are conducted in a
manner not to constitute a nuisance or hazard to neighboring persons or property and, in
any event, the total number of animals permitted at any time on any lot or parcel within
the Village shall not exceed that number specified in Chapter 91 of this Code.
(2) Home office use by service professionals shall be a permitted home occupation provided
that such offices are not used for meetings or office visits by clients, patients and other
business invitees.
(3) Permitted home occupations shall notinclude:
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-21
(a) Any wholesale or retail business unless conducted entirely by mail or telephone,
which does not involve the sale, receipt or delivery of merchandise on the premises;
(b) Any manufacturingbusiness;
(c) A service establishment of any kind operating on or from the premises;
(d) A clinic or hospital;
(e) A barber shop or beauty shop;
(f) A public dog kennel;
(g) A restaurant;
(h) A veterinary or animal hospital;or
(i) Any activity that produces noxious matter, or is a public hazard or nuisance.
(4) Permitted home occupations shall not be conducted in any building on the premises other
than the building which is used by the occupant as his private dwelling.
(5) Permitted home occupations shall be carried on only by members of the family with in a
residential building and shall not include the use of any mechanical equipment other
than is usual for purely domestic or hobby purposes, and further shall not include exterior
display or exterior signs except as are permitted by the sign regulations for residential
districts. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in such
home occupations.
(6) The parking or storing on public or private property of any truck, tractor, or other commercial
vehicle other than in a garage for a period longer than to load or unload or to
render a service shall be considered a business and not a residential use, and not be allowed
in the district.
(7) Until the Village acquires or constructs a Village hall or other office space, the use of a
residence for the Village Office shall be a permitted home occupation anduse.
(8) Garage and yard sales shall be permitted in residential districts provided: (i) the maximum
number of garage and/or yard sales per residence per year shall be two and
(ii) such garage and yard sales are no longer than three consecutive days between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. each day.
(B) Prohibited Structures: Trailers, car ports, mobile homes or temporary residential structures are
prohibited in all districts. After November 1, 1995, storage of commercial vehicles, boats snowmobiles,
jet skis, off-road vehicles, inoperable vehicles, unregistered vehicles, lawn trackers,
storage pods, recreational vehicles, campers or trailers outside a garage or building for any period
of time are also prohibited.
(C) Churches: Churches shall be governed by the following regulations:
(1) Churches may be constructed only upon land containing a minimum acreage of three
acres plus two acres for each 1,000 square feet of the floor area of the church building
in excess of 2,000 square feet.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-22
(2) The church building shall contain a minimumof 2,000 square feet.
(3) Parking areas for the church shall conform with the requirements of this Chapter. In
addition thereto, there shall be provided adequate space for motor vehicle parking based
upon a minimum of one space for each five seats contained in the church.
(4) Every church shall be set back from the center line of the road a minimum of 100 feet,
each side yard shall be a minimum of 75 feet, the minimum frontage of the land upon
which the church is contained shall be 200 feet and the rear yard shall be not less than
100 feet from the rear of the church to the rear lot line.
(D) Antennas and Towers: The following regulations shall apply to all wind-energy conversion towers,
satellite dish antennas, and other antenna or tower systems erected in residential districts:
(1) The following minimum setbacks shall be observed from all property lines and from all
above-ground utilitylines:
(a) For towers with wind-activated propellers or blades four times the tower height
plus six times the rotordiameter.
(b) For all other towers, the tower height plus 10 feet.
(2) Any tower or antenna erected in a residential district shall be for the private, non- commercial
use of the owner of the property on which it is erected.
(3) A six-foot high fence with locked gate shall be erected around any tower or antenna
exceeding 15 feet in height. No portion of the integral ladder constructed within a tower
or antenna shall be located lower than 12 feet above grade.
(4) With respect to any tower or antenna exceeding 50 feet in height, written consent shall
be obtained from the owners of all property located within 300 feet of the property on
which such tower or antenna is located.
(5) All satellite dish antennas, which in residential districts shall not exceed six feet in diameter,
must be screened from off-site view by means of a dense natural evergreen
screen or berm. No satellite dish antenna over three feet in diameter shall be installed on
a roof in a residentialdistrict.
(6) The noise generated by any tower or antenna shall be limited to a level which at the
property line is indistinguishable fromexisting customary background noise level.
(7) No tower or antenna shall be erected until the structural and foundation design thereof
has been certified by a registered structural engineer to provide adequate resistance to
overturning and other lateral and gravity loading. With respect to all towers and antennas
exceeding 15 feet in height, a maintenance inspection of all exposed metal components
shall be performed not less than every five years by a registered architect or structural
engineer, with a copy of the inspection report filed with the Village Clerk.
(8) No antenna system or any tower containing a generator shall be erected until a qualified
party certifies that the tower or antenna will not interfere with off-site radio, television
or telephone reception.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-23
(9) Any wind generator which activates at wind speeds of 40 miles per hour or greater shall
contain a brakingsystem.
(10) Any tower or antenna containing exposed metal components greater than 15 feet in
height shall contain an electricalground.
(E) Short-term Rental Properties. Short-term Rental Properties in all districts shall be governed by the
following regulations:
(1) No property within any district may be used more than once per calendar year as a Short-
Term Rental Property except as follows:
(a) Pursuant to a rental agreement executed pursuant to or in conjunction with a contract
to sell the real estate on which the Short-Term Rental Property is located, for
rental to the seller or buyer of the Real-Estate;
(b) For rental to existing Village residents who have been displaced from their regular
dwelling unit due to damage, repair or renovations;
(c) For the provision of overnight lodging to guests of existing Village residents other
than the owner of the Short-Term Rental Property; or
(d) By owners who can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Administrator,
that they will suffer a demonstrable financial hardship if use of the property for a
Short-Term Rental Property is prohibited. No property may be used as a Short-
Term Rental Property pursuant to this Section prior to approval by the Village
Administrator and ratification by the Village President and Board of Trustee. Owners
who have been denied such use by the Village Administrator may appeal this
decision to the Village President and Board of Trustees whose decision shall be
final.
§158.24 R-1 43,560 SQUARE FEET SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The R-1 District is established to provide for single family detached residences on lots of 43,560 square
feet or larger to maintain the overall low-density residential character of the Village and to preserve
environmentally sensitive areas, in locations consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The following
regulations govern the R-1 Single-Family Residential District:
(A) PermittedUses:
(1) Single-family detacheddwellings.
(2) Home occupations as permitted by this Chapter.
(3) Signs as permitted by thisChapter.
(4) Temporary signs and structures as required for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed such construction, but in no event for more than one year.
(5) Accessory uses as regulated by this Chapter.
(6) Public parks.
(7) Wildlife preserves.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-24
(B) Special Uses:
(1) Utility and public uses where specifically regulated by franchise granted to or contract
with the particular utility or public service by the Village Board.
(2) Parks, recreation and forest areas or wildlife preserves where such are owned by the
Village for the sole benefit of all its residents.
(3) Churches.
(4) Antennas and towers.
(5) Country clubs.
(6) Golf courses.
(C) Lot Area: There shall be not less than 43,560 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. The lot
area shall include the land lying within one-half of the right-of-way of any streets, roads and
private easement for ingress and egress lying adjacent to the lot.
(D) Building Height: Building height shall not exceed two and one-half stories above a basement
story or 35 feet, whichever islower.
(E) Dwelling Standards: One story dwellings shall have a total habitable ground floor area of not
less than 1,200 square feet. Dwellings having more than one story shall have not less than 900
square feet of habitable ground floor area nor less than 1,500 square feet of total habitable floor
area.
(F) Frontage: No lot shall have a frontage of less than 75 feet nor an average lot width of less than
150 feet.
(G) Front Yard: There shall be provided a front yard of not less than 50 feet.
(H) Side Yard: There shall be provided two side yards, each of which shall be not less than 30 feet.
On corner lots the total width of the corner side yard and side yard shall be sufficient to maintain
a buildable width of at least 45 feet.
(I) Rear Yard: There shall be provided a rear yard of not less than 40 feet.
§158.25 R-2 80,000 SQUARE FEET SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The R-2 District is established to provide for single family detached residences on lots of 80,000 square
feet or larger to maintain the overall low-density residential character of the Village and to preserve
environmentally sensitive areas, in locations consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The following
regulations govern the R-2 Single-Family Residential District:
(A) Permitted Uses:
(1) Single-family detacheddwellings.
(2) Home occupations as permitted by this Chapter.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-25
(3) Signs as permitted by thisChapter.
(4) Temporary signs and structures as required for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed such construction, but in no event for more than one year.
(5) Accessory uses as regulated by thisChapter.
(6) Public parks.
(7) Wildlife preserves.
(B) Special Uses:
(1) Utility and public uses where specifically regulated by franchise granted to or contract
with the particular utility or public service by the Village Board.
(2) Parks, recreation and forest areas or wildlife preserves where such are owned by the
Village for the sole benefit of all its residents.
(3) Churches.
(4) Antennas and towers.
(5) Country clubs.
(6) Golf courses.
(C) Lot Area: There shall be not less than 80,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. The area
shall include the land lying within one-half of the right-of-way of any streets, roads and private
easements for ingress and egress lying adjacent to the lot.
(D) Building Height: Building height shall not exceed two and one-half stories above a basement
story or 35 feet whichever islower.
(E) Dwelling Standards: One-story dwellings shall have a total habitable ground floor area of not
less than 1,200 square feet. Dwellings having more than one story shall have not less than 900
square feet of habitable ground floor area nor less than 1,500 square feet of total habitable floor
area.
(F) Frontage: No lot shall have a frontage of less than 150 feet nor an average lot width of less than
200 feet.
(G) Front Yard: There shall be provided a front yard of not less than 60 feet.
(H) Side Yard: There shall be provided two side yards, each of which shall be not less than 40 feet.
On a corner lot there shall be a front yard on each street side of such lot except that the buildable
width of the lot shall not be reduced to less than 55 feet. No accessory building shall project
beyond the yard line on either street.
(I) Rear Yard: There shall be provided a rear yard of not less than 50 feet.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-26
§158.26 R-3 200,000 SQUARE FEET SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The R-3 District established to provide for single family detached residences on lots of 200,000 square
feet or larger to maintain the low-density residential character of the Village and to preserve environmentally
sensitive areas, in locations consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The following regulations
govern the R-3 Single-Family Residential District:
(A) Permitted Uses: The uses permitted in the R-1 District.
(B) Special Uses: The special uses permitted in the R-1 District.
(C) Lot Area: There shall not be less than 200,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit, provided
that at least 80,000 square feet of the tract is three feet above the high water mark to provide for
living space, septic fields and an acceptablewell.
(D) Building Height: Heights permitted in the R-1 District.
(E) Dwelling Standards: Standards as required in the R-1 District.
(F) Frontage: No lot shall have less than 300 feet offrontage.
(G) Front Yard: There shall be provided a front yard of not less than 100 feet, exceptions being where
it is impossible to locate 80,000 square feet of ground above flood plain without deviations.
(H) Side Yard: There shall be provided two side yards, each of which shall not be less than 40 feet
wide. Exceptions shall be the same as in division (G) above.
(I) Rear Yard: There shall be provided a rear yard of not less than 100 feet. Exceptions shall be the
same as in division (G) above.
(J) Grade Restrictions: No building or structure other than a fence shall be erected on or moved to
a lot or tract of land in this district unless the ground upon which the building or structure is to
be erected for the 10 feet beyond the limits of the building or structure is raised to such level that
the main floor of the building or structure shall be not less than three feet above the high water
level. No basement floor or other floor shall be constructed below or at lower elevation than the
main floor. The high water shall be defined as 642 feet above mean sea level 1929 adjustment.
§158.27 GB GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
The GB District is established to provide for professional office, retail, and service establishments which
offer a wide range of goods and services in locations which abut or front, and have access to, either
directly or via frontage roads, heavily traveled major arterial roadways. The following regulations govern
the GB General Business District:
(A) UseRegulations:
(1) Permitted Uses:
(a) Antique shops.
(b) Art supply stores including picture framing conducted on the premises for retail
trade.
(c) Athletic and health clubs.
(d) Auction rooms.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-27
(e) Bakeries, where all goods are sold on the premises at retail.
(f) Banks and financial institutions (including drive-in facilities).
(g) Barber shops and beautyparlors.
(h) Bicycle sales, rental andrepairs.
(i) Book or stationery stores.
(j) Business, music, dance or commercial schools.
(k) Camera and photographic supplystores.
(l) Carpet, rug and tile stores.
(m) Catering establishments.
(n) Department, furniture and home appliance stores.
(o) Drapery and fabric stores.
(p) Dressmakingestablishments.
(q) Drug stores.
(r) Dry cleaners employing facilities for not more than 1,000 pounds of dry goods
per day and using carbon tetrachloride or other non-inflammable cleaning
agents.
(s) Dry goods stores.
(t) Electrical appliance shops andrepair.
(u) Employment agencies.
(v) Florist shops and greenhouses for retail tradeonly.
(w) Food stores andsupermarkets.
(x) Furniture stores and home appliancestores.
(y) Furrier shop.
(z) Garden supply and seed stores.
(aa) Gift shops.
(bb) Hardware store.
(cc) Hobby and handicraft shops.
(dd) Interior decorating shops.
(ee) Jewelry stores, includingwatch repair.
(ff) Leather goods and luggage stores.
(gg) Meat markets or poultry stores, if no slaughter or stripping is involved; delicatessens
and specialty foodstores.
(hh) Medical and dental clinics.
(ii) Music stores, including sheet music and phonograph record sales and instrument
sales and repairs.
(jj) Optician and optical goods stores.
(kk) Paint and wallpaper stores.
(ll) Painting and decorating shops. Salesonly.
(mm) Pet shop or animal hospital when conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
(nn) Photographers or artists’ studios, including development and printing of photographs,
when conducted on the premises as part of the retail business.
(oo) Professional or serviceoffices.
(pp) Radio broadcasting station.
(qq) Rental agencies.
(rr) Restaurants, but not including drive-in, carry-out or fast food establishments.
(ss) Retail stores and services
(tt) Shoe repair shops.
(uu) Single family detached dwellings and attached multi-family dwellings but only
as part of a mixed use planned development in accordancewith Chapter 153 of
this Code.
(vv) Sporting goods stores.
(ww) Tailor and dressmaking shops.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-28
(xx) Taxi service stations.
(yy) Telegraph service stations.
(zz) Telephone buildings.
(aaa) Temporary building incidental only to construction of a permitted use.
(bbb) Tobacco shops.
(ccc) Toy stores.
(ddd) Travel bureaus.
(eee) Wearing apparel shops.
(fff) Wholesale establishments excluding any building for which the principal use is
storage warehousing.
(ggg) Archery ranges, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, miniature golf links, swimming
pools, tennis courts, and other like facilities.
(hhh) Uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses and accessory buildings
when located on the same lot. All business or service of the aforesaid stores,
shops or businesses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building, except for automobile parking and off-street areas.
(iii) Additional retail commercial uses similar in character to those listed above, provided
that they are not activities which are characterized by rapid turnover of a
high volume of customers and vehicular traffic.
(2) SpecialUses:
(a) The following additional uses are permitted as conditional uses in the GB District,
but because of special circumstances requiring additional specific standards
to be met, a special use permit shall be required. Such uses include:
(1) Auditoriums.
(2) Automobile sales and service shops conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building as one integrated business operation, including
but not limited to automobile painting, upholstering, rebuilding, or
body and fender work. However, in all cases where junk vehicles are
temporarily stored on the business property, they shall be stored within
the boundaries of a 10-foot high solid core fence, designed and constructed
in a manner so as to prevent persons who may pass by the business
operation from being able to view any of the temporarily stored
vehicles, and the 10-foot high solid core fence shall be designed and
constructed in a manner aesthetically acceptable to the Village. The
term temporarily herein means any period of time which does not exceed
one month. Over one month is beyond the limits of temporarily.
(3) Automobile washing facilities, rollover or conveyor.
(4) Convenience food stores.
(5) Hotel or motel, including dining and meeting rooms.
(6) Medical and dental clinics.
(7) Museums.
(8) Restaurants of the drive-in, carry-out or fast-food type.
(9) Taverns, music/night clubs as part of a mixed use planned development
in accordance with Chapter 153 of this Code.
(10) Theaters (in-door only).
(11) Business parks, comprised of offices, laboratories, showrooms or warehousing
and related uses for wholesale and service businesses.
(12) Churches.
(13) Antennas and towers.
(14) Country clubs.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-29
(15) Golf courses.
(16) Public uses, including fire station, police station, school, vehicle garages
and other governmentaluses.
(17) Automated teller machines(ATMs).
(b) These special uses are subject to the following standards as well as the general
standards herein:
(1) For a hotel or motel, a minimum lot area of 1,500 square feet per lodging
room or 120,000 square feet, whichever is greater, and a minimum
lot area of 80,000 square feet for other special uses.
(2) Any drive-in facility shall provide a sufficient area for a minimum of
three vehicular spaces per service window or drawer.
(3) Direct access to a collector or arterial road designated on the transportation
plan section of the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) A minimum lot frontage of 250 feet and a minimum average lot width
of 250 feet, except with respect to special uses referred to in Section
(A)(2)(b)5 herein below.
(5) Automobile service stations, automobile washing facilities, convenience
food stores, and restaurants of the drive-in, carry-out or fast food
type have a high volume of traffic and rapid turnover of customers.
They are typically oriented to high volume traffic locations with high
visibility from the roadway. These special uses shall therefor be permitted
as a conditional use in a GB General Business District only if:
(a) Location of the use is within 300 feet of the intersection of a
regional arterial road and a local arterial road, as is identified in
the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) There is a minimumlot area of 60,000 square feet.
(c) A frontage of not less than 150 feet nor more than 250 feet shall
be required. Where the parcel has frontage along two streets,
the total frontage shall not be less than 300 feet nor more than
600 feet.
(d) No more than one building shall be permitted per lot, and such
building shall have not less than 1,250 square feet of gross area.
(e) Business parks shall be permitted in a GB General Business
District only:
(i) If all activities are conducted within an enclosed building;
(ii) If no noise, smells or vibrations will emanate from the
buildings which may be heard or smelled beyond the
property lines of the special use property;
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-30
(iii) If there is no outside storage ofmaterials;
(iv) If all loading docks are located at the rear of the building
or buildings on the special use property and such
loading docks are screened from the view of all roads
and adjoining properties; and
(v) If all exterior lighting is low glare, low impact lighting.
(B) Building Height: No building shall be erected or enlarged to exceed 35 feet in height inclusive
of elevator penthouses, chimneys, mechanical equipment, tanks and similar projections.
(C) Areas: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall be hereafter
erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are provided and maintained in
connection with such building, structure or enlargement:
(1) Front Setback: All structures permitted in this district shall be set back from the front
street line a distance not less than 80 feet. Parking shall not be located within 30 feet of
the street line.
(2) Side Yard: Where a lot is used for any of the purposes permitted in this district and is
located at the intersection of two or more streets, and where a “R” District adjoins the
rear of the lot, the side yard on the side of the lot adjacent to the street shall not be less
than 100 feet in width, except that the buildable width of the lot shall not be reduced to
less than 50 feet. In all other cases a side yard of not less than 30 feet is required except
on any side of a lot adjoining a residential district, in which case there shall be a side
yard of not less than 150 feet, inclusive of the screening easement herein. Parking shall
be permitted in the side yards, but no closer than 20 feet to any lot line adjoining a nonresidential
district, and no closer than 50 feet to any lot line adjoining a residential district.
(3) Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet, except on
a lot adjoining a residential district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less
than 150 feet inclusive of the screening easement required herein. No parking shall be
permitted within 20 feet of any lot line adjoining a non-residential district or within 50
feet of any lot line adjoining a residential district.
(4) Lot Area: There shall be not less than 30,000 square feet of lot area for each business
unit or use.
(5) Lot Coverage: Not more than 35 percent of the lot area of any lot may be covered by
buildings or structures. Not more than 65 percent of the lot area of any lot may be
covered by impervious surfaces, including buildings, parking and loading areas and
driveways. Existing water areas shall be excluded from the lot for the purpose of calculating
lot coverage.
(D) Sewer and Water Requirements: Shall be as set forth herein.
(E) Screening Requirements: Shall be as set forth herein.
§158.28 PUBLIC LANDS DISTRICT.
A. Purpose: The Public Lands District is established to distinguish those parcels of land dedicated
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-31
to public service and facilities use, including all Village, County, State and Federal facilities,
emergency service facilities such as fire departments and rescue operations, wastewater treatment
plants, public and/or private utility substations, water towers, utility and public service
related distribution facilities, and similar land uses; to protect existing open space for public
recreational use; to preserve space for the expansion of essential governmental functions and
administration; to preserve space for public educational and cultural facilities such as schools,
libraries and museums; and to eliminate the ambiguity of maintaining public lands and facilities
in unrelated use districts.
B. Applicability: This Section contains special standards that apply to uses owned or operated by
local governmental or institutional agencies elected by the residents of the Village. Because these
units of local government, as publicly-elected bodies, represent the Village as a whole, it can be
presumed that their activities by and large operate to promote the public health, safety, comfort,
and welfare.
(1) Use Regulations: The following uses shall be permitted within the Public Lands District.
Other uses similar to those listed below may be permitted as determined appropriate by
the Village Board.
(a) PermittedUses:
(i) Emergency servicefacilities
• Fire departments
• Rescue operations
• Police departments
• Other similar uses
(ii) Public administrativefacilities
• Village Hall
• Public Works facilities
• Other similar uses
(iii) Public educationaland cultural facilities
• Schools
• Libraries
• Museums
• Cultural centers
• Other similar uses
(iv) Public recreational facilities
• Parks, playfields and ancillary uses (public restrooms, concession
stands not exceeding 750 square feet, warming houses)
• Public open spaces
• Community centers
• Recreational centers
• Other similar uses
(b) Special Uses:
(i) Government buildings and public uses other than those listed as permitted
uses in this Section.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-32
(ii) Utility substations, such as electric power substations, water treatment,
sewage treatment and similar utility uses, including pumping stations.
(iii) Permitted uses within the Public Lands District must comply with the
conditions of this Chapter.
(2) Performance Standards: All uses in the Public Lands District shall conform to the following
use standards:
(a) Site Development Plan Review: To encourage the creation of an institutional
use environment that is compatible with the residential character of the Village,
zoning and building permits for permitted uses in the Public Lands District shall
not be issued without review and approval in accordance with the Site Development
Plan procedures and standards of this Chapter.
(b) Floor Area Ratio (“FAR”): For lot sizes of 1 to 5 acres, the FAR is not to exceed
0.15; for lot sizes above 5.1 acres, the FAR is not to exceed0.10.
(c) Accessory Uses or Structures; Exceptions: All accessory uses and structures
shall comply with the standards in this Chapter, provided, however, that the size
of accessory buildings shall be as determined by the Village Board, but shall not
exceed the floor area of the principal use(s) on a lot, unless authorized as a special
use; and provided further that windmills may exceed the building height of
the principal structure but may not exceed 45 feet.
(d) Fences: Fence heights shall be as determined by the Village Board, but shall not
exceed six feet, unless authorized as a special use.
(e) Building Height of Principal Structures: Not to exceed 35 feet.
(f) Areas: No building or structure nor the enlargement of any building or structure
shall be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas
are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement:
(i) Front setback: All structures permitted in this district shall be set back
from the front property line a distance not less than 80 feet. Parking
shall not be located within 20 feet of the front property line.
(ii) Side yard:
(1) Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets,
and adjoins the rear of an adjacent lot, the corner side yard on
the side of the lot adjacent to the street shall not be less than 50
feet.
(2) In all other cases a side yard of not less than 30 feet is required,
except on a side yard adjoining a residential district, in which
case there shall be a side yard of not less than 75 feet, inclusive
of the screening easement required herein. Parking shall be permitted
in the side yards, but no closer than 20 feet to any lot
line adjoining a non-residential district, and no closer than 50
feet to any lot line adjoining a residential district.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-33
(iii) Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less
than 35 feet, except on a lot adjoining a residential district, in which
case there shall be a rear yard of not less than 100 feet inclusive of the
screening easement required herein. No parking shall be permitted
within 20 feet of any lot line adjoining a non-residential district or within
50 feet of any lot line adjoining a residential district.
(iv) Lot coverage: Not more than 25 percent of the lot area of any lot may
be covered by buildings or structures. Not more than 50 percent of the
lot area of any lot may be covered by impervious surfaces, including
buildings, parking and loading areas and driveways. Existing water areas
shall be excluded from the lot for the purpose of calculating lotcoverage.
(v) Lighting: Light levels shall be in accordance with the standards in Section
153.03(O) of this Code, except for thefollowing:
(1) No lights shall be permitted in playfields; and
(2) Light fixtures shall have cut-off shields to eliminate glare on adjoining
residential uses.
§158.29 PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
The PD District is established to provide for development of the Triangle and parcels with frontage on
Lake Cook Road (between Quentin Road and the Barrington Woods Subdivision) and Rand Road. The
regulations that govern the PD District are set forth in Chapter 153: Planned Developments, of this Code.
If there is a conflict between standards set forth herein or found in Chapter 153, the provisions of Chapter
153 shall govern. The uses permitted in the PD District are all those uses permitted in the GB District,
including the following residential uses: single-family dwellings, attached single-family dwellings
(townhomes, rowhomes, duplexes).
§158.30 OVERLAY SIGN DISTRICT.
(A) Creation of Overlay Sign District: The Overlay Sign District is hereby created to establish certain
regulations relative to the installation of signs in order to enhance and maintain the appearance
and character of certain commercial areas within the Village. Except as otherwise provided in
this Code, the provisions of Chapter 157, Signs, and specifically Section 157.21 thereof, Overlay
Sign District, shall be applicable to all property located within the Overlay Sign District.
(B) Territory: The property which is the subject of and which shall be located within the Village’s
Overlay Sign District is that property bounded by Lake-Cook Road, Quentin Road and Rand
Road within theVillage.
§158.31 SITE LIGHTING.
In the GB, and PD districts, exterior lighting requirements contained in Section 153.15(O) of this Code
shall apply.
§158.32 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPE EASEMENTS.
(A) Requirements for Residential Areas: Screening and landscape easement of not less than 50 feet
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-34
in width shall be required in the following locations:
(1) Where any use other than residential abuts the residential district.
(2) Where any use other than residential abuts a private or public road or alley contiguous
to a residential district.
(B) Requirements for Other Areas: A screening and landscape easement shall be provided along all
other lot lines asfollows:
(1) Twenty feet in width alongside and rear lot lines and front yard lines where no parking
is permitted in the front yard.
(2) Thirty feet in width along any front lot line where parking is located in the front yard.
(C) Landscape Specifications:
(1) All planting screens shall consist of plant materials identified in the “Listing of Recommended
Plant Materials” on file at the Village Hall.
(2) All planting screens adjacent to residential areas shall consist of berms and plant materials
which will produce a dense, all season visual barrier to a height of not less than eight
feet above grade of the residential lot line.
(3) All planting screens required along a front lot line shall consist of berms and plant material
which will produce a dense, all weather visual barrier to a height of four feet above
grade at the point of the easement furthest fromthe street line.
(4) All other planting screens alongside and rear lot lines and adjoining to any roadway,
driveway, or parking area shall consist entirely of plant materials suitable for locations
along roadways.
(5) All berms shall be constructed to the following standards:
(a) In easements along residential areas berms shall be varied in height from four
to six feet and shall not have a slope with a greater than 2:1 ratio.
(b) In easements along other lot lines the slopes of berms shall not exceed a 3:1 ratio.
(c) All surfaces of berms shall be covered with plant material including appropriate
ground covers in areas not planted with trees or shrubs.
(D) In easements along residential areas, berms shall be continuous except as necessary to provide
for natural drainage systems.
§158.33 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
(A) Off-Street Parking:
(1) For the purpose of this Section, 180 square feet of lot or floor area, which has a means
of ingress and egress from a public or private vehicle easement or right-of-way, shall be
deemed parking space for one vehicle. Such space shall not occupy any front yard, but,
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-35
where open, may be included as part of an open space for side or rear yard. On corner
or through lots, parking space may not be included as part of required yards lying adjacent
to either street, except as otherwise provided herein. Parking spaces and driveways
providing access thereto that are required in residential districts shall be surfaced with
an all-weather dust proof material.
(2) Parking areas serving non-residential uses of property shall be hard surfaced and graded
so as to drain off all surface water to adequate drainage structures. Lights used to illuminate
such parking lots shall be so arranged as to reflect lighting away from the adjoining
premises in the residential district. Such parking spaces shall be reserved for the sole
use of the occupants of the building or lots, their customers, or visitors thereto. Churches,
theaters, stadia, auditoriums, and other places of assembly may make arrangements for
joint use of parking spaces as hereinafter specified.
(3) In any district, except as noted below, every building built, or structurally altered, enlarged
or increased in capacity, and every land use initiated subsequent to the adoption
of this Section shall be provided with minimumoff-street parking facilities as follows:
(a) One- and two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings: Two parking
spaces for each dwelling unit.
(b) Hotel, rooming houses, clubs and fraternal homes: One parking space for each
guest sleeping room and one space for each employee.
(c) Hospitals: 0.4 parking spaces per employee plus one parking space for each
three beds plus one parking space for five average daily outpatient visits, plus
one parking space per ten daily emergency roomvisits.
(d) Medical office: 5.5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area;
(e) Elderly housing: One parking space per four employees plus one parking space
for each two dwelling units;
(f) Group nursing homes and assisted living homes: One parking space per four
employees plus one parking space for each six infirmary beds plus one parking
space for each three dwellingunits;
(g) Daycare center: One parking space per employee plus 0.1 parking space per
person of licensed capacity.
(h) Motels: One parking space for each lodging unit and one space for each employee.
(i) Churches, auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadia, theaters and other places of public
or private assembly with fixedseats:
1. .25 parking spaces per person, based upon maximumseating capacity.
(j) For the purpose of this type of use, parking spaces already provided to meet offstreet
parking requirements for stores, office buildings and industrial establishments,
or off-street parking facilities provided by the municipality, lying within
300 feet of the place of public assembly as measured along the lines of public
access, and that are not normally in use between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
midnight, and are made available for other parking, may be used to meet up to
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-36
75 percent of the total requirements of parking space for places of public assembly.
(k) Dance halls, bowling alleys and private clubs: .33 spaces per person based upon
maximum seatingcapacity.
(l) Funeral homes: Fifteen parking spaces on the premises, plus five spaces for each
area which can be used as a parlor.
(m) Retail establishments, offices, research laboratories: One parking space for each
300 square feet of gross floor area, except that restaurants or establishments
whose primary use is to serve meals and refreshments to patrons shall provide
one parking space for each 50 square feet of eating area in the building.
(n) Wholesale and distributing establishments including telephone exchanges: 1.5
parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus any required spaces
for office uses.
(o) Manufacturingestablishments:
1. One parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area plus required
spaces or office uses, to be provided on the premises or at other
off-street locations within 1,000 feet of the main entrance.
2. Parking spaces required under this section may be reduced at a time
when capacity or use of a building is changed in such a manner that a
new use or capacity would require less space than before the change.
Such reduction may not be below the standards set forth for the new
uses.
(p) Public Services and Utilities: One parking space per employee on the largest work
shift, plus one space per company vehicle normally stored or parked on the premises,
plus one space per 500 square feet of gross square footage of the office area.
(4) Loading or unloading areas shall not be considered as parking areas.
(5) The joint use of parking facilities may be permitted in cases where major parking demands
occur on different days of the week or during different hours, provided that parking
spaces will be available for each use in accordance with the above standards, and
that the owners agree in writing that any subsequent sale or division of the property or
change in use thereof will not interfere with the joint use of the parkingfacilities.
(6) A plan of parking facilities shall accompany each application for a building permit, or
certificate of compliance, or application for rezoning. The completion of the improvements
for parking according to such plan shall be a requisite for the validity of the permit
or certificate.
(B) Off-Street Loading Facilities. On the same lot with every building or part thereof, erected hereafter
to be used for other than exclusive dwelling purposes, or as an accessory use for dwelling
purposes, there shall be provided on the lot, adequate space for motor vehicles in order to avoid
undue interference with the public use of streets. Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided
for, shall include a 10-foot by 25-foot loading space, with 15 feet height clearance, and
one such space shall be provided for each 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor or lot
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-37
area used for other than residence purposes.
§158.34 WATER SUPPLY AND WELLS.
(A) Regulations Applying to AllDistricts:
(1) All water supply systems and all sewage and waste disposal systems in any use district
shall comply with the subdivision regulations set forth in Chapter 155 of this Code.
(2) In addition, all water supply systems and sewage and waste disposal systems not heretofore
constructed shall be subject to the approval of the Commission and Building and
Zoning Official. Such approval shall be withheld if, in the judgment of the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the Building and Zoning Official, the proposed system does not
comply with the Village regulations regulating same, does not provide adequate safety
for public health, or will not adequately serve the proposed residence, business, industry,
or other facility for which it is intended.
(B) Regulations Applying to Residential Districts: Individual sewage treatment facilities will be approved
by the Building and Zoning Official only upon adequate proof that such wells are free
from contamination. The approval of the Building and Zoning Official is a requirement in addition
to those stated in the aforementioned subdivisionregulations. See Chapter 51, the adoption
of the Lake County Health Code.
(C) Regulations Applying to Districts Other Than Residential Districts:
(1) All wells hereafter drilled, dug, or otherwise constructed in districts other than residential
districts shall be designed and constructed so that no water is removed from such
strata, aquifer, or other underground source as supplies the water to a majority of residences
within the Village or within a three-mile radius of the subject well.
(2) All wells shall be cased in such a manner as to insure freedom from contamination and
freedom frominfiltration fromnearby residential water supply sources.
§158.35 HILLCREST ROAD OVERLAY DISTRICT.
(A) Creation of Overlay District: The Hillcrest Road Overlay District (hereinafter the “Hillcrest District”)
is established as an overlay district subject to the provisions of this Chapter which, where
applicable, complement and supersede the provisions of the underlying R-1 43,560 Square Feet
Single Family Residential District (the “R-1 District”).
(B) Legal Description: The legal description of the lands included in the Hillcrest District is as follows:
That part of Lot Two (2) of the Northwest quarter (1/4) of Section 3, Township 42 North, Range
10 East of the Third Principal Meridian, bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the
Northwest corner of said Lot 2, thence East along the North line of said Lot, 376.0 feet; thence
South along a line running parallel with the West line of said Lot 231.75 feet to the South line
of the North half (1/2) of the North 14 acres of the West half (1/2) of said Lot 2; thence
West along said South line to the West line of said Lot 2; thence North along said West line to
the place of beginning, and all unincorporated public right of way adjacent thereto.
Lot Five (5) in Block Two (2), in Engelund Subdivision of the West Half (1/2) (Except the South
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-38
12 Acres and Except the North 14 Acres of Lot 2), Government Division of the Northwest Quarter
(1/4) Of Section 3, Township 42 North, Range 10, East of the Third Principal Meridian.
Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 in Hillcrest Gardens, a Subdivision of Part of the West
Half of Lot Two (2) in the Northwest Quarter of Section 3, Township 42 North, Range 1 0, East
of the Third PrincipalMeridian, in Cook County, Illinois.
(C) Uses: Uses permitted in the Hillcrest District shall be the same use as permitted in the R-1 District.
(D) Lot Area: There shall be no minimum lot area within the Hillcrest District, provided that the
subdivision lots existing of record on July 31, 2004 shall not be re-subdivided.
(E) Dwelling Standards: There shall be no minimum square footage requirements for dwellings
within the Hillcrest District. No existing dwelling may be replaced with a new dwelling of fewer
square feet than the existing dwelling.
(F) Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio for a single-family residence shall be .4.
(G) Yards: The minimum side yard for yards adjacent to another lot shall be five feet. The minimum
side yard for yards adjacent to a street shall be 10 feet. The minimum front and rear yards shall
be 20 feet.
(H) Existing Improvements: All existing improvements on the property shall be treated as legal nonconforming
uses. Any additions or remodeling to the existing improvements shall not require a
zoning permit so long as the applicable yard requirements aresatisfied.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
§158.36 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL REQUIRED.
Prior to the construction of any building or structure, or undertaking any site improvements within the
GB and PD districts, an application shall be made for approval of a Site Development Plan.
§158.37 PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE
The applicant may request a conference with the Commission for a preliminary discussion of the proposed
development. Such conference shall be scheduled as part of a regular meeting of the Commission.
The applicant shall present exhibits and written information as may be necessary to acquaint the Commission
with the scope and character of the proposed development and serve as the basis for a preliminary
evaluation of the conformance of the proposed development with the intent of the standards and
regulations for site developments. The material presented by the applicant shall include information concerning:
(A) Type of use proposed.
(B) General location of proposedstructures.
(C) Location of access points to adjacent streets and internal vehicular circulation system.
(D) Location of parking areas and amount of spaces to be provided.
(E) Location, extent and general type of landscaping to be provided including any existing features
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-39
to be maintained.
(F) Preliminary indication of proposed methods of wastewater treatment and disposal.
§158.38 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF SITE PLAN.
An application shall:
(A) Be filed with the VillageAdministrator.
(B) Be accompanied by a fee as required in Chapter 38 of this Code.
(C) Include all information and documentation required by this Section, unless specifically waived
in writing, in quantities, formand size specified by the Village.
§158.39 CONTENT OF SITE PLAN.
The following information and documentation, when taken together, shall constitute a Site Development
Plan:
(A) Applicant’s name, address and interest in subject property.
(B) Owner’s name, address, if different than applicant, and owners signed consent to the filing of
the application.
(C) Names and addresses of persons who prepared the Site Development Plan or portions thereof.
(D) Address and legal description of the subject property.
(E) A survey including legal description, certified by a registered professional engineer or a registered
land surveyor, showing property boundary lines and dimensions, easements, public and
private rights-of-way crossing and adjacent to the subject property.
(F) A graphic rendering of the existing site conditions, at a scale not less than one inch equals 100
feet with contour intervals not greater than two feet which depicts all significant natural, topographic
and physical features of the subject property. Such rendering shall locate and detail
the extent of tree cover including single trees in excess of six inches in diameter and significant
masses of vegetation, water courses on or within 150 feet of the subject property, existing drainage
patterns, existing development of the property and all land within 100 feet thereof including
existing streets, property lines, utilities and easement.
(G) A detailed drawing, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet of the proposed Site Development
Plan, including the proposed dimension and location of vehicular elements, open space, and required
landscape and screening easement; all buildings or structures and all setback lines. The
plan shall be accompanied by drawings showing cross-sections at a scale not less than one-inch
equals 100 feet of the proposed development, at right angles to all public roads (existing or proposed)
on which the site has frontage; such cross-sections showing all principal structures related
to existing and proposed topographic elevations on the site.
(H) A tabulation of the following information:
(1) Total site area in acres and square feet.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-40
(2) Total area of ground coverage of all buildings and structures.
(3) Total area of ground cover of all impervious areas.
(4) Number of parking spacesprovided.
(5) Total gross floor area of eachstructure.
(I) A preliminary engineering study showing the location and adequacy of proposed sanitary
wastewater treatment, stormdrainage and domestic water systems.
(J) A detailed dimensional landscapingplan showing:
(1) Locations, size and species of all existing plant material to remain along with a description
of what measures will be taken to protect such materials during construction.
(2) Location, size and species of all proposed plant material.
(3) Preliminary grading plans and profiles for allberms.
(K) When a subdivision of land is involved, the detailed plan required by this section must be accompanied
by a Preliminary Subdivision Plan.
§158.40 REVIEW OF SITE PLAN.
(A) Submission to the Commission: Upon receipt, the Village Administrator shall forward copies of
the Site Development Plan to the Commission. Copies shall also be forwarded to the Village
President and members of the Board of Trustees.
(B) Action by the Commission:
(1) Within 30 days following the submission of the Plan, the Commission shall, with
such aid and advice of the various commissions and officials of the Village as may be
appropriate, review the final plan as submitted, with respect to its substantial conformity
to the standards for site development within this Chapter; as well as with any conditions
imposed by approval of a special use permit under the provision of this Chapter.
(2) If the Commission finds the Site Development Plan to be in all respects complete in compliance
with the standards and intent of this Chapter, the Commission shall approve the
final plan.
(3) If the Commission finds that such compliance may be conditioned upon modification to
conform with the above standards, it may approve the final plan subject to such modifications.
All approvals shall be accompanied by a report presenting the findings of the
Commission with respect to the final plan.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§158.41 BUILDING AND ZONING OFFICIAL; POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) The enforcing officer of this Chapter shall be the Village Building and Zoning Official.
(B) Office of the Building and Zoning Official: The Building and Zoning Official shall be the
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-41
enforcing officers of this Chapter.
(C) Village Clerk Support: The Village Clerk shall:
(1) Maintain permanent and current records of the ordinances, including, but not limited to
maps, amendments and special uses, variations, appeals and applications therefor;
(2) Receive, file and forward to the Village Board for action all applications for special uses
or petitions for amendments to this Chapter, which may be filed initially in the office of
the Building and Zoning Official;
(3) Receive, from any source, applications for special uses or amendments which have been
introduced in the Village Board, and transmit copies of same to the Planning and Zoning
Official for review and recommendations;
(4) Receive, from the Commission, recommendations on all amendments and special uses,
and transmit same to the Village Board, together with the recommendations on amendments
of the Building and Zoning Official;
(5) Receive and file copies of all applications for appeals, variations and other matters on
which the Commission is required to pass under this Chapter; and
(6) Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the Commission in
the exercise of its duties.
§158.42 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
(A) Creation: A Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby created for the Village to carry out the
duties of a Planning and Zoning Commission and a zoning board of appeals. When used in this
Chapter, “Commission” shall be construed to mean the Planning and Zoning Commission and
“Commissioners” shall be construed to mean the members of the Commission.
(B) Membership: The Commission shall consist of a chairman and six members to be appointed by
the President with the advice and consent of the Village Board. The President shall be an exofficio
member of the Commission. The Chairman shall be appointed annually by the President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Annually, the Commissioners shall elect
one of its own to serve as vice-chairman. The Village Clerk shall serve as secretary to the Commission.
(C) Term of Office: The first appointees shall serve for the following terms, or until their respective
successors, in similar manner, have been appointed and qualified: one for one year, one for two
years, one for three years, one for four years, one for five years, one for six years and one for
seven years. Successors to each member so appointed shall serve five-year terms except that
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the membership vacated. The term of each
Commissioner shall expire April 30 of the year of the expiration of its respective term of office.
Thereafter, the appointments shall be made at the April meeting of the Village Board.
(D) Vacancy: Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment.
(E) Removal: The President, with the approval of the Village Board, may remove any member of
the Commission for cause after a public hearing.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-42
(F) Compensation: No member of the Commission shall receive any compensation for service as
such, except that the Village Clerk may be paid such compensation as the President and Board
of Trustees may from time to time determine.
§158.43 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSIONREFERENCES.
Any ordinance, code, regulation, etc., of the Village or state statute that references the Plan Commission,
Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Board of Appeals shall mean the Commission.
§158.44 DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The duties of the Commission are as follows:
1. To prepare and recommend to the Village Board a comprehensive plan of public improvements
looking to the present and future development of the Village. After its adoption by the Village
Board this plan shall be known as the Official Plan of the Village of Deer Park. Thereafter, from
time to time, the Commission may recommend changes in the Official Plan. This plan may include
reasonable requirements with reference to the streets, alleys and public grounds in unsubdivided
land situated within the corporate limits or in contiguous territory not more than 1½
miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality. These requirements shall
be effective whenever this unsubdivided land is subdivided after the adoption of the Official
Plan. Following the adoption of the Official Plan no map or plat of any subdivision presented
for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the Village or in contiguous territory
outside of and not more than 1½ miles from those limits and not included in any other municipality,
shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide
for streets, alleys and public grounds in conformity with the Official Plan.
2. To prepare and recommend to the Village Board from time to time plans for specific improvements
in the pursuance of the Official Plan.
3. To give aid to the Village officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced
within the Official Plan and to further the making of these projects, and generally promote
the Official Plan.
4. To exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted by this Code as may be conferred
by the Village and are granted a village under the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS), including,
but not limited to Sections 5/11-12-4 to 5/11-12-13.
5. To hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building and
Zoning Official relating to this Chapter by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved thereby, or
by any officer, department, board or commission of the Village. The appeal shall be taken within
45 days of the action complained of by filing a notice of appeal, in duplicate, specifying the
grounds thereof, in the office of the Village Clerk who shall transmit forthwith one copy to the
Building and Zoning Official and one copy to the Commission Chairman. The Building and
Zoning Official shall forthwith transmit to the Commission Chairman all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building
and Zoning Official certifies to the Commission that, by reason of facts stated in the certification,
a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be
stayed except by a restraining order issued by the Commission or a court of record after notice
to the Building and Zoning Official and on due cause shown.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-43
The Commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal, give due
notice thereof to all interested parties and shall render a written decision on the appeal without
unreasonable delay. Any person may appear at the hearing and present testimony in person or
by a duly authorized agent or attorney. The Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building and Zoning
Official.
6. To recommend to the Village Board after holding a public hearing on application for variations
from the strict enforcement of any provisions of this Chapter, in accordance with the rules and
standards set forth therein.
7. To recommend to the Village Board, after holding a public hearing, on applications for special
uses listed in each of the several zoning districts.
8. To recommend to the Village Board, after holding a public hearing, on applications for planned
developments referred to it by the Village Board and to hear and decide other matters referred
to it or upon which it is required to pass under the provisions of the Deer Park ZoningOrdinance.
9. To recommend to the Village Board, after holding a public hearing, on petitions for amendment
of the provisions of this Chapter and the boundary lines of zoning districts established therein.
10. To transmit to the Village Board, with every recommendation, findings of fact and to refer to
any exhibits containing plans and specifications relating to its recommendation, which plans and
specifications shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Commission. The findings of
facts shall specify the reason or reasons for its recommendation. The terms of the relief recommended
shall be specifically set forth in a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of
fact of the Commission.
11. To file immediately in the office of the Village Clerk every rule, order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Commission after any meeting or hearing, which shall be a public record.
12. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the Commission to change any of the
provisions of this Chapter or district boundary lines established hereby. The concurring vote of
four members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Building and Zoning Official or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which
the Commission is authorized to act.
13. Additional duties of the Commission are also outlined in this Chapter, the Deer Park Municipal
Code and the Illinois Municipal Code.
§158.45 SPECIAL ZONING COMMISSION.
The Commission shall serve as a special zoning commission whenever a text amendment is proposed to
this Chapter. The Village Clerk shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep record of its examinations
and other official actions, prepare findings of fact and record the individual votes upon every question.
Expenses incurred by the Commission in the performance of official duties are to be itemized and shall
be paid by the Village.
§158.46 MEETINGS
All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the
Commission and/or Village Board may determine. The presence of four members shall be necessary for
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-44
a quorum. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Chairman, or Acting Chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Village Clerk shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
keep record of its examinations and other official actions, prepare findings of fact and record the individual
votes upon every question. Expenses incurred by the Commission in the performance of official
duties are to be itemized and shall be paid by the Village.
§158.47 MAINTENANCE OFRECORDS.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of its proceedings.
§158.48 ORAL REPORTS ANDRECOMMENDATIONS.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the Commission from presenting reports and recommendations
orally to the President and Board of Trustees. Such oral reports, recommendations or
plans shall have the same full force and effect as written reports, recommendations or plans.
§158.49 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
No permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued unless the Building and Zoning
Official and Zoning Official has certified after examination that it complies with all provisions of this
Chapter.
§158.50 OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied
or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate shall have been issued by
the Building and Zoning Official stating that the building and use of land complies with all the building
and health laws and ordinances having jurisdiction thereover and with the provisions of this Chapter. No
change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof now or hereafter erected or structurally altered
that is not permitted by the provisions of this Chapter. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the continuance
of the present occupancy or lawful use of any existing building, except as may be necessary for
safety of life and property. Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for not later than 10 days after the
erection or alteration of such buildings have been completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on
file in the office of the Building and Zoning Official and copies shall be furnished on request to any
persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
§158.51 VARIATIONS.
(A) Standards and Purpose:
(1) In no case shall the Commission recommend variation from this Chapter unless a property
owner can show that a strict application of this Chapter relating to the use, construction,
or alterations of buildings or structures or utilization of the land will impose upon
him unusual or impractical difficulties or particular hardship, that such variations of the
strict application of the terms of this Chapter are in harmony with its general purpose
and intent, and only when the Commission is satisfied that granting of such variation
will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable
and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to practically deprive the owner of
any use of the property and thus warrant a variation from the comprehensive plan as
established by this Chapter, and that the surrounding property will not be adversely affected.
(2) In considering all appeals and all proposed exceptions or variations from this Chapter,
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-45
the Commission shall, before recommending any exceptions or variations from the ordinance
in a specific case, first determine that it will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property to unreasonably increase congestion in the public
streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or diminish the drainage
or watershed or soil erosion control with the surrounding area or diminish the taxable
or sale value of land and improvements within the surrounding areas, or in any other
respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals, interest, or welfare
of the inhabitants of theVillage.
(B) AuthorizedVariations:
(1) To permit a variation in the yard requirements of any district where there are unusual
and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out of these provisions
due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other conditions, provided
such variation will not adversely affect any adjoining property or the general welfare.
(2) To permit a variation in the height of a building where such building is erected with a
frontage on a public waterway or on a natural hillside, but such variation shall only be
made for the purpose of adjusting the height limits so as to conform with that of neighboring
structures.
(3) To permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient
area of the lot; but in no event shall the area of the lot be less than 90 percent of the area
required by this Chapter for the particular district in which it is located.
(4) To permit a variation from Chapter 151. Fences, of this Code with regard to fence location,
material and opacity, provided such variation will not adversely affect any adjoining
property.
§158.52 APPEALS.
An appeal may be taken to the Commissions by any person, firm or corporation or by any officer of the
Village aggrieved by a decision of the Building and Zoning Official Notice of appeal must be given
within 45 days of the decision of such officer.
§158.53 AMENDMENTS.
(A) Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this Chapter
may be amended from time to time by ordinances, but no such amendment shall be made without
a public hearing before the Commission which shall report its findings and recommendations to
the Village Board, except as otherwise stated herein.
(B) Initiation of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, by the Commission,
or by any resident of or owner of property in the Village.
(C) Procedure: Prior to a public hearing by the Commission on any amendment introduced to the
Village Board, such amendment shall be forwarded by the Village Board to the Commission
with a request for recommendations relative thereto.
§158.54 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR AMENDMENTS, SPECIAL USES OR
VARIATIONS.
(A) Each application for an amendment, special use, planned development, or variation filed by or
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-46
on behalf of the owner or owners of property affected shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
filing fee and/or one or more deposits with the Village as required by Chapter 38, Reimbursement
for Professional Fees and Other Expenses, of this Code, and said Chapter 38 shall be applicable
to all such applications for an amendment, special use, planned development and/or
variation.
(B) Within 30 days following publication of an ordinance adopting an amendment or authorizing a
special use, or the issuance of an order permitting a variation, or the denial of an application or
other similar final action, the Village shall itemize all expenses involved in each application,
including estimated expenses not yet paid by the Village, and refund the balance of the escrow
deposit to the applicant. The refund check shall be accompanied by a statement of expenses
incurred. No interest shall be paid on the deposit escrow or any additional deposit escrow as
required.
(C) No filing and/or deposit fees shall be applicable to petitions in the public interest filed by any
governmental agency.
(D) Notice: Not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days prior to the Commission hearing on an
application for an amendment of this Chapter, a special use permit or tentative approval of a plat
of subdivision; or not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days prior to a hearing on an application
for a zoning variation, the applicant: (i) shall give notice by certified mail to the owners of record
of all parcels of land within 500 feet of the perimeter of the property being considered; and (ii)
shall publish notice in a newspaper published in the Village, in a format prescribed by the Village
Administrator, stating:
(1) The nature of the application;
(a) The general location of the subject property by address or other identifiable geographic
characteristics;
(b) The time and place of the public hearing;
(c) That the application is on file and may be examined in the office of the Village
Administrator during regular business hours;
(d) That the application on file may be examined in the Village Office; and
(e) Shall post notice of the public hearing relative to the subject property on the
subject property in a format prescribed by the Village Administrator.
(2) At the hearing the applicant shall deliver to the Village Clerk a publisher’s certificate of
publication of the required notice, and evidence of mailing of notice as required herein
above. In the event no publisher’s certificate or evidence of mailing is received by the
Village Clerk, at the hearing on that mailer, the hearing shall not be held.
(3) If the public hearing on any matter is continued it shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to publish notice of the reconvened hearing as in the case of the original notice,
unless the date of the continued hearing was announced publicly in the course of the
preceding hearing on the matter.
(4) The Village Clerk shall post the agenda of each meeting or public hearing by the Commission
as required by the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
Title XV
(Rev. 04/19) 15-158-47
§158.55 PENALTY.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any building, structure, or premises in violation of the terms of this
Chapter. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with or who resists the enforcement of any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than $200.00
nor more than $750.00 for each offense and shall be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution
including but not limited to the Village’s attorney fees, court costs and other costs and expenses incurred
by the Village related thereto. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 160: TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS
Section
General
§160.001 Purpose
§160.002 Definitions
§160.003 Registration
§160.004 Telecommunications License
§160.005 Telecommunications Franchise
§160.006 Cable Television Franchise
§160.007 Application to Existing Franchise Ordinances and Agreements
§160.008 Penalties
§160.009 Other Remedies
§160.010 Severability
Registration of Telecommunications Carriers and Providers
§160.020 Registration Required
§160.021 Registration Fee
§160.022 Purpose of Registration
Telecommunications License
§160.030 Telecommunications License
§160.031 License Application
§160.032 Determination by the Village
§160.033 Agreement
§160.034 Nonexclusive Grant
§160.035 Revocability
§160.036 Rights Granted
§160.037 Term of Grant
§160.038 License Route
§160.039 Location of Facilities
§160.040 Construction Permits
§160.041 Compensation to Village
§160.042 Service to Village Users
§160.043 Amendment of Grant
§160.044 Renewal Applications
§160.045 Renewal Determinations
§160.046 Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-1 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
Telecommunications Franchise
§160.050 Telecommunications Franchise
§160.051 Telecommunications Franchise Application
§160.052 Determination by the Village
§160.053 Agreement
§160.054 Nonexclusive Grant
§160.055 Revocability
§160.056 Term of Grant
§160.057 Rights Granted
§160.058 Franchise Territory
§160.059 Location of Facilities
§160.060 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.061 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.062 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.063 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.064 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.065 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.066 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.067 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
Cable Franchise
§160.070 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.071 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.072 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.073 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.074 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.075 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.076 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.077 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.078 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.079 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.080 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.081 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.082 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.083 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.084 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.085 [Repealed by Ord. 07-27, effective 1-16-08]
§160.086 Extension of Service to Newly Annexed or Developing Areas
§160.087 Individual Service Drops
§160.088 System Description and Service
§160.089 Operational Requirements and Records
§160.090 Tests and Performance Monitoring
§160.091 Services Adjustment and Complaint Procedure
§160.092 Protection of Privacy
§160.093 Prohibition from Engaging in Radio and Television Sales or Service
§160.094 Penalties
§160.095 Grantee May Promulgate Rules
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-2 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
Costs; Expenses; Fees; Other Payments
§160.100 Purpose
§160.101 Application and Review Fee
§160.102 Other Village Costs
§160.103 Reserved Compensation for Public Ways
§160.104 Compensation for Village Property
§160.105 Construction Permit Fee (or Engineering Review Fee)
§160.106 [Repealed by Ord., effective 11-18-02]
§160.107 Cable Fees
§160.108 Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax
§160.109 Acceptance by Village
§160.110 Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
§160.111 [Repealed by Ord., effective 11-18-02]
§160.112 [Repealed by Ord., effective 11-18-02]
§160.113 [Repealed by Ord., effective 11-18-02]
§160.114 Compliance with Other Laws
§160.115 Existing Franchises and Licenses
§160.116 Penalties
§160.117 Enforcement
§160.118 Severability
§160.119 Conflict
Conditions of Grant
§160.120 Location of Facilities
§160.121 Compliance with J.U.L.I.E.
§160.122 Construction Permits
§160.123 Interference with the Public Ways
§160.124 Damage to Property
§160.125 Notice of Work
§160.126 Repair and Emergency Work
§160.127 Maintenance of Facilities
§160.128 Relocation or Removal of Facilities
§160.129 Removal of Unauthorized Facilities
§160.130 Restoration of Public Ways, Other Ways and Village Property
§160.131 Facilities Maps
§160.132 Duty to Provide Information
§160.133 Leased Capacity
§160.134 Liability; Indemnification; Insurance
§160.135 Grantee Insurance
§160.136 General Indemnification
§160.137 Performance and Construction Surety
§160.138 Security Fund
§160.139 Construction and Completion Bond
§160.140 Coordination of Construction Activities
§160.141 Assignments or Transfers of Grant
§160.142 Transactions Affecting Control of Grant
§160.143 Foreclosure, Condemnation, and Receivership
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-3 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.144 Safety
§160.145 Compliance with Law
§160.146 Subsequent Action by Government Authorities
§160.147 Nonenforcement by Village
§160.148 Rights and Remedies
§160.149 Limits on Grantee’s Recourse
§160.150 Revocation or Termination of Grant
§160.151 Notice and Duty to Cure
§160.152 Hearing
§160.153 Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions
§160.154 Force Majeure
§160.155 Time Essence of Agreement
Construction Standards
§160.160 General
§160.161 Construction Codes
§160.162 Construction Permits
§160.163 Applications
§160.164 Engineer’s Certification
§160.165 Traffic Control Plan
§160.166 Issuance of Permit
§160.167 Construction Schedule
§160.168 Compliance with Permit
§160.169 Display of Permit
§160.170 Survey of Underground Facilities
§160.171 Noncomplying Work
§160.172 Completion of Construction
§160.173 As-Built Drawings
§160.174 Restoration of Improvements
§160.175 Landscape Restoration
§160.176 Construction Surety
§160.177 Exceptions
§160.178 Responsibility of Owner
GENERAL
§160.001 PURPOSE.
The purpose and intent of this Telecommunications Ordinance (the “Ordinance”) is to:
(A) establish a local policy concerning Telecommunications Providers and services;
(B) establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with
respect to the regulation of Telecommunications Providers and services;
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-4 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(C) promote competition in telecommunications;
(D) minimize unnecessary local regulation of Telecommunications Providers and services;
(E) encourage the provision of advanced and competitive Telecommunications Services on the widest
possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the Village;
(F) permit and manage reasonable access to the Public Ways of the Village for telecommunications
purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
(G) conserve the limited physical capacity of the Public Ways held in public trust by the Village;
(H) assure that the Village’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and
use of the Public Ways are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
(I) secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the residents of the Village for
permitting private use of the Public Ways;
(J) assure that all Telecommunications Carriers providing facilities or services within the Village
comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village;
(K) assure that the Village can continue to protect fairly and responsibly the public health, safety and
welfare;
(L) enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state
regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development.
§160.002 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words
and phrases when capitalized shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context indicates that
another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include
the future, words in plural include the singular, and words in singular include the plural.
Affiliate. A person that directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is
under common ownership or control with another person.
Annual Gross Revenue. . . . reserved.
Cable Act. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. ‘532, et. seq., as now and
hereafter amended.
Cable Operator. A Telecommunications Carrier providing or offering to provide “cable service”
within the Village as that term is defined in the Cable Act.
Cable Service. The same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
Corporate Authorities. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-5 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
Excess Capacity. The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole,
handhole or other utility facility within the Public Way that is or will be available for use for
additional Telecommunications Facilities.
FCC or Federal Communications Commission. The Federal administrative agency, or lawful
successor, authorized to regulate and oversee Telecommunications Carriers, services and providers
on a national level.
Franchise. The non-exclusive rights granted pursuant to the Ordinance to occupy specific Public
Ways of the Village for the purpose of providing Telecommunications Services to any person or
area in the Village.
Franchise Area. The corporate limits of the Village including all territory thereafter annexed to
the Village.
Grantee. The natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint
venture, or organization of any kind granted a franchise or license by the Village pursuant to the
Ordinance and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
Gross Revenue. All of the revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, that is derived from or in conjunction with the operation of a
telecommunications system in the Village including, without limitation, all revenue received for the
provision of service, installation, reconnection, sale of products, and the imputed value of free
service and the value of all goods and services received by a Grantee in exchange for the service;
provided, however, that no billings shall be imputed related to the services provided to the Village.
ICC or Illinois Commerce Commission. The State administrative agency, or lawful successor,
authorized to regulate and oversee Telecommunications Carriers, services and providers in the State
of Illinois.
Other Ways. The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights-of-way within the
Village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other than the Village.
Overhead Facilities. The utility poles, utility facilities and Telecommunications Facilities located
above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such
facilities.
Person. Corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms,
partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and their lessors, trustees and receivers.
Public Street. Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for motor vehicle travel
under the jurisdiction and control of the Village which has been acquired, established, or devoted to
highway purposes not inconsistent with Telecommunications Facilities.
Public Way. All public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined therein, now or
hereafter owned by the Village, but only to the extent of the Village’s right, title, interest or
authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
Telecommunications Facilities.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-6 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
State. The State of Illinois.
Surplus Space. That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary
clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, to allow its use by a Telecommunications Carrier for a pole attachment.
Telecommunications Carrier. Every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or
manages plant, equipment or property within the Village, used or to be used for the purpose of
offering Telecommunications Service.
Telecommunications Facilities. The plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to,
cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be
used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer Telecommunications Services.
Telecommunications Provider. Every person who provides Telecommunications Service over
Telecommunications Facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
Telecommunications Service. The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for
other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming
information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite
or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
Telecommunications System. See Telecommunications Facilities.
Underground Facilities. Utility and Telecommunications Facilities located under the surface of
the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities.
Usable Space. The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible
attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders
and regulations of the ICC.
Utility Easement. Any easement owned by the Village and acquired, established, dedicated or
devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with Telecommunications Facilities.
Utility Facilities. The plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes,
mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of
the ground within the Public Ways of the Village and used or to be used for the purpose of
providing utility or Telecommunications Services.
Village. The Village of Deer Park.
Village Property. All real property owned by the Village, other than Public Streets and Utility
Easements as those terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the
Village, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this
Ordinance.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-7 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.003 REGISTRATION.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all Telecommunications Carriers and Providers engaged in the
business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications originating or terminating in the
Village shall register with the Village pursuant to §§ 160.020, 160.021 and 160.022 of this Ordinance.
§160.004 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE.
Except as otherwise provided therein, any Telecommunications Carriers who desire to construct, install,
operate, maintain, or otherwise locate Telecommunications Facilities in, under, over or across any Public
Way of the Village for the sole purpose of providing Telecommunications Service to persons and areas
outside the Village shall first obtain a license granting the use of such Public Ways from the Village
pursuant to §§ 160.030-160.046 of this Ordinance.
§160.005 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any Telecommunications Carriers who desire to construct, install,
operate, maintain or otherwise locate Telecommunications Facilities in, under, over or across any Public
Way of the Village, and also to provide Telecommunications Service to persons or areas in the Village,
shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such Public Ways from the Village pursuant to §§
160.050-160.067 of this Ordinance.
§160.006 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE.
Except as otherwise provided herein, any Telecommunications Carrier who desires to construct, install,
operate, maintain or locate Telecommunications Facilities in any Public Way of the Village for the
purpose of providing cable service to persons in the Village shall first obtain a cable franchise from the
Village as provided in §§ 160.070-160.095 of this Ordinance.
§160.007 APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS.
This Ordinance shall have no effect on any existing telecommunications or cable franchise ordinance or
telecommunications or cable franchise agreement until:
(A) the expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
(B) an amendment is made to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both
parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date.
§160.008 PENALTIES.
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of
the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more
than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed
committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-8 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.009 OTHER REMEDIES.
Nothing in the franchise ordinance or franchise agreement shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this Ordinance.
§160.010 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this Ordinance, or its application to
any person, is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court or agency of competent
jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
§160.020 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
All Telecommunications Carriers and Providers that offer or provide any Telecommunications Service for
a fee directly to the public, either within the Village, or outside the corporate limits from
Telecommunications Facilities within the Village, shall register with the Village pursuant to §§ 160.020-
160.022 on forms to be provided by the Village, which shall include the following:
(A) The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
(B) The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the
accuracy of the registration statement.
(C) A description of registrant’s existing or proposed Telecommunications Facilities within the Village.
(D) A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is
currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the Village.
(E) Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to Public Way licensing or
franchising under this Ordinance.
(F) Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the
Telecommunications Services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation
or privilege subject to any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other
occupation tax imposed by the Village.
(G) Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of
authority required by the Illinois Commerce Commission to provide Telecommunications Services
or facilities within the Village.
(H) Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction
permit, operating license or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission
to provide Telecommunications Services or Facilities within the Village.
(I) Such other information as the Village may reasonably require.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-9 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.021 REGISTRATION FEE.
Each application for registration as a Telecommunications Carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a
fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00).
§160.022 PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION.
The purpose of registration hereunder is to:
(A) provide the Village with accurate and current information concerning the Telecommunications
Carriers and Providers who offer or provide Telecommunications Services within the Village, or
that own or operate Telecommunication Facilities within the Village;
(B) assist the Village in enforcement of this Ordinance;
(C) assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license
fees or charges that may be due the Village; and
(D) assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws.
§160.030 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE.
A telecommunications license shall be required of any Telecommunications Carrier who desires to
occupy specific Public Ways of the Village for the sole purpose of providing Telecommunications
Services to persons or areas outside the Village.
Except as expressly provided in a license agreement, the granting of a license shall not take the place of
any license, permit, or approval that is, or may in the future be, required to be secured by the Grantee
from any governmental authority or person in order to:
(A) erect, construct, reconstruct, install, use, maintain, test, inspect, operate, repair, relocate, or remove
a Telecommunications System;
(B) access, possess, or otherwise use any real property in connection with a Telecommunications
System; or
(C) engage in, maintain, operate, or carry on a business within the Village.
§160.031 LICENSE APPLICATION.
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this Chapter shall file an application
with the Village which shall include the following information:
(A) The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
(B) A description of the Telecommunications Services that are or will be offered or provided by
licensee over its Telecommunications Facilities.
(C) A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such
Telecommunications Services.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-10 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(D) Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located
within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
(1) the location and route requested for applicant’s proposed Telecommunications Facilities;
(2) the location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water,
sewer drainage and other facilities in the Public Way along the proposed route;
(3) the location(s), if any, for interconnection with the Telecommunications Facilities of other
Telecommunications Carriers;
(4) the specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant
proposes to remove or relocate temporarily or permanently.
(E) If applicant is proposing to install Overhead Facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for
locating its Telecommunications Facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
(F) If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the Public
Ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
(1) the Excess Capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of
applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities;
(2) the Excess Capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of
applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities.
(G) If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed
within the Public Ways:
(1) the location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
(2) the Excess Capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s
Telecommunications Facilities.
(H) A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
(I) A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
(J) Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove
the facilities.
(K) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and
expertise regarding the Telecommunications Facilities and Services described in the application.
(L) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and
permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the Telecommunications
Services.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-11 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(M) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §§ 160.100 through 160.113 of this Chapter.
(N) Such other and further information as may be required by the Village.
§160.032 DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE.
Within sixty (60) days after receiving a properly completed application pursuant to § 160.031 hereof, the
Village shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the Village is unable to issue a written determination within the said
sixty (60) days, it shall automatically have an additional sixty (60) days after providing written notice
with the reasons for the extension within which to respond. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The capacity of the Public Ways to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities.
(D) The capacity of the Public Ways to accommodate additional utility and Telecommunications
Facilities if the license is granted.
(E) The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or
landscaping if the license is granted.
(F) The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the Public Ways.
(G) The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
(H) The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted.
(I) The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
(J) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
(K) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the Public Ways will serve the
community interest.
§160.033 AGREEMENT.
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the Village have executed a written
agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use
Public Ways of the Village will be granted.
§160.034 NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.
No license granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to
occupy or use the Public Ways of the Village for delivery of Telecommunications Services or any other
purposes.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-12 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.035 REVOCABILITY.
Every license shall, whether or not specifically stated in the license agreement, be revocable in
accordance with the terms of this Article and shall be deemed to create only a license to use the Public
Ways to the extent and in the manner provided herein, which license shall terminate automatically upon
the expiration, revocation, or other termination of the license agreement granting it.
§160.036 RIGHTS GRANTED.
No license granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or interest in the Public Ways, but shall
be deemed a license only to use and occupy the Public Ways for the limited purposes and term stated in
the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
§160.037 TERM OF GRANT.
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall
be in effect for a term of five (5) years.
§160.038 LICENSE ROUTE.
A telecommunications license granted under this Article shall be limited to a grant of specific Public
Ways and defined portions thereof.
§160.039 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located
in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
(A) Telecommunications Facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit
whenever Excess Capacity exists within such Utility Facility.
(B) A licensee with permission to install Overhead Facilities shall install its Telecommunications
Facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if Surplus Space is
available.
(C) Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or Telecommunications Facilities are
located underground within a Public Way of the Village, a licensee with permission to occupy the
same Public Way must also locate its Telecommunications Facilities underground.
(D) Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or Telecommunications Facilities are
located or relocated underground within a Public Way of the Village, a Grantee that currently
occupies the same Public Way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or
undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently
to minimize the disruption of the Public Ways.
(E) Whenever new Telecommunications Facilities exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility
easement to accommodate reasonably future Telecommunications Carriers or Facilities, the Grantee
shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities (“New Facilities”) for
nondiscriminatory access to future Telecommunications Carriers. In the event that a Grantee
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-13 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
constructs New Facilities, Grantee may recapture the cost of said construction by leasing, assigning
or otherwise transferring any unused portion of the New Facilities to other Telecommunication
Providers for a reasonable fee or through cost recapture agreements approved by the Village. In no
event shall the Village be responsible for any of the Grantee’s costs associated with the construction
of the New Facilities.
§160.040 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for Telecommunications Facilities as required in
§ 160.122 of this Ordinance, provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and
a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a license
agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
§160.041 COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE.
Each license granted under this Chapter is subject to the Village’s right, which is expressly reserved, to
fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee;
provided, nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the Village and a licensee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid.
§160.042 SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS.
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide Telecommunications Services to persons or areas within
the Village upon submitting an application for approval pursuant to §§ 160.050-160.067 hereof.
§160.043 AMENDMENT OF GRANT.
(A) A new license application and grant shall be required of any Telecommunications Carrier that
desires to extend or locate its Telecommunications Facilities in Public Ways of the Village which
are not included in a license previously granted under this Ordinance.
(B) If Grantee is ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its Telecommunications Facilities in Public
Ways not included in a previously granted license, the Village shall grant a license amendment
without further application.
§160.044 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.
A Grantee that desires to renew its license under this Article shall, not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days nor less than ninety (90) days before expiration of the current license, file an application with
the Village for renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
(A) The information required pursuant to § 160.031 of this Article.
(B) Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the Village and the Grantee.
§160.045 RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS.
Within ninety (90) days after receiving a properly completed application pursuant to § 160.044 hereof, the
Village shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part,
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-14 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall
include the reasons for non-renewal.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The continuing capacity of the Public Ways to accommodate the applicant’s existing facilities.
(D) The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the license agreement.
(E) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
(F) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the Public Ways will serve
the community interest.
§160.046 OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL.
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee’s performance of the
license agreement, or of the requirements of this Ordinance, have been cured, or a plan detailing the
corrective action to be taken by the Grantee has been approved by the Village.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
§ 160.050 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any Telecommunications Carrier who desires to
occupy Public Ways of the Village and to provide Telecommunications Services to any person or area in
the Village.
Except as expressly provided in a franchise agreement, the granting of a franchise shall not take the place
of any license, permit, or approval that is, or may in the future be, required to be secured by the Grantee
from any governmental authority or person in order to:
(A) erect, construct, reconstruct, install, use, maintain, test, inspect, operate, repair, relocate, or remove
a Telecommunications System;
(B) access, possess, or otherwise use any real property in connection with a Telecommunications
System; or
(C) engage in, maintain, operate, or carry on a business within the Village.
§160.051 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE APPLICATION.
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this § 160.051 shall file an
application with the Village which shall include the following information:
(A) The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-15 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) A description of the Telecommunications Services that are or will be offered or provided by the
franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
(C) A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide
such Telecommunications Services.
(D) Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located
within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
(1) the location and route requested for applicant’s proposed Telecommunications Facilities.
(2) the location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water,
sewer drainage and other facilities in the Public Way along the proposed route.
(3) the location(s), if any, for interconnection with the Telecommunications Facilities of other
Telecommunications Carriers.
(4) the specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant
proposes to remove or relocate temporarily or permanently.
(E) If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that Surplus Space is available for
locating its Telecommunications Facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
(F) If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the Public
Ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
(1) the Excess Capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of
applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities;
(2) the Excess Capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of
applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities.
(G) If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed
within the Public Ways:
(1) the location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
(2) the Excess Capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s
Telecommunications Facilities.
(H) A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
(I) A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
(J) Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove
the facilities.
(K) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and
expertise regarding the Telecommunications Facilities and Services described in the application.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-16 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(L) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and
permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the Telecommunications
Services.
(M) Whether the applicant intends to provide Cable Service, video dialtone service or other video
programming service, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to
cable franchising.
(N) An accurate map showing the location of any existing Telecommunications Facilities in the Village
that applicant intends to use or lease.
(O) A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the
Village and other public, educational and governmental institutions.
(P) A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies.
(Q) The area or areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the
entire franchise area.
(R) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §§ 160.100-160.113 of this Ordinance.
(S) Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village.
§160.052 DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE.
Within sixty (60) days after receiving a properly completed application pursuant to § 160.051 hereof, the
Village shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the Village is unable to issue a written determination within the said
sixty (60) days, it shall automatically have an additional sixty (60) days after providing written notice
with the reasons for the extension within which to respond. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The capacity of the Public Ways to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities.
(D) The capacity of the Public Ways to accommodate additional utility and Telecommunications
Facilities if the franchise is granted.
(E) The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or
landscaping if the franchise is granted.
(F) The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the Public Ways.
(G) The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
(H) The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-17 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(I) The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
(J) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
(K) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the Public Ways will serve the
community interest.
§160.053 AGREEMENT.
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the Village have executed a written
agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use
Public Ways of the Village will be granted.
§160.054 NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.
No franchise granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to
occupy or use the Public Ways of the Village for delivery of Telecommunications Services or any other
purposes.
§160.055 REVOCABILITY.
Every franchise shall, whether or not specifically stated in the franchise agreement, be revocable in
accordance with the terms of this Article and shall be deemed to create only a license to use the Public
Ways to the extent and in the manner provided herein, which license shall terminate automatically upon
the expiration, revocation, or other termination of the franchise agreement granting it.
§160.056 TERM OF GRANT.
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder
shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years.
§160.057 RIGHTS GRANTED.
No franchise granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or interest in the Public Ways, but
shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy the Public Ways for the limited purposes and term
stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title.
§160.058 FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
A telecommunications franchise granted under this Article shall be limited to the specific geographic area
of the Village to be served by the franchise Grantee, and the specific Public Ways necessary to serve such
areas.
§160.059 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and
located in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
(A) Telecommunications Facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit
whenever Excess Capacity exists within such Utility Facility.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-18 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its Telecommunications
Facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if Surplus Space is
available.
(C) Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or Telecommunications Facilities are
located underground within a Public Way of the Village, a franchisee with permission to occupy the
same Public Way must also locate its Telecommunications Facilities underground.
(D) Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or Telecommunications Facilities are
located or relocated underground within a Public Way of the Village, a Grantee that currently
occupies the same Public Way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or
undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently
to minimize the disruption of the Public Ways.
(E) Whenever new Telecommunications Facilities exhaust the capacity of a Public Street or Utility
Easement to accommodate reasonably future Telecommunications Carriers or Facilities, the
Grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities (“New Facilities”)
for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers. In the event that a Grantee constructs New
Facilities, Grantee may recapture the cost of said construction by leasing, assigning or otherwise
transferring any unused portion of the New Facilities to other Telecommunication Providers for a
reasonable fee or through cost recapture agreements approved by the Village. In no event shall the
Village be responsible for any of the Grantee’s costs associated with the construction of the New
Facilities.
§160.060 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for Telecommunications Facilities as required
in § 160.122 of this Ordinance provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village
and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
§160.061 COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE.
Each franchise granted under this Article is subject to the Village’s right, which is expressly reserved, to
fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the
franchisee; provided, nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee from agreeing to
the compensation to be paid.
§160.062 NONDISCRIMINATION.
A franchisee shall make its Telecommunications Services available to any customer within its franchise
area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges
for Grantee’s services; provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit a franchisee from
making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers.
§160.063 SERVICE TO THE VILLAGE.
A franchisee shall make its Telecommunications Services available to the Village at its most favorable
rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-19 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.064 AMENDMENT OF GRANT.
(A) A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any Telecommunications Carrier that
desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its Telecommunications Facilities in Public
Ways of the Village which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this Ordinance.
(B) If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its Telecommunications Facilities in Public Ways not
included in a previously granted franchise, the Village shall grant a franchise amendment without
further application.
§160.065 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.
A Grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this Article shall, not more than two hundred forty
(240) days nor less than one hundred fifty (150) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an
application with the Village for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:
(A) The information required pursuant to § 160.051 of this Article.
(B) Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the Village and the Grantee.
§160.066 RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS.
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a properly completed application pursuant to §
160.065 hereof, the Village shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal
application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for non-renewal.
(A) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(B) The legal ability of the applicant.
(C) The continuing capacity of the Public Ways to accommodate the applicant’s existing facilities.
(D) The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and the franchise agreement.
(E) Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
(F) Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the Public Ways will serve
the community interest.
§160.067 OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL.
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the Grantee’s performance of
the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this Ordinance, have been cured, or a plan detailing the
corrective action to be taken by the Grantee has been approved by the Village.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-20 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
CABLE FRANCHISE
§160.070 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. All terms not
otherwise defined herein are defined in §§ 160.002-160.006 of this Ordinance. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the
singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
Agency. The person, department or agency designated by the Village to act in specified matters
related to cable television, or in the absence of such designation, the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village.
Auxiliary Services. Any communication service in addition to “regular subscriber services”
including, but not limited to, services for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made, pay
TV, burglar alarm services, data or other electronic transmission services, facsimile reproduction
services, meter reading services and home shopping services, interactive two-way services and any
other service utilizing any facility or equipment of a cable television system operating pursuant to a
franchise granted under this ordinance.
Board. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
Cable Television System (or “CATV system”). Any non-broadcast facility consisting of a set of
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that
distributes or is designed to distribute to subscribers audio, video and other forms of electronic or
electrical signals, but such term shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve only
subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwelling under common ownership, control or
management which does not use municipal rights-of-way.
Channel. A band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electro-magnetic spectrum, capable of
carrying either one audio-visual television signal and a few non-video signals, or a large number of
non-video signals.
Converter. An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to
interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector
also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations.
Depreciated Value. The value as shown on the Grantee’s books and records of all the cable
television system’s tangible assets after depreciation which shall be calculated to the end of the
Grantee’s last fiscal year and which shall be based on a straight line depreciation method over the
term of the franchise with no salvage remaining at the end of the term. Said value shall not include
“good will” or any value that Grantee’s books and records attribute to the franchise.
Fair Market Value. The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going
business based on the system valuation and sale multiples prevailing in the industry.
Franchise Area. The corporate limits of the Village including all territory thereafter annexed to
the Village.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-21 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
Gross Revenues. All revenue derived directly or indirectly from the operation or use of all or part
of a Cable Television System franchised pursuant to the Ordinance by the Grantee, its affiliates,
subsidiaries, parents, and any person in which the Grantee has a financial interest including, but not
limited to, revenue from regular subscriber service fees, auxiliary service fees, installation and
reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter rentals, studio rental, production equipment and
personnel fees, and advertising revenues; provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes on
services furnished by the Grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the State,
local or other governmental unit and collected by the Grantee on behalf of said governmental unit.
Net Profit. The amount remaining after deducting from gross revenues all of the actual, direct and
indirect, expenses associated with operating the cable television system including the franchise fee,
interest, depreciation and Federal or State income taxes, to be determined in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles consistently applied.
Regular Subscriber Service. The distribution to subscribers of signals over the cable television
system on all channels except those for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made, twoway
services, and those intended for reception by equipment other than a television broadcast
receiver.
Schools. All public, and private, elementary and secondary schools, junior colleges, colleges and
universities which have been granted a certificate of recognition by the Illinois State Board of
Education, pursuant to Section 2-3.25 of the Illinois School Code.
Subscriber. Any person who receives the regular subscriber service and/or any one or more of
such other services as may be provided by the Grantee’s cable television system, and does not
further distribute such service(s).
User. A person or organization utilizing a system channel or system equipment and facilities for
purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a
subscriber capacity.
§160.071 CABLE FRANCHISE.
A cable franchise shall be required of any Telecommunications Carrier who desires to occupy specific
Public Ways of the Village for the purpose of providing Cable Service to persons in the Village.
§160.072 CABLE FRANCHISE APPLICATION.
Any person that desires a cable franchise pursuant to this Article shall file an application with the Village
which shall include the following information:
(A) The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
(B) A description of the Telecommunications Services that are or will be offered or provided by the
franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
(C) A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide
such Telecommunications Services.
(D) Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located
within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-22 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(1) the location and route requested for applicant’s proposed Telecommunications Facilities.
(2) the location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water,
sewer drainage and other facilities in the Public Way along the proposed route.
(3) the location(s), if any, for interconnection with the Telecommunications Facilities of other
Telecommunications Carriers.
(4) the specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant
proposes to remove or relocate temporarily or permanently.
(E) If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that Surplus Space is available for
locating its Telecommunications Facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
(F) If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the Public
Ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
(1) the Excess Capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of
applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities;
(2) the Excess Capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of
applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities.
(G) If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed
within the Public Ways:
(1) the location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
(2) the Excess Capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s
Telecommunications Facilities.
(H) A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
(I) A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
(J) Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove
the facilities.
(K) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and
expertise regarding the Telecommunications Facilities and Services described in the application.
(L) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and
permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the Telecommunications
Services.
(M) Whether the applicant intends to provide Cable Service, video dialtone service or other video
programming service, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to
cable franchising.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-23 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(N) An accurate map showing the location of any existing Telecommunications Facilities in the Village
that applicant intends to use or lease.
(O) A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the
Village and other public, educational and governmental institutions.
(P) A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies.
(Q) The area or areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the
entire franchise area.
(R) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §§ 160.100-160.113 of this Ordinance.
(S) Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village.
§160.073 TERM OF GRANT AND NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.
The term of the original franchise shall be ten (10) years from the date the franchise is accepted by the
Grantee. The term of a renewed franchise shall be no more than ten (10) years, and may be less, in the
discretion of the Village. No franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall give any exclusive right
to a Grantee and every such franchise shall be deemed to reserve the right to grant other franchises to use
and occupy the Public Ways of the Village for cable television or any other purpose on such terms as the
Village may then deem appropriate.
§160.074 NOTICE TO THE GRANTEE.
Except as provided in §160.073 above, the Village shall not take any final action involving the
modification, renewal, revocation or termination of the Grantee’s franchise unless the Village has
(1) advised the Grantee in writing, at least thirty (30) days prior to a meeting where such action is
contemplated, as to its time, place and purpose, and (2) published a notice, at least once, ten (10) days
before the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village; provided such notice need not
be given of any adjourned or continued meeting where notice was given of the original meeting. The
Grantee and any interested person shall be entitled to be heard at such meeting.
§160.075 FRANCHISE REVIEW AND MODIFICATION.
It shall be the policy of the Village to amend a Franchise, upon application of the Grantee, when
necessary to enable the Grantee to take advantage of significant operational or technological
advancements which will afford it an opportunity to serve more effectively, efficiently, or economically
its subscribers in the Village and the Village shall not unreasonably withhold such amendment. Further,
within the term of the franchise, the Board may, after notice and hearing as required in § 160.074 of
above, adopt a resolution providing for reasonable and appropriate modifications in franchisee’s franchise
of a nature that would not result in effectively terminating same.
§160.076 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSIONS.
The Village and the Grantee shall hold an annual performance evaluation in addition to any other
evaluations as may be required by federal and state law. All such evaluation meetings shall be open to the
public. Such meetings may be called by the Village or the Grantee by notifying the other that such a
meeting shall be held no less than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-24 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(A) Special evaluation meetings may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request
of the Agency, the Village or the Grantee.
(B) All evaluation meetings shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general
circulation in accordance with the notice requirements of § 160.074 above. Grantee shall notify
subscribers of all evaluation meetings including any adjourned meetings by announcement on the
highest use origination channel on the system no less than three (3) times between the hours of 7
o’clock p.m. and 9 o’clock p.m. for five (5) consecutive days immediately preceding each meeting
and, in addition, on the Community Service channel at least once per hour for 48 hours before the
meeting.
(C) Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but are
not limited to, franchise fees, penalties, applications of new technologies, system performance,
services provided, programming offered, customer complaints, privacy, amendments to this
ordinance, modification to the franchise, judicial and FCC rulings, line extension policies and
Grantee or Village rules.
(D) During a review and evaluation by the Village, the Grantee shall fully cooperate with the Village
and shall provide such information and documents as the Village may need to perform reasonably
its review.
(E) If at any time during its review the Village determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate
CATV system performance, it may require the Grantee to perform tests and analyses directed
toward the suspected inadequacies. The Grantee shall fully cooperate with the Village in
performing such testing and shall prepare results and a report if requested within thirty (30) days
after notice. Such report shall include the following information:
(F) The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special tests;
(G) What system component was tested;
(H) The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
(I) The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved;
(J) Any other information pertinent to said tests and analyses which may be required.
(K) The Village may require the test to be supervised at Grantee’s expense by a professional engineer
not on the permanent staff of the Grantee to be approved by the Village. The engineer should sign
all records of special tests and forward to the Village such records with a report interpreting the
results of the test and recommending actions to be taken.
(L) The Village’s right under § 160.076 shall be limited to requiring tests, analyses and reports
covering specific subjects and characteristics based on said complaints or other evidence when and
under such circumstances as the Village has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or
other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable
service.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-25 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.077 CABLE FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
As set forth in the Cable Act, the Grantee shall be solely responsible for requesting the Village, in writing,
to hold a special meeting of the Board or designated committee thereof, the purpose of which will be to
review the Grantee’s performance during the term of its franchise, to consider the adequacy of the
franchise from the standpoint of the Village, the Grantee, and the Federal Communications Commission
Rules for Cable Television, and to determine the advisability of renewing the Grantee’s franchise. Unless
the Board shall consent to some lesser notice, said request shall be made not less than six (6) months prior
to the franchise expiration date. Upon receipt of said request, the Village shall adopt a resolution setting
forth the time and place of the special meeting. If no request for renewal is made, the franchise shall
expire according to its terms.
(A) The Village shall hear any interested persons during said special meeting and shall determine
whether or not the Grantee did reasonably comply with the terms and conditions imposed by the
Ordinance and the Franchise. Notice of such meeting shall be given in accordance with § 160.074
above.
(B) If the Village determines that the Grantee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and
conditions imposed by the Ordinance and the Franchise, the Village may renew the Grantee’s
Franchise by resolution, with any reasonable modifications it deems desirable, for a period of time
not longer than ten (10) years; provided renewal provisions and the renewal process shall be subject
to the provisions of then applicable federal rules and statutes.
(C) If the Village does not renew the Franchise, the Village shall have the option, to the extent then
permitted by existing law, to acquire the tangible assets (plant, equipment and facilities) of the
Grantee’s cable television system, or the option to require the sale of such assets to a succeeding
Grantee on the terms hereinafter specified.
(D) The Village shall have the right to recoup from the Grantee all direct expenses incurred pursuant to
the consideration of renewal of the franchise to the then existing Grantee whether or not the
Franchise was renewed. The Village may require the Grantee to remove or abandon all or a portion
of the tangible assets of the cable television system from the Village, it being recognized that it may
be in the best interests of the Village and the Grantee to abandon certain facilities, such as
underground cable, rather than removing the same. If the Village acquires the assets for municipal
ownership, the amount paid for such assets shall be their fair market value. If the Village requires
sale of the assets to a succeeding Grantee, the amount paid for such assets shall be in the Fair
Market Value of the assets, but not including in such valuation the value as a going business and
not including sales multiples, but not less than the replacement cost of the assets in place as
adjusted for their remaining useful life. Except as provided in § 160.080 below, the Village’s
option to acquire the assets of the Grantee or to require the sale of such assets to a succeeding
Grantee or to require the removal of such assets from the municipality must be exercised within one
(1) year from the date of the franchise expiration, unless such period is extended with the consent of
the Grantee.
§160.078 FRANCHISE REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
Whenever a Grantee shall refuse, neglect or willfully fail to construct, operate or maintain its cable
television system or to provide service to its subscribers in substantial accordance with the terms of the
Ordinance and the franchise or to comply with the conditions of occupancy of any Public Way or to make
required extension of service, or shall in any other way substantially violate the terms and conditions of
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-26 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
this ordinance, the franchise, or any applicable rule or regulation, or practices any fraud or deceit upon the
Village or its subscribers, or fails to pay franchise fees when due, or if a Grantee becomes insolvent, or is
unable to or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt, or seeks relief under the bankruptcy laws,
then the Franchise may be revoked.
(A) In the event the Village or the Agency believes that grounds for revocation exist or have existed,
the Village or Agency may notify a Grantee, in writing, setting forth the nature and facts of such
noncompliance. If, within fifteen (15) days following delivery of such written notification, the
Grantee has not furnished reasonably satisfactory evidence that corrective action has been taken or
is being actively and expeditiously pursued, or that the alleged violations did not occur, or that the
alleged violations were beyond the Grantee’s control, the Agency shall thereupon refer the matter to
the Village.
(B) Upon referral from the Agency or by its own motion, the Village may, following notice and hearing
pursuant to § 160.074 of this Article, revoke a franchise pursuant to § 160.078 above.
(C) A Grantee shall not be subject to revocation pursuant to this Section for any act or omission
wherein such act or omission was beyond the Grantee’s control, such as, but not limited to, strikes,
war, acts of God, or governmental regulations. An act or omission shall not be deemed to be
beyond a Grantee’s control if committed, omitted, or caused by a corporation or other business
entity which holds a controlling interest in the Grantee, whether held directly or indirectly. Further,
the failure of a Grantee to obtain financing, or to pay any money due from it to any person,
including the Village, for whatever reason, shall not be an act or omission which is beyond the
Grantee’s control.
(D) In the event that a Franchise has been revoked by the Village, the Village shall have an option, to
the extent then permitted by existing law, to either purchase the tangible assets of the Grantee’s
cable television system previously governed by the franchise at their Fair Market Value as defined
herein, assign such rights to purchase to any person including a successor Grantee, whether or not
for consideration paid to the Village and without consideration to the Grantee, or to require the
Grantee to remove or abandon all or a portion of the tangible assets (plant, equipment and facilities)
of the cable television system from the municipality, it being recognized that it may be in the best
interests of the Village and the Grantee to abandon certain facilities, such as underground cable,
rather than removing the same. Unless some later date is agreed to by the Grantee and except as
provided in § 160.080, such an option must be exercised within one (1) year from the date of the
revocation of the Franchise, or the entry of the final judgment by a court reviewing the question of
the Village’s revocation, or the entry of a final order upon appeal of same, whichever is later.
(E) The termination of a Grantee’s rights under a Franchise shall in no way affect any other rights the
Village may have under the Franchise or under any provision of law or ordinance.
§160.079 ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS ACTION BY GRANTEE.
If a Grantee arbitrarily and capriciously discontinues service to a substantial number of its subscribers, the
Grantee’s franchise may be revoked by a resolution of the Village following notice to the Grantee and an
opportunity to be heard. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 160.074 above, notice to the Grantee under
this Section may be less than thirty (30) days. Provided further, the Village may seek appropriate judicial
or other relief, including specific performance, and/or may proceed to exercise its rights and powers as
provided for herein.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-27 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.080 PROVISION FOR ARBITRATION.
In the event the Village pursues the option to purchase Grantee’s cable television system, or any of its
assets, and the Fair Market Value, replacement cost or depreciated value cannot be agreed upon, said
value shall be determined by a panel of arbitrators, which panel may be requested by either the Board or
the Grantee no sooner than ninety (90) days after notice that the Village desires to purchase the system
(unless such ninety (90) day provision is waived by both parties). The panel shall be composed of one
arbitrator chosen by the Village, one arbitrator chosen by the Grantee, and a third arbitrator chosen by the
first two arbitrators. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne
by the parties in such manner as the arbitrators provide in their award, but in no event will the Village be
obligated for more than one-half the expenses. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be
binding on the parties. The arbitrators shall follow the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration
Association except where in conflict with an express provision of this ordinance. The arbitration hearing
shall take place in Cook or Lake County, as determined by the Village, unless otherwise agreed to by the
parties in writing. Notwithstanding any other timetable imposed by this ordinance, the Village shall,
within ninety (90) days following notice to it of the decision of the arbitrators, either withdraw any notice
it may have given of its intent or election to acquire the Grantee’s system or shall affirmatively accept the
decision of the arbitrators and affirm its election to purchase the system or assets. If the Village fails to
accept the arbitrator’s decision and affirm its election to purchase within the aforesaid ninety (90) day
period, the rights of the Village to purchase shall expire.
§160.081 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP TO VILLAGE.
In those circumstances wherein the Village shall have elected to purchase ownership of a Grantee’s cable
television system or any of its assets, the Village shall, unless the Grantee has agreed to some other terms,
pay the price of such assets to the Grantee within twelve (12) months following the date upon which the
election to purchase becomes irrevocable and title to the system or assets shall pass to the Village upon
such payment.
§160.082 GRANTEE’S OBLIGATION AS TRUSTEE.
At all times from the expiration or revocation of a franchise and until either (1) a Grantee transfers to the
Village or other succeeding operator of the system all of its rights, title and interest to all assets, real and
personal, related to its cable television system, or (2) the Village’s right to either acquire or assign its
rights to acquire any of the Grantee’s assets expires without the Village having exercised such a right,
whichever occurs first, the Grantee shall have a duty to such successor as a trustee holding such assets for
the benefit of such successor and the Grantee shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any of the system
assets nor shall the Grantee make any physical, material or administrative operational changes that would
tend to (1) degrade the quality of service to the subscribers, (2) decrease gross revenues, or (3) materially
increase expenses, without the expressed permission, in writing, of the Village or its assigns. The
Grantee, as such trustee, shall at all times operate the system in accordance with terms of the Ordinance
and the terms of the Franchise as if the Franchise had not expired or had not been revoked. In the event
the Grantee fails or refuses to operate the system as trustee, the Village shall have the option to name a
successor trustee or operate the system itself as a trustee in accordance with the terms of the Ordinance
and the terms of the Franchise.
(A) In the event of expiration or revocation of a franchise, this Section shall not be construed to give a
Grantee any vested or other franchise right, but the right of the Grantee in such circumstances shall
exist only on a day-to-day basis until the transfer is effected.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-28 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) As full compensation for its ownership interests and during this interim period, the Grantee shall be
entitled to receive a reasonable profit during the period between the expiration or revocation of the
franchise, as the case may be, and the transfer of the Grantee’s assets to the Village or a successor.
(C) Further, this Section shall in no way limit the power of the Village, upon expiration or revocation of
a franchise, to require the Grantee to cease all operations whatsoever and/or remove its facilities, or
otherwise exercise any rights the Village would otherwise have.
§160.083 FRANCHISE FEE.
The Grantee, in consideration of the privilege granted under the franchise for the operation of a cable
television system, and the expense of regulation pursuant to the franchise incurred by the Village, shall
pay to the Village five percent (5%) of its annual gross revenues during the period of its operation under
the franchise unless a lesser amount is specified in the franchise granted; or the maximum amount as may
be set from time to time by controlling Federal or State law, if such maximum is less than five percent
(5%).
(A) The Grantee shall file with the Village, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of each of the
Grantee’s fiscal quarters, a financial statement clearly showing the Gross Revenues received by
Grantee during the preceding quarter, and shall simultaneously tender payment of the quarterly
portion of the franchise fee. The Grantee shall also file, within one hundred twenty (120) days
following the conclusion of the Grantee’s fiscal year, a financial report prepared and audited
annually by a Certified Public Accountant, clearly showing the yearly total gross revenues.
(B) The Village shall have the right, consistent with the provision of § 160.132, to inspect the Grantee’s
income records, the right of audit and the right to recompute any amounts determined to be payable
under the Ordinance. Any additional amount due the Village as a result of the audit shall be paid
within thirty (30) days following written notice to the Grantee by the Village which notice shall
include a copy of the audit report. The cost of said audit shall be borne by the Grantee if it is
properly determined that the Grantee’s annual payment due to the Village for the preceding year is
increased thereby by more than five percent (5%).
(C) In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the
applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be charged from such due date at the annual rate
of twelve percent (12%) or two percent (2%) over the “Prime Rate” as published in the Wall Street
Journal (currently in the “Money Rates” column as of the last day of each month) whichever is
higher.
(D) In the event the Franchise is terminated for any reason, the Grantee shall file with the Village,
within thirty (30) days of the termination of service by the Grantee pursuant to the Franchise or this
Ordinance, a financial statement clearly showing the Gross Revenues received by Grantee since the
end of the previous fiscal quarter. The Grantee shall pay the franchise fee due at the time such
statement is filed or within thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier.
§160.084 SUBSCRIBER AND USER FEES.
By accepting a Franchise granted pursuant to the terms and conditions imposed by the Ordinance, and
pursuant to the terms of such Franchise, the Grantee agrees that the Village shall have the authority and
right to establish, in a reasonable manner, the Grantee’s fees for regular subscriber service, and all other
subscriber and user services, if, and to the extent permitted by law or FCC rules and regulations.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-29 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(A) The Grantee shall not, with regard to fees, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any
person or group of persons.
(B) The Grantee shall be required to notify in writing each new subscriber of all applicable fees and
charges for providing cable television service.
(C) Grantee may, at its own discretion, in a non-discriminatory manner, waive, reduce or suspend
connection fees or monthly service fees for promotional purposes.
(D) Except as may otherwise be provided in a franchise ordinance, a Subscriber shall have the right to
have its service disconnected without charge, which shall include the removal of any equipment
owned by the Grantee from the Subscriber’s residence. Such disconnection shall be made as soon
as practicable and in no case later than thirty (30) days following written notice to the Grantee of
same. No Grantee shall enter into any agreement with a Subscriber which imposes any charge
following disconnection of service, except for reconnection and subsequent monthly or periodic
charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new customers. This Section shall
not prevent a Grantee from refusing service to any person because the Grantee’s prior accounts with
that person remain due and owing or from charging a reconnection fee for an account which was
terminated for non-payment.
(E) Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a Grantee may offer service which requires
advance payment of periodic service charges for no more than one (1) year in advance subject to
the conditions contained in this section. A Subscriber shall have the right, at any time, to have its
service disconnected without charge and with a refund of unused service charges paid to the
customer within thirty (30) days from the date of service. Rate increases shall not be effective with
respect to any Subscriber until after the expiration of any period for which advance payment has
been accepted by the Grantee.
§160.085 VILLAGE SERVICE AREA.
Grantee shall provide service to every potential subscriber within the Village within twelve (12) months
from the date of the acceptance by Grantee of a franchise.
§160.086 EXTENSION OF SERVICE TO NEWLY ANNEXED OR DEVELOPING AREAS.
Whenever the density of dwelling units in newly annexed areas of the Village, or in newly established
subdivisions in the Village equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) dwelling units per-cable route mile, service
will be provided, at the same rates as other areas of the Village, within six (6) months (weather and make
ready by public utilities permitting; provided that Grantee will not be required to service a new
subdivision until fifty per cent (50%) of the homes in such subdivision, or in any platted unit of the
subdivision, have been occupied, whenever the density of dwelling units of such areas is less than twentyfive
(25) dwelling units per-cable route mile, connection and service rates may be charged which reflect
the additional costs of such service).
§160.087 INDIVIDUAL SERVICE DROPS.
Grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to any potential Subscriber within the
Village at the standard connection charge, if the connection to such subscriber would require no more
than a standard two hundred fifty (250) foot aerial or buried drop line from the closer of any Public Way,
or any trunk or feeder cable.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-30 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or buried drop line in excess of such two
hundred fifty (250) feet, Grantee shall extend and make available cable television service to such
Subscribers at a connection charge not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the Grantee for
the distance exceeding two hundred fifty (250) feet, but not to exceed fifty cents ($.50) per foot.
However, there shall be no charge for aerial or buried drop lines to any institutional user, regardless of the
distance of such drop line.
§160.088 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND SERVICE.
The cable television system to be installed by Grantee shall comply in all respects with the requirements
set forth in the FCC’s Rules for Cable Television including applicable amendments thereto, provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the Grantee from proposing to
comply with more rigid technical performance requirements, in which case the Grantee’s application shall
be incorporated by reference in the Franchise, and will be binding on the Grantee. If the FCC should
delete said requirements, the Village hereby reserves the right to amend the Ordinance and any franchise
ordinance or agreement to incorporate similar standards and every franchise granted pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be subject to such reserved power whether or not expressly so conditioned.
(A) The Grantee shall not permit the transmission of any programming in violation of any federal, state
or local law. Except as specifically modified by the Cable Franchise Ordinance, Grantee shall
provide, without charge, each subscriber’s television set with a lock out capability to limit the
programs available to viewers. Such lockout shall have the capability of being changed at no
charge to the subscriber.
(B) All reasonable steps shall be taken by the Grantee as necessary from time to time to minimize
signal leakage and/or any adverse effects of such leakage from the CATV system consistent with
the then existing state of technology.
§160.089 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RECORDS.
Grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the cable television system in full compliance with the
rules and regulations, including applicable amendments, of the FCC and all other applicable federal, state
or local laws and regulations, including the latest editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the
National Fire Protection Association National Electrical Code. The cable television system and all its
parts shall be subject to inspection by the Village, and the Village hereby reserves the right to review
Grantee’s construction plans prior to the commencement of construction. The Village shall not, however,
be required to make inspections or approve the Grantee’s system and plans, and specifically disclaims
such obligation; the Grantee shall be solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to assure compliance
with such laws and regulations and the safety of its system as installed.
(A) Grantee shall maintain a location, within the Village or within fifteen (15) miles of the Village
limits, which shall be open and accessible to the public during normal business hours to allow
payment of bills. Grantee shall employ an operator or maintain a telephone answering service
twenty-four (24) hours per day, each day of the year, with a toll free or local number, to receive
subscriber complaints and to dispatch assistance in the case of any emergency or major system
malfunction affecting a number of subscribers.
(B) Grantee shall design, construct, operate, and maintain the system at all times so that signals carried
are delivered to subscribers without material degradation in quality (within the limitations imposed
by the technical state-of-the-art).
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-31 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(C) Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by Grantee
with federal or state agencies having appropriate jurisdiction in matters affecting cable television
operation within the Village or received from said agencies shall be furnished simultaneously to the
Village by Grantee.
(D) In the case of any emergency or disaster, the Grantee shall, upon request of the Village, make
available its facilities to the Village, without cost, for emergency use during the emergency or
disaster period.
§160.090 TESTS AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING.
Not later than ninety (90) days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made
available for service to Subscribers, technical performance tests shall be conducted by the Grantee to
demonstrate full compliance with the Technical Standards applicable pursuant to §§ 160.088 and 160.089
above. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision of a qualified registered professional
engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to
the Village, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualifications
of the engineer responsible for the tests. Upon the reasonable belief of the Village that the Grantee has
failed to meet the franchise requirements, the Village may request additional tests to be conducted by an
independent registered professional engineer at the expense of the Grantee.
(A) System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output of the last amplifier in the
longest feeder line, at or near trunk line extremities, or at the locations to be specified in the
Franchise. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be required by the Village.
(B) At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the Village may require additional
reasonable tests, including full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a
specific subscriber’s terminal, at the Grantee’s expense to the extent such tests may be performed
by the Grantee’s employees utilizing its existing facilities and equipment; provided, however, that
the Village reserves the right to conduct its own tests upon reasonable notice to the Grantee and if
non-compliance is found, the expense thereof shall be borne by the Grantee. The Village will
endeavor to arrange its request for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to
Grantee or to the subscriber.
§160.091 SERVICES ADJUSTMENT AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
Grantee shall establish a maintenance service capable of locating and correcting major system
malfunctions promptly, except for circumstances beyond the Grantee’s control such as strikes, acts of
God, wars, riots and civil disturbances. Said maintenance service shall be available at all hours, to correct
such major system malfunctions affecting a number of Subscribers.
(A) A listed local telephone number or toll free number, shall be made available to Subscribers for
service calls at any time of the day or night. Whenever service to more than four (4) subscribers is
unintentionally interrupted, Grantee shall fully restore such service to all the affected Subscribers
within six (6) hours of the first report of the service interruption and whenever unintentional service
interruptions affect four (4) or less Subscribers, service to such Subscribers shall be fully restored
within one business day (Saturday being a business day) of the first report of the service
interruption. In the event that service is not restored with said times, the Subscriber or Subscribers
affected will be given credit on the next regular bill for one full day for each day or part day when
service not so restored. Appropriate records shall be made of service calls showing when and what
corrective action was completed. Such records shall be available to the Village during normal
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-32 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
business hours and retained in Grantee’s files until the next scheduled performance evaluation
session described in § 160.077 above or for a longer period as directed by the Village. A summary
of such calls shall be prepared by the Grantee and submitted to the Village annually, beginning
twelve (12) months after service is provided to the first Subscriber.
(B) The Grantee shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is installed written instructions that
clearly set forth procedures for placing a service call, or requesting an adjustment.
(C) In the event a Subscriber does not obtain a satisfactory response or resolution to his request for
service or an adjustment within a reasonable period of time, he may advise the Agency or other
designated employee in writing of his dissatisfaction. The Agency or other designated employee
shall have authority to investigate any subscriber or user complaint or request for adjustment and to
order corrective action as shall be appropriate. The Village may require Grantee to establish rules
and procedures regulating complaint resolution in the Franchise agreement. Nothing herein shall
limit the rights of any Subscriber or other person to bring an action against Grantee in a court of
law.
(D) The Grantee shall interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good
cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after cablecasting
notice of service interruption at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the service interruption.
Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance, and
repair, with notification, on any day except Saturday or Sunday, or the day following a legal
holiday.
§160.092 PROTECTION OF PRIVACY.
Grantee shall not permit the transmission of any signal, aural, visual or digital, including “polling” the
channel selection, from any Subscriber’s premises without first obtaining informed consent of the
Subscriber which shall not have been obtained from the Subscriber as a condition of any service for
which transmission is not an essential element. The request for such consent shall be contained in a
separate document, which specially enumerates and describes the transmissions being authorized and
includes a prominent statement that the Subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its
provision and shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind, whatsoever.
This provision is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or
measurement of system performance or used for billing Subscribers.
(A) Grantee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any Subscriber’s
premises that will permit transmission from Subscriber’s premises of two-way services utilizing
aural, visual or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the Subscriber as
provided in this Section.
(B) Grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not, without the specific written authorization of
the subscriber involved, as provided in this Section, sell or otherwise make available to any party
any information which identifies the viewing habits or responses of individual Subscribers.
§160.093 PROHIBITION FROM ENGAGING IN RADIO AND TELEVISION SALES OR
SERVICE.
The Grantee, its subsidiaries and affiliates are specifically prohibited from engaging directly or indirectly
in the sale or leasing of television receivers, radio receivers, or television or radio parts, except such parts
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-33 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
and accessories required for any type of cable connections, such as converters and connection plugs and
accessories, individually or with any person, anywhere in the Village, whether or not for a fee or charge,
and is further prohibited from engaging in any type of repair service to television receivers or radio
receivers.
§160.094 PENALTIES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix or to cause to be attached or affixed any equipment or
device which allows access to or use of any cable television service without payment to the Grantee for
same.
(A) Persons, whether natural or artificial, or commercial entities who violate any of the following
provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense: willful action or inaction by Grantee as described in § 160.078; non-compliance
by a Grantee as described in § 160.078; arbitrary or capricious action by a Grantee as described in §
160.079; willful failure by a Grantee to comply with the laws, rules or regulations described in
§ 160.088; transmission by a Grantee of a signal from a subscriber’s premises in violation of
§ 160.091, and any person attaching or affixing or causing to be attached or affixed any equipment
or device as described in § 160.093 above, and each such equipment or device shall be deemed a
separate offense. Each day of said violations shall constitute a separate offense.
§160.095 GRANTEE MAY PROMULGATE RULES.
Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its
business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under
this Ordinance and the Rules of the FCC, and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its
Subscribers. Such rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the force of law. Such rules and
regulations shall be filed with the Village and shall not, unless the Village consents in writing to an earlier
effective date, take effect until after such filing.
COSTS; EXPENSES; FEES; OTHER PAYMENTS
§160.100 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and
expenses of the Village related to the enforcement and administration of this Ordinance. In case of
conflict or ambiguity between §§ 160.100-160.119 and §§ 160.070-160.095, the Grantee agrees that the
provision which provides the greatest benefit to the Village, in the sole discretion of the Village, shall
prevail.
§160.101 APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE.
Any applicant for a Telecommunications License or Telecommunications Franchise or Cable Franchise
pursuant to this Ordinance shall pay a fee of One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) or one
percent (1%) of the estimated cost of applicant’s proposed Telecommunications Facilities, as certified by
the applicant’s professional engineer, whichever is greater.
(A) The application and review fee shall be deposited with the Village as part of the application filed
pursuant to the application sections of this Ordinance.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-34 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied
shall, within sixty (60) days of its application and review fee payment written request, be refunded
the balance of its deposit under this Section, less all ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by
the Village in connection with the application.
§160.102 OTHER VILLAGE COSTS.
All license or franchise Grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefore, reimburse
the Village for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with any
modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise
agreement.
§160.103 RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS.
The Village reserves its right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the
property rights granted to a telecommunications license or franchise Grantee. Nothing in this Article shall
prohibit the Village and a Grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the granted property
rights.
§160.104 COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY.
If the right is granted by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy Village Property for
the installation of Telecommunications Facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the
Village.
§160.105 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE (OR ENGINEERING REVIEW FEE).
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, any Grantee obtaining a permit (the “Permittee”) shall pay a
permit fee equal to three percent (3%) of the estimated cost of constructing the Telecommunication
Facilities, as certified by the applicant’s engineer and approved by the Village Engineer, whichever is
greater.
§160.106
Repealed by Ordinance 02-21, effective 11-18-02.
§160.107 CABLE FEES.
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in §§
160.070-160.095 of this Ordinance.
§160.108 REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX.
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Article, and any compensation charged and paid for the
Public Ways provided for in § 160.103, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state and
local taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a Telecommunications Carrier or provider, its
customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery of transmission of
Telecommunications Services.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-35 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§ 160.109 ACCEPTANCE BY THE VILLAGE.
The acceptance by the Village of any payment shall not be construed as an accord by the Village that the
amount of such payment is the correct amount due from Grantee pursuant to the license or franchise
agreement entered into with the Grantee, nor shall such acceptance of any payment be construed to be a
release or waiver of any claim the Village may have for further or additional sums due and payable
pursuant to a license or franchise agreement.
§160.110 TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
Definitions. As used in this §160.110 the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(A) “Gross Charges” means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege
of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village, and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service
costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be
included only as and when paid. “Gross charges” for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel point within the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each
channel point within the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel
provided within the Village. However, “gross charges” shall not include:
(1) any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made under: (i) the fee imposed
by this Section, (ii) additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under Section 9-221 or 9-
222 of the Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (v) 911
surcharges, or (vi) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
(2) charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the Village;
(3) charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or
subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or
content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers,
data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes
the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
(4) charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the
customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified
from other charges;
(5) charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to
the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Village;
(6) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly
owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation
and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory
required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-36 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(7) bad debts (“bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which
gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or
uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on
that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
(8) charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or
(9) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the Village.
(B) “Public Right-of-Way” means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated
or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the Village has acquired
the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with
telecommunications facilities. “Public Right-of-Way” shall not include any real or personal Village
property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include Village
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public
right-of-way.
(C) “Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State,” or any like term, means and includes
any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or
any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in
this State.
(D) “Sale of telecommunications at retail” means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other
than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is
not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
(E) “Service address” means the location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received.
If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems,
maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, “service address” shall mean the location of
the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in
Illinois where bills are sent.
(F) “Telecommunications” includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar
facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, “telecommunications” shall also include
wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. “Telecommunications” shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications”
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use
as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-37 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, rights of access
charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
“Telecommunications” shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as
defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now
or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
(G) “Telecommunications provider” means (1) any telecommunications retailer; and (2) any person
that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the
public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
(H) “Telecommunications retailer” or “retailer” or “carrier” means and includes every person
engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this Section.
The Village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the
satisfaction of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee.
When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon ail of the gross charges
for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer
maintaining a place of business within the Village.
(I) “Wireless telecommunications” includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless
services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No.
104-104), 42 U.S.C. §332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile
radio services, and paging services.
§160.111
Repealed by Ordinance 02-21, effective 11-18-02.
§160.112
Repealed by Ordinance 02-21, effective 11-18-02.
§160.113
Repealed by Ordinance 02-21, effective 11-18-02.
§160.114 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
Nothing in §§160.100-160.119 shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law,
including but not limited to.
(A) generally applicable taxes; and
(B) standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way,
including standards relating to free standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-ofway,
as provided; and
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-38 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(C) any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards
governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
(D) compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code, concerning uses or structures not located
on, over, or within the right-of-way.
§160.115 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the Village
entered into before the effective date of this Article regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain
valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the
extent waived.
§160.116 PENALTIES.
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any
of the provisions of §§ 160.100-160.119 shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty
provisions of § 160.008.
§160.117 ENFORCEMENT.
Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have
for enforcement of this Section.
§160.118 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of §§ 160.100-160.119 is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
§160.119 CONFLICT.
Sections 160.100 through 160.119 supersede all Sections or parts of Sections adopted prior hereto which
are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. 01-4, passed 1-15-01)
CONDITIONS OF GRANT
§160.120 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement. In case of conflict or
ambiguity between §§ 160.120-160.155 and §§ 160.070-160.095, the Grantee agrees that the provision
which provides the greatest benefit to the Village, in the sole discretion of the Village, shall prevail.
(A) A Grantee shall install its Telecommunications Facilities within an existing underground duct or
conduit whenever Excess Capacity exists within such utility facility.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-39 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) A Grantee with permission to install Overhead Facilities shall install its Telecommunications
Facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if Surplus Space is
available.
(C) Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or Telecommunications Facilities are
located underground within a Public Way of the Village, a Grantee with permission to occupy the
same Public Way must also locate its Telecommunications Facilities underground.
(D) Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or Telecommunications Facilities are
located or relocated underground within a Public Way of the Village, a Grantee that currently
occupies the same Public Way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or
undue hardship as determined by the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently
to minimize the disruption of the Public Ways.
(E) Whenever new Telecommunications Facilities will exhaust the capacity of a Public Street or Utility
Easement to accommodate reasonably future Telecommunications Carriers or Facilities, the
Grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for
nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.
§160.121 COMPLIANCE WITH J.U.L.I.E.
All license or franchise Grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the Public Ways, comply
with all regulations of J.U.L.I.E.
§160.122 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
All license or franchise Grantees are required to obtain construction permits for Telecommunications
Facilities as required in §§ 160.16-160.178 of this Ordinance. However, nothing in this Article shall
prohibit the Village and a Grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially
equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.
§160.123 INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS.
No license or franchise Grantee may locate or maintain its Telecommunications Facilities so as to
interfere unreasonably with the use of the Public Ways by the Village, by the general public or by other
persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the Public Ways. All such facilities shall be moved by
the Grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Village Engineer.
§160.124 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
No license or franchise Grantee nor any person acting on a Grantee’s behalf shall take any action or
permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any Village Property, Public Ways of the
Village, Other Ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
§160.125 NOTICE OF WORK.
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or franchise Grantee, nor any
person acting on the Grantee’s behalf, shall commence any nonemergency work in or about the Public
Ways of the Village or Other Ways within ten (10) working days advance notice to the Village.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-40 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.126 REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK.
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a Grantee may commence such repair and emergency
response work as required under the circumstances, provided the Grantee shall notify the Village as
promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible if advance
notice is not practicable.
§160.127 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.
Each license or franchise Grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner
that complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
§160.128 RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, a license or franchise Grantee shall, at
its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
Telecommunications Facilities within the Public Ways whenever the Corporate Authorities shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
(A) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Village or other public improvement in
or upon the Public Ways.
(B) The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in or upon the Public Ways.
§160.129 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES.
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any Grantee, Telecommunications
Carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized Telecommunications System,
facility or related appurtenances within the Public Ways of the Village shall, at its own expense, remove
such facilities or appurtenances from the Public Ways of the Village. A Telecommunications System or
facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
(A) Upon expiration or termination of the Grantee’s telecommunications license or franchise.
(B) Upon abandonment of a facility within the Public Ways of the Village.
(C) If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications
license or franchise.
(D) If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required
construction permit.
(E) If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the Grantee’s
telecommunications license or franchise.
§160.130 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY.
(A) When a license or franchise Grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or
affecting any Public Ways, Other Ways or Village Property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly
remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as
existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Village.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-41 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(B) If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this Section, the
Grantee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall
be at the Grantee’s sole expense and the Grantee shall promptly undertake and complete the
required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such
permanent restoration.
(C) A Grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights,
flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to
prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting
such ways or property.
§160.131 FACILITIES MAPS.
Each license or franchise Grantee shall provide the Village with an accurate map or maps certifying the
location of all Telecommunications Facilities within the Public Ways. Each Grantee shall provide
updated maps annually.
§160.132 DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.
Within ten (10) days of a written request from the Village, each license or franchise Grantee shall furnish
the Village with information sufficient to demonstrate:
(A) That Grantee has complied with all requirements of this Ordinance.
(B) That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the Village in connection
with the Telecommunications Services and Facilities provided by the Grantee have been properly
collected and paid by the Grantee.
(C) Financial data of Grantee of franchise.
(1) Annual reports. The Grantee of a franchise shall, annually, within ninety (90) days after the
close of its fiscal year, submit to the Village a written statement, approved by an officer of the
Grantee, of the Grantee’s gross revenues for the year just concluded. Such statement shall be
supplemented by an audit prepared by an independent certified public accountant in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, as well as by such additional
financial statements and records as may be required by the Village, within six (6) months
following the close of the Grantee’s fiscal year. Unless required by applicable law, the
Village shall keep all financial statements and records of the Grantee confidential.
(2) Books and records. The Grantee shall maintain, at all times during the term of the franchise,
(1) complete, accurate and properly totaled books and records showing the business
conducted by the Grantee in the Village in sufficient detail to show all gross revenue;
(2) complete, accurate and up-to-date maps of the Telecommunications System. The Village
may require the Grantee to keep additional records and maps which it determines are
reasonably necessary.
(3) Inspection and audits. All of such books and records and originals of all maps and other
documents pertaining to this franchise shall be maintained in and made available for
inspection by the Village or its agents or employees, at the Grantee’s principal office, at
reasonable times and intervals. A Franchise shall maintain such books and records for the
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-42 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
Franchise Area specified in the franchise separately from any other operations, provided,
however, that any expenses or expenditures which apply to both the system in said Franchise
Area and any other operations shall be reasonably allocated between all such operations,
consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. Such books and records shall be
retained, in any reasonable form, for a period of not less than seven (7) years, or as required
for Internal Revenue Service audit requirements, whichever is longer. The Village shall have
the right to extend the retention period through the term of any renewed franchise. If such
books and records are kept outside of the immediate Chicago metropolitan area, the Grantee
shall transport the books and records, to the extent practicable, to the Village if the Village
desires to review them. The Village shall have the right to obtain copies of all documents,
maps, or records pertaining to the franchise. The Grantee shall fully cooperate in assisting in
this regard.
(4) Inquiries. The Village may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to the franchise and the
operation of the Telecommunications System. The Grantee shall respond to such inquiries
within five (5) business days of such inquiry.
§160.133 LEASED CAPACITY.
A license or franchise Grantee shall have the right, without prior Village approval, to offer or provide
capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:
(A) Grantee shall furnish the Village with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
(B) The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
§160.134 LIABILITY; INDEMNIFICATION; INSURANCE.
(A) Grantee. The Grantee shall be responsible for any damage or loss to any real or personal property
of the Village or of any person, and for any injury to or death of any individual person, or any
officer, employee, or agent of the Village, arising out of or in connection with the Grantee’s
negligence or misconduct in the construction, installation, use, operation, maintenance, repair,
and/or removal of the Telecommunications System, or its failure to act in connection therewith
when, in the reasonable judgment of the Village, the Grantee should have taken certain action.
(B) Village. The Village and its officers, employees, and agents shall not be liable for any loss or
damage to any real or personal property of any person, or for any injury to or death of any
individual person, arising out of or in connection with the Grantee’s negligence or misconduct in
the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, removal of, or other action or event with respect
to, the telecommunications system.
(C) Emergency and other actions.
(1) The Village may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, as determined by
the Village, cut or move any facilities, in which event the Village shall not be liable therefore
to the Grantee. When practical, as determined in the sole judgment and discretion of the
Village, the Grantee shall be consulted prior to any such cutting or movement of its wires and
be given the opportunity to perform such work itself.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-43 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(2) Unless directly caused by the malicious or intentional acts of the Village, the Village shall not
be liable to the Grantee for any damage to or loss of all or any part of the
Telecommunications System, or otherwise, as a result of or in connection with the protection,
breaking through, movement, removal, alteration, or relocation of any part of the
Telecommunications System by or on behalf of the Grantee or the Village in connection with
any emergency, public work, public improvement, alteration of any municipal structure, any
change in the grade or line of any Public Way, or the elimination, discontinuation, and
closing of any Public Way, as provided herein. When practical, as determined in the sole
judgment and discretion of the Village, the Grantee shall be consulted prior to any such
cutting or movement of its wires and be given the opportunity to perform such work itself.
(3) The Village and its officers, employees, and agents shall not be liable to the Grantee or any
affiliates of the Grantee for any special, incidental, consequential, punitive, or other damages
as a result of the exercise of any right of the Village pursuant to this Ordinance or the license
or franchise agreement, including, without limitation, the right of the Village to terminate the
license or franchise and to take any action subsequent thereto.
§160.135 GRANTEE INSURANCE.
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each Grantee shall, as a condition of the
grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the Grantee and the
Village as a named insured, and the Village’s elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and
employees as coinsureds:
(A) Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
(1) Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(2) Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(3) Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability.
(B) Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of Three Million Dollars
($3,000,000) for each person and Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000) for each accident.
(C) Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not
less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000).
(D) Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and
products completed hazard with limits of not less than Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000).
(E) The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained by the Grantee
throughout the term of the telecommunications license or franchise, and any other period of time
during which the Grantee is operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the
removal of its Telecommunications Facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the
following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the Village, by
registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.”
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-44 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(F) Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than thirty
(30) days prior to said cancellation, the Grantee shall obtain and furnish to the Village replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
§160.136 GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION.
Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, Grantee’s express
undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result
from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the Grantee or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation,
maintenance, repair or removal of its Telecommunications Facilities, and in providing or offering
Telecommunications Services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Ordinance or by a grant agreement made or entered into
pursuant to this Ordinance.
§160.137 PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY.
Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance is effective, and as necessary thereafter,
the Grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form
and substance acceptable to the Village as may be required by this Ordinance or by an applicable license
or franchise agreement.
§160.138 SECURITY FUND.
Each Grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the Village by depositing the amount of Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) with the Village in cash, an unconditional letter of credit, or other
instrument acceptable to the Village, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of Grantee so
long as any of Grantee’s Telecommunications Facilities are located within the Public Ways of the Village.
(A) The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of this Ordinance, including
any costs, expenses, damages or loss the Village pays or incurs because of any failure attributable
to the Grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rule, regulations or permits of the Village.
(B) Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the Village shall give written notice to the
Grantee:
(1) describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, cost or expenses which
the Village has incurred by reason of Grantee’s act or default;
(2) providing a reasonable opportunity for Grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default
or failure, if applicable;
(3) providing a reasonable opportunity for Grantee to pay any monies due the Village before the
Village withdraws the amount thereof from the security fund, if applicable;
(4) that the Grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in
the notice with the Village Administrator or his designee.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-45 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(C) Grantees shall replenish the security fund within fourteen (14) days after written notice from the
Village that there is a deficiency in the amount of the fund.
§160.139 CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND.
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate
surety acceptable to the Village equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of constructing Grantee’s
Telecommunications Facilities within the Public Ways of the Village shall be deposited before
construction is commenced.
(A) The construction bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the
work, as determined by the Village Engineer, including restoration of Public Ways and other
property affected by the construction.
(B) The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the Village:
(1) timely completion of construction;
(2) construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;
(3) proper location of the facilities as specified by the Village;
(4) restoration of the Public Ways and other property affected by the construction;
(5) the submission of “as-built” drawings after completion of the work as required by this
Ordinance;
(6) timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services
provided in connection with the work.
§160.140 COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
All Grantees are required to cooperate with the Village and with each other.
(A) By February 1 of each year, Grantees shall provide the Village with a schedule of their proposed
construction activities in, around or that may affect the Public Ways.
(B) Each Grantee shall meet with the Village, other Grantees and users of the Public Ways annually or
as determined by the Village to schedule and coordinate construction in the Public Ways.
(C) All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the Village
Engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages.
§160.141 ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT.
Ownership or control of a Telecommunications System, license or franchise may not, directly or
indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the
Grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the Village, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then only on such reasonable
conditions as may be prescribed therein.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-46 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(A) No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within twelve (12) months after the initial
grant of the license or franchise, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
(B) Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system or integral part of a system
shall be assigned or transferred before construction of the Telecommunications System has been
completed.
(C) Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or system shall provide and certify the
following information to the Village not less than one hundred and fifty (150) days prior to the
proposed date of transfer:
(1) Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the proposed transfer or
assignment;
(2) All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise applicant pursuant to
§§160.030-160.095 of this Ordinance with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee;
(3) Any other information reasonably required by the Village.
(D) No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and
other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the Telecommunications System pursuant to
this Ordinance.
(C) Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the Grantee shall reimburse the
Village for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the Village in
considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
(F) Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or integral part of a system
without prior approval of the Village under this Section or pursuant to a license or franchise
agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the grant.
(G) Any sale, transfer or assignment authorized by the Village shall be made by a bill of sale or similar
document, an executed copy of which shall be filed with the Village within thirty (30) days after
any such sale, transfer or assignment. The Village shall not withhold its consent unreasonably;
provided, however, the proposed assignee agrees to comply with all the provisions of this
Ordinance and the franchise and reasonable amendments thereto, and must, in the Village’s
discretion reasonably exercised, have the technical and character qualifications required by
§§160.030-160.095 and have the financial wherewithal to carry out the obligations set forth in this
Ordinance.
(H) The consent of the Village to any sale, transfer, lease, trust, mortgage or other instrument of
hypothecation shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the Village under the
Ordinance and the franchise.
§160.142 TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT.
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of ten percent (10%) or more of the
ownership or working control of the Grantee, of the ownership or working control of a
telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having
ownership or working control of the Grantee or of a Telecommunications System, or of control of the
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-47 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
capacity or bandwidth of Grantee’s Telecommunication System, facilities or substantial parts thereof,
shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring Village approval pursuant to § 160.141 hereof.
Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from Village approval.
§160.143 FORECLOSURE, CONDEMNATION, AND RECEIVERSHIP.
(A) Foreclosure. Upon the scheduled occurrence of any foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or any
part of the Telecommunications System, or the termination of any lease or mortgage covering all or
any material party of the Telecommunications System, the Grantee shall immediately notify the
Village of such occurrence. Such notification shall be treated as a notification of a proposed change
in control of the Grantee, and the provisions of § 160.141 shall apply.
(B) Condemnation. In the event that the Telecommunications System, or any material part thereof, if
taken, appropriated, or condemned pursuant to law, and the effect of such taking is to frustrate or
impede materially the ability of the Grantee to carry out any of its obligations pursuant to, and the
purposes of, this Ordinance, then the Village may revoke the license or franchise in accordance
with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
(C) Receivership. The Grantee shall notify the Village, in writing, immediately if: (1) the Grantee files
a voluntary petition in bankruptcy, a voluntary petition to reorganize its business, or a voluntary
petition to effect a plan or other arrangement with creditors; (2) the Grantee files an answer
admitting the jurisdiction of the court and the material allegations of an involuntary petition filed
pursuant to the bankruptcy code, as amended from time to time; (3) the Grantee is adjudicated
bankrupt, makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or applies for or consents to the
appointment of any receiver or trustee of all or any part of its property including, without limitation,
all of any part of the Telecommunications System; (4) the Grantee institutes dissolution or
liquidation proceedings with respect to its business; (5) an order is entered approving an
involuntary petition to reorganize the business of the Grantee or to effect a plan or other
arrangement with creditors or appointing a receiver or trustee for the Grantee of all or a part of its
property including, without limitation, all or any part of the Telecommunications Systems; or (6) a
writ or warrant of attachment, execution, distraint, levy, possession, or any similar process shall be
issued by any court against all or any part of the property of the Grantee including, without
limitation, all or any part of the Telecommunications System.
§160.144 SAFETY.
(A) Standard of Care. The Grantee shall at all times utilize the standard of care attendant to the risks
involved and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public
or to employees of the Grantee.
(B) Equipment Installation and Maintenance. All installations in the Telecommunications System shall
be made so as not to impair the fire integrity of any building or structure. The Grantee shall install
and maintain its facilities in accordance with the requirements of all applicable codes and in such
manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the Village or any public utility. All
facilities in, over, under, and upon the Public Ways and private property within the Village,
wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable
condition and in good order and repair.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-48 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§160.145 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.
The Grantee shall at all times comply with laws, codes, rules, and regulations of all governmental
authorities, regardless of whether such law, code, rule, or regulation is expressly referenced in this
Ordinance or the license or franchise agreement. The Grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable
laws, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules, and regulations of the Village and all applicable memoranda
and other directives of the Village, as such laws, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules, regulations,
memoranda, and directives may be modified or amended provided that such modification or amendment
does not impair, conflict with, or diminish the rights granted to the Grantee under this Ordinance or the
license or franchise agreement.
§160.146 SUBSEQUENT ACTION BY GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES.
If any subsequent law, ordinance, rule, code, regulation, controlling judicial review, or decision shall
require or permit the Grantee to perform any act or shall prohibit the Grantee from performing any act
such that the Grantee may be in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance or an applicable license or
franchise agreement, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the Grantee shall so notify the
Village. If the Village determines, in its sole judgment and discretion, that a material provision of this
Ordinance or the license or franchise agreement is affected by such changed or new law, ordinance, or
regulation, then the Village and the Grantee shall enter into good faith negotiations to modify the license
or franchise agreement to conform with such changed requirements.
§160.147 NONENFORCEMENT BY VILLAGE.
No Grantee shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance or
the license or franchise agreement by any failure of the Village, on any one or more occasions, to insist on
the Grantee’s performance of, or to seek the Grantee’s compliance with, any one or more of such terms
and conditions.
§160.148 RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
(A) Cumulative Effect. All rights and remedies given to the Village by this Ordinance and the license
or franchise agreement shall be in addition to and cumulative with each other and with any and all
other rights or remedies shall not be exclusive, but each and every right and remedy specifically
provided or otherwise existing or given may be exercised from time to time and as often and in
such order as may be deemed expedient by the Village in its sole judgment and discretion, and the
exercise at the same time or thereafter any other right or remedy nor shall any such delay or
omission be construed to be a waiver of or acquiescence to any default. The exercise of any such
right of remedy by the Village shall not release the Grantee from its obligations of any liability
under this Ordinance or the license or franchise agreement.
(B) Injunction or Decree. In addition to all other remedies granted or available to the Village, the
Village shall be entitled to the restraint by injunction of the violation, or attempted or threatened
violation, by the Grantee of any terms or provisions of this Ordinance or the license or franchise
agreement, or to a decree compelling performance by the Grantee of any term or provision thereof.
(C) Village Rights Reserved. The Village expressly reserves the following rights which shall not be
deemed to be waived or abrogated by any license or franchise granted or any license or franchise
agreement executed pursuant to this Ordinance:
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-49 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(1) to exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may
be vested in or granted to the Village;
(2) to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein, in the license or franchise agreement,
or in any existing applicable ordinance, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary
in the exercise of its police power; and
(3) to modify the license or franchise agreement executed pursuant to this Ordinance.
The express reservation of the foregoing rights shall not be construed as a waiver of any other rights
lawfully belonging to the Village.
§160.149 LIMITS ON GRANTEE’S RECOURSE.
Grantee shall have no recourse against the Village for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the
terms and conditions of this Ordinance or the franchise or because of the Village’s granting or
enforcement thereof nor for the Village’s failure to have the authority to grant the franchise. The Grantee
expressly agrees that upon its acceptance of the franchise it does so relying upon its own investigation and
understanding of the power and authority of the Village to grant said franchise.
(A) The decision of the Village concerning the awarding of the license or franchise shall be final.
§160.150 REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT.
A license or franchise granted by the Village to use or occupy Public Ways of the Village may be revoked
for the following reasons:
(A) Construction or operation in the Village or in the Public Ways of the Village without a license or
franchise grant of authorization.
(B) Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
(C) Unauthorized transfer of control of the Grantee.
(D) Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
(E) Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of Grantee’s franchise or license assets, or a substantial
interest therein.
(F) Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a Grantee in any application to the Village.
(G) Abandonment of Telecommunications Facilities in the Public Ways.
(H) Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Ordinance.
(I) Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the Village.
(J) Insolvency or bankruptcy of the Grantee.
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-50 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(K) Violation of material provisions of this Ordinance.
(L) Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
§160.151 NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE.
In the event that the Village Administrator believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or
franchise, he shall give the Grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a
short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and
providing the Grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
(A) That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the
violation or noncompliance.
(B) That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
(C) That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.
§160.152 HEARING.
In the event that a Grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the Village Administrator
as provided in § 160.150 hereof, the Village Administrator shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance
to the Corporate Authorities. The Corporate Authorities shall provide the Grantee with notice
and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
§160.153 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.
If persuaded that the Grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this Ordinance,
or of a franchise or license agreement, the Corporate Authorities shall determine whether to revoke the
license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances,
extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
(A) Whether the misconduct was egregious.
(B) Whether substantial harm resulted.
(C) Whether the violation was intentional.
(D) Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
(E) Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
(F) Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
§160.154 FORCE MAJEURE.
Whenever a period of time is provided for in this Ordinance for either the Village or the Grantee to do or
perform any act or obligation, neither the Village nor the Grantee shall be liable for any delays or inability
to perform due to causes beyond their respective control such as war, riot, insurrection, rebellion, strike,
lockout, unavoidable casualty or damage to personnel, materials, or equipment, fire, flood, storm,
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-51 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
earthquake, tornado, or any act of God; provided, however, that such time period shall be extended for
only the actual amount of time the Village or Grantee is so delayed and provided further, however, that an
act or omission shall not be deemed to be “beyond the Grantee’s control” if committed, omitted, or
caused by the Grantee, the Grantee’s employees, officers, or agents or a subsidiary, affiliate, or parent of
the Grantee or by any corporation or other business entity that holds a controlling interest in the Grantee,
whether held directly or indirectly.
§160.155 TIME ESSENCE OF AGREEMENT.
Whenever this Ordinance or the license or franchise sets forth any time for any act to be performed by the
Grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and the Grantee’s failure to perform within the time
allotted shall, be sufficient grounds for the Village to invoke the remedies available under the terms and
conditions of this Ordinance and the license or franchise.
§§160.160 – 160.178 repealed by Ordinance 07-27, passed 12-17-07, effective 1-16-08.
(Am. Ord. 07-27, passed 12-17-07)
____________________________________________________________________________________
16-160-52 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
CHAPTER 161: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Section
§161.1 Definitions
§161.2 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Imposed
§161.3 Collection of Tax by Retailers
§161.4 Returns to Department
§161.5 Resellers
§161.6 Severability
§161.7 Effective Date
§161.1 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(A) “Amount paid” means the amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in this municipality
regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
(B) “Department” means the Illinois Department of Revenue.
(C) “Gross charge” means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash,
credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. “Gross charges” for private line service shall include
charges imposed at each channel point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage
between each channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of the interstate
inter channel provided within Illinois. However, “gross charge” shall not include:
(1) any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made pursuant to: (i) the tax
imposed by this Ordinance, (ii) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act,
(iii) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, (iv) 911 surcharges, or
(v) charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of
the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5 et seq.), as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers’ bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified
in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act;
(2) charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
(3) charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for
subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or
content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-161-1 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(4) charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the
customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified
from other charges;
(5) charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-222.1) to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
(6) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly
owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Ordinance has already been paid to a
retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such
service;
(7) bad debts (“bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which
gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or
uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on
that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
(8) charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices; or
(9) amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.
(D) “Interstate telecommunications” means all telecommunications that either originate or terminate
outside this State.
(E) “Intrastate telecommunications’ means all telecommunications that originate and terminate within
this State.
(F) “Person” means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or
other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal and State governments, including
State universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this
State.
(G) “Purchase at retail” means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a
sale at retail.
(H) “Retailer” means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this Section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this
State, who, to the satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection
and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax.
When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in this State in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this State. The permit may be
revoked by the Department at its discretion.
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-161-2 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
(I) “Retailer” maintaining a place of business in this State’, or any like term, means and includes any
retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this
State.
(J) “Sale at retail” means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all
services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than
the Federal and State governments, and State universities created by statute and other than between
a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for
their use or consumption and not for resale.
(K) “Service address” means the location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received
by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones,
paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer’s place of primary use
as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act (35 ILCS 638 et seq.). For
air-to-ground systems and the like, “service address” shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization
code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
(L) “Taxpayer” means a person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees
engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in a municipality and
who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this Section.
(M) “Telecommunications”, in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes,
without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio,
stationary two radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one or two
communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or
similar facilities. As used in this Section, “private line” means a dedicated non sensitive service for
a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. The definition of “telecommunications” shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall not include
purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component
part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges,
charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service
shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be
considered ‘telecommunications” subject to the tax imposed under this Section. For purposes of this
Section, “prepaid telephone calling arrangements” means that term as defined in Section 2-27 of the
Retailers’ Occupations Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-27).
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-161-3 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
§161.2 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
(A) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
(B) The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the
act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax
enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly
due and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state
or local tax in this State.
(C) The tax imposed by this Section is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or
privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by the municipality.
§161.3 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
(A) The tax authorized by this Section shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a
place of business in this State and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax
required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Section and any such tax collected by
such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross
charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this Section shall constitute a debt
of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as
the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer,
then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the manner provided
by the Department.
(B) Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Section shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct
item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications.
§161.4 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
On or before the last day of August 2003, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter, the tax
imposed under this Section on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to Section 5-50 of the Illinois Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by
the Department to implement the Act.
§161.5 RESELLERS.
(A) If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such
telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-161-4 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)
shall state facts which will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax
authorized by this Article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as
the Department may reasonably require.
(B) Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and
shall certify such number to the applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is
obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication
tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
(C) Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale
unless the person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable
because of being a sale for resale.
§161.6 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Section, or the application of any provision of this Section, is held
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this Section, or
their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such provision, is severable,
unless otherwise provided by this Section.
§161.7 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Section shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication as
required by law, provided, however, that (1) Section 2 and Section 3 shall take effect for all bills issued
on or after July 1, 2003, (2) the tax provided for herein shall take effect for all bills issued on or after the
first day of July, 2003 and (3) any amounts due or payable to the municipality for any tax periods ending
prior to the first day of July, 2003, shall nevertheless remain payable as if this Section had not be adopted.
Copies of this Section shall be certified and sent to the Illinois Department of Revenue prior to April 1,
2003.
(Ord. 02-09, passed 9-16-02)
(Am. Ord. 02-21, passed 11-18-02)
_____________________________________________________________________________________
16-161-5 Title XVI
(Rev. 05/12)